 My Lord  As I was unwilling to trouble Your Lordship with letters that could only contain assurances of Respect I defer'd writing till I arrived in this Country the few extracts from my journal is all the information I am able to give your Lordship at present of the Natives; who never come to us & with whom I have never been able to remain but a very short time. The Rains now fall very heavy & many of the Natives find it difficult to support themselves as few fish are caught. I shall be able to give a better account of the Country when I have visited Lansdowne Hills - they form part of a Range of Mountains that appear to be fifty Miles in land & on which I have in a late excursion seen Smoke which with my having traced the Natives Thirty Miles towards these Hills leaves no doubt but that there are Inhabitants in the interior parts of the Country. I thought these Hills worthy the Name I have giving them and at the foot of which I flatter my self that I shall find a River that communicates with the Sea at no great distance from port Jackson which I have prefer'd to Botany bay as affording a more eligible Situation for the Colony & being with out exception the finest Harbour in the World. My reason for thinking there must be a large river is the having found pools of water which did not appear to be formed in the Rainy Season. The want of time prevented of tracing them to their Source.  The Woods by which we are surrounded are not removed but with a labour of which no Idea can be formed & unfortunately the Timber is only fit for fire wood & I was obliged to fix on this Spot on account of Water which in the dry Season is scarce as here are not any runs of fresh water but what are drains from the Marshes form'd in the Rainy Season. Botany bay offer'd no Security for large Ships here a Thousand Sail of the Line may ride in the most perfect Security.  The clearing the ground will be a Work of time & it will be four Years at least before this Colony will be able to support it self & perhaps no Country in the World affords less assistance to first Settlers. Still My Lord I think that perseverance will answer evry purpose proposed by Government & that this Country will hereafter be a most Valuable acquisition to Great Britain from its situation.  It has been my determination from the time I landed never to fire on the Natives but in a case of absolute necessity & I have been so fortunate as to have avoided it hitherto. I think they deserve a better Character than what they will receive from Monsr. La Perouse who was under the disagreeable necessity of firing on them I think better of them from having been more with them. They do not in my opinion want personal Courage they very readily place a confidence & are I believe strictly honest among themselves. [13]   Most of the Men wanting the right front tooth in the Upper Jaw & most of the Women wanting the first & second joints of the little finger of the left hand are circumstances not observed in Capt. Cooks Voyage  Your Lordship will I hope do me the justice to believe me fully sensible of the polite attention I receiv'd when leaving England & permit me the honor of subscribing my self with the greatest Respect & esteem  My LORD / Your LORDSHIPS / OBLIGED & MOST OBEDIENT / HUMBLE  SERVANT / A PHILLIP  The Supply sailing very badly had not permitted my gaining the advantage hoped for but I began to examine the bay as soon as we anchored and found that tho' extensive it did not afford shelter to ships from the easterly winds; the greater part of the bay being so shoal that ships of even a moderate draught of water are obliged to anchor with the entrance of the bay open and are exposed to a heavy sea that rolls in when it blows hard from the eastward. [45]   Several small runs of fresh water were found in different parts of the bay but I did not see any situation to which there was not some very strong objection. The small creek that is in the northern part of the bay runs a considerable way into the country but it had only water for a boat. The sides of this creek are frequently overflowed and the lowlands a swamp. The western branch runs up for a considerable distance but the officers I sent to examine it could not find any water except in very small drains.  The best situation that offered was near Point Sutherland where there was a small run of good water; but the ground near it as well as a considerable part of the higher ground was spongy and the ships could not approach this part of the bay.  Several good situations offered for a small number of people but none that appeared calculated for our numbers and where the stores and provisions could be landed without a great loss of time. When I considered the bay's being so very open and the probability of the swamps rendering the most eligible situation unhealthy I judged it advisable to examine Port Jackson; but that no time might be lost if I did not succeed in finding a better harbour and a proper situation for the settlement the ground near Point Sutherland was in the meantime to be cleared and preparations made for landing under the direction of the Lieutenant Governor.  As the time in which I might be absent if I went in the Supply must have been very uncertain I went round with three boats taking with me Captain Hunter and several officers that by examining different parts of the port at the same time less time might be lost.  We got into Port Jackson early in the afternoon and had the satisfaction of finding the finest harbour in the world in which a thousand sail of the line may ride in the most perfect security and of which a rough survey made by Captain Hunter and the officers of the Sirius after the ships came round may give your Lordship some idea.  The different coves were examined with all possible expedition. I fixed on the one that had the best springs of water and in which the ships can anchor so close to the shore that at a very small expence quays may be made at which the largest ships may unload.  This cove which I honoured with the name of Sydney is about a quarter of a mile across at the entrance and half a mile in length.  We returned to Botany Bay the third day where I received a very unfavourable account of the ground that was clearing.  The ships immediately prepared to go round and the 25th - seven days after I arrived in the Supply - I sailed in her for Port Jackson leaving Captain Hunter to follow with the transports it then blowing too strong for them to work out of the bay. [46] They joined me the next evening and all the transports were moored in the cove.  Your Lordship will permit me to observe that our situation tho' so very different from what might be expected is nevertheless the best that offered. My instructions did not permit me to detain the transports a sufficient length of time to examine the coast to any considerable distance it was absolutely necessary to be certain of a sufficient quantity of fresh water in a situation that was healthy and which the ships might approach within a reasonable distance for the conveniency of landing the stores and provisions and I am fully persuaded that we should never have succeeded had it been attempted to move them only one mile from where they were landed. There are some parts of this harbour where the trees stand at a considerable distance from each other and where there are small runs of water which shall be cultivated when our numbers permit and when the country inland can be examined. I make no doubt but some good situations will be found that have water which I have never yet been able to find either in Botany Bay or in this harbour but in very small streams.  Some hand that is near and where the trees stand at a considerable distance from each other will as soon as convicts can be spared be cultivated by the officers for raising a little corn for their stock; and this I have endeavoured to promote as much as possible for I fear the consequence if a ship be lost in her passage out with provisions.  As there are only twelve convicts who are carpenters as many as could be procured from the ships have been hired to work on the hospital and store-houses. The people were healthy when landed but scurvy has for some time appeared amongst them and now rages in a most extraordinary manner. Only sixteen carpenters could be hired from the ships and several of the convict carpenters were sick. It was now the middle of February; the rains began to fall very heavy and pointed out the necessity of butting people; convicts were therefore appointed to assist the detachment in this work. [...] [48]   Your Lordship will not be surprized that I have been under the necessity of assembling a Criminal Court. Six men were condemned to death. One who was the head of the gang was executed the same day; the others I reprieved. They are to be exiled from the settlement and when the season permits I intend they shall be landed near the South Cape where by their forming connexions with the natives some benefit may accrue to the public. These men had frequently robbed the stores and the other convicts. The one who suffered and two others were condemned for robbing the stores of provisions the very day they received a week's provisions and at which time their allowance as settled by the Navy Board was the same as the soldiers spirits excepted; the others for robbing a tent and for stealing provisions from other convicts.  The great labour in clearing the ground will not permit more than eight acres to be sown this year with wheat and barley. At the same time the immense number of ants and field-mice will render our crops very uncertain.  Part of the live stock brought from the Cape small as it was has been lost and our resource in fish is also uncertain. Some days great quantities are caught but never sufficient to save any part of the provisions; and at times fish are scarce.  Your Lordship will I presume see the necessity of a regular supply of provisions for four or five years and of clothing shoes and frocks in the greatest proportion. The necessary implements for husbandry and for clearing the ground brought out will with difficulty be made to serve the time that is necessary for sending out a fresh supply.  The labour of the convicts shall be as is directed for the public stock but it is necessary to permit a part of the convicts to work for the officers who in our present situation would otherwise find it impossible to clear a sufficient quantity of ground to raise what is absolutely necessary to support the little stock they have; and I am to request that your Lordship will be pleased to direct me to what extent that indulgence may be granted the officers of the garrison.  The Sirius shall be sent to the northward to barter for stock and which shall be employed solely for the purpose of increasing the breed of such cattle as she may procure. The Supply is no ways calculated for this service as in the least sea her decks are full of water.  The very small proportion of females makes the sending out an additional number absolutely necessary for I am certain your Lordship will think that to send for women from the Islands in our present situation would answer no other purpose than that of bringing them to pine away in misery.  [...] every day proves the necessity of proper persons being sent out to superintend the convicts. If a small number of carpenters and bricklayers are sent out with proper people who are capable of superintending the convicts they will soon be rendered serviceable to the State and without which they will remain for years a burden to Government. Numbers of them have been brought up from their infancy in such indolence that they would starve if left to themselves; and many (their numbers now exceed fifty) from old age and disorders which are incurable and with which they were sent from England are incapable of any kind of work.  Thus situated your Lordship will excuse my observing a second time that a regular supply of provisions from England will be absolutely necessary for four or five years as the crops for two years to come cannot be depended on for more than what will be necessary for seed and what the Sirius may procure can only be to breed from. Should necessity oblige us to make use of what that ship may be able to procure I do not apprehend that the live-stock she will bring in twelve months will be more than a month's provision for the colony; and the Supply is totally unfit for a service of this kind. [...]   I should hope that few convicts will be sent out this year or the next unless they are artificers and after what I have had the honour of observing to your Lordship I make no doubt that proper people will be sent to superintend them. The ships that bring out convicts should have at least the two years' provisions on board to land with them for the putting the convicts on board some ships and the provisions that were to support them in others as was done I beg leave to observe much against my intimation must have been fatal if the ship carrying the provisions had been lost.  As soon as the rains permitted the getting the provisions on shore from the two remaining store-ships they were cleared except of the spirits which are on board of one of them and which will be landed the end of this month. It was my intention to send the two store-ships away together and expected they would be ready to sail the first week in October and the Sirius was ordered to be ready to sail about the same time to the northward in order to procure live-stock but it was now found that very little of the English wheat had vegetated and a very considerable quantity of barley and many seeds had rotted in the ground having been heated in the passage and some much injured by the weevil. All the barley and wheat likewise which had been put on board the Supply at the Cape were destroyed by the weevil. The ground was therefore necessarily sown a second time with the seed which I had saved for the next year in case the crops in the ground met with any accident. The wheat sent to Norfolk Island had likewise failed and there did not remain seed to sow one acre. I could not be certain that the ships which are expected would bring any quantity of grain or if put on board them that they would preserve it good by a proper attention to stowage to the want of which I impute our present loss.  The colony not being in a state to support any considerable quantity of live stock many being under the necessity at present of frequently killing a part of what they have for want of food to Support them I should be obliged to kill what the Sirius might procure and which could not be expected to exceed ten or fourteen days provision for the settlement; and we now have not more than a year's bread in store having been obliged to furnish the Sirius and Supply with provisions. [57] On these considerations but more immediately from the fear of not having grain to put into the ground next year when we shall have a more considerable quantity of ground to sow I have thought it necessary to order the Sirius to go to the Cape of Good Hope in order to procure grain and at the same time what quantity of flour and provisions she can receive... .The detachment is now inclosing ground for their gardens and we have about six acres of wheat eight of barley and six acres of other grain all which as well as such garden seeds as were not spoiled promise well; and though the soil is in general a light sandy soil it is I believe as good as what is commonly found near the sea-coast in other parts of the world. The great inconvenience we find is from the rocks and the labour of clearing away the woods which surround us and which are mostly gum-trees of a very large size and which are only useful as firewood though I think that when we can cut them down in the winter and give them time to season they may be made useful in building. [...]   The climate is equal to the finest in Europe and we very seldom have any fogs. All the plants and fruit-trees brought from the Brazil and the Cape that did not die in the passage thrive exceeding well; and we do not want vegetables good in their kind which are natural to the country. [...].  I have now given up all hopes of recovering the two bulls and four cows that were lost and one sheep only remains of upwards of seventy which I had purchased at the Cape on my own account and on Government's account. It is the rank grass under the trees which has destroyed them for those who have only had one or two sheep which have fed about their tents have preserved them.  Flogs and poultry thrive and increase fast. Black cattle will thrive full as well and as we shall be able in future to guard against their straying your Lordship will please to determine whether it would not be necessary to order any ship that was coming to the settlement with provisions to purchase at the Cape as many cows as could he conveniently received on board with a couple of young bulls. But the ship for that purpose should be able to stow them between decks; and I beg leave to observe that a forty or fifty gun ship that brought out provisions and stores leaving her guns out would answer the purpose better than any transport and at once stock this settlement. [...]   Your Lordship will see by my former letters the little progress we have been able to make in cultivating the lands and I presume the necessity of a few proper persons being sent out to superintend the convicts as well as settlers who have been used to cultivation; for at present this settlement only affords one person that I can employ in cultivating the lands on the public account. Most of the officers have cultivated a little ground but is merely for their own conveniency and none more than a single acre except the Lieutenant-Governor who has about three acres. I have sixteen at a small farm on the public account.  It must my Lord be settlers with the assistance of the convicts that will put this country in a situation for supporting its inhabitants; nothing but the uncertainty of the time in which my letters may reach England and the possibility of those last written being the first received would make me trouble your Lordship in this letter with a repetition of what I have fully explained in my former letters - that the people who are not convicts are necessary for the stores from which provisions or stores are delivering almost hourly and that we want for superintending the convicts such as have been brought up in the line in which they are now employed.  With respect to the natives it was my determination from my first landing that nothing less than the most absolute necessity should ever make me fire upon them and tho' persevering in this resolution has at times been rather difficult I have hitherto been so fortunate that it never has been necessary. Mons. La Perouse while at Botany Bay was not so fortunate. He was obliged to fire on them in consequence of which with the bad behaviour of some of the transports' boats and some convicts the natives have lately avoided us but proper measures are taken to regain their confidence.  The few hours I have to collect and put into method the observations I have made of these people will I hope excuse me to your Lordship for sending only extracts from my journal as they have been set down when the little incidents occurred and from which a more just opinion of these people may be drawn than I should perhaps be able to give.  When I first landed in Botany Bay the natives appeared on the beach and were easily persuaded to receive what was offered them and tho' they came armed very readily returned the confidence I placed in them by going to them alone and unarmed most of them laying down their spears when desired; and while the ships remained in Botany Bay no dispute happened between our people and the natives. [66] They were all naked but seemed fond of ornaments putting the beads of red baize that were given them around their heads or necks. Their arms and canoes being described in "Captain Cook's Voyage" I do not trouble your Lordship with any description of them.  When I first went in the boats to Port Jackson the natives appeared armed near the place at which we landed and were very vociferous but like the others easily persuaded to accept what was offered them and I persuaded one man who appeared to be the chief or master of the family to go with me to that part of the beach where the people were boiling their meat. When he came near the marines who were drawn up near the place and saw that by proceeding he should be separated from his companions who remained with several officers at some distance he stopped and with great firmness seemed by words and acting to threaten if they offered to take any advantage of his situation. He then went on with me to examine what was boiling in the pot and exprest his admiration in a manner that made me believe he intended to profit from what he saw and which I made him understand he might very easily by the help of some oyster-shells. I believe they know no other way of dressing their food but by broiling and they are seldom seen without a fire or a piece of wood on fire which they carry with them from place to place and in their canoes so that I apprehend they find some difficulty in procuring fire by any other means with which they are acquainted. The boats in passing near a point of land in the harbour were seen by a number of men and twenty of them waded into the water unarmed received what was offered to them and examined the boats with a curiosity that gave me a much higher opinion of them than I had formed from the behaviour of those seen in Captain Cook's voyage and their confidence and manly behaviour made me give the name of Manly Cove to this place.  It is not possible to determine with any accuracy the number of natives but I think that in Botany Bay Port Jackson Broken Bay and the intermediate coast they cannot be less than one thousand five hundred.  Experience sir has taught me how difficult it is to make men industrious who have passed their lives in habits of vice and indolence. In some cases it has been found impossible; neither kindness nor severity have had any effect; and tho' I can say that the convicts in general behave well there are many who dread punishment less than they fear labour; and those who have not been brought up to hard work which are by far the greatest part bear it badly. They shrink from it the moment the eye of the overseer is turned from them.  I do not [wish] for many farmers to be sent out as superintendents for few farmers will be found equal to the charge of a considerable number of convicts; but if two good men could be found who as well as being good husbandmen had sufficient spirit to discharge the trust which must repose in them they will be of great use. They will be necessary as the number of convicts increase and the more so as the person who at present has that charge will not settle in the country. It was supposed that a sufficient number of good farmers might have been found amongst the convicts to have superintended the labours of the rest; and men have been found who answer the purpose of preventing their straggling from their work but none of them are equal to the charge of directing the labour of a number of convicts with whom most of them are linked by crimes they would not wish to have brought forward and very few of the convicts have been found to be good farmers. [...]   I wish sir to point out the great difference between a settlement formed as this is and one formed by farmers and emigrants who have been used to labour and who reap the fruits of their own industry. Amongst the latter few are idle or useless and they feel themselves interested in their different employments. On the contrary amongst the convicts we have few who are inclined to be industrious or who feel themselves anyways interested in the advantages which are to accrue from their labours and we have many who are helpless and a dead-weight on the settlement. Many of those helpless wretches who were sent out in the first ships are dead and the numbers of those who remained are now considerably increased. I will sir insert an extract from the surgeon's report who I directed to examine these people. [55]   "After a careful examination of the convicts I find upwards of one hundred who must ever be a burden to the settlement not being able to do any kind of labour from old age and chronical diseases of long standing. Amongst the females there is one who has lost the use of her limbs upwards of three years and amongst the males two are perfect idiots."  Such are the people sent from the different gaols and from the hulks where it is said the healthy and the artificers are retained. The sending out of the disordered and the helpless clears the gaols and may ease the parishes from which they are sent; but sir it is obvious that this settlement instead of being a colony which is to Support itself will if the practice is continued remain for years a burthen to the mother country. The desire of giving you a full and clear information on this head has made me enter into this detail. Of the nine hundred and thirty males sent out by the last ships two hundred and sixty-one died on board and fifty have died since landing. The number of sick this day is four hundred and fifty; and many who are not reckoned as sick have barely strength to attend to themselves. Such is our present state; and when the last ships arrived we had not sixty people sick in the colony. But sir I hope the many untoward circumstances which the colony has hitherto met with are now done away; and I flatter myself that after two years from this time we shall not want any further supply of flour.  If settlers are sent out many difficulties will be removed; they may choose those situations to which for the above reasons I cannot at this moment detach convicts; and I have had the honor of observing in my former dispatches that settlers appear to be absolutely necessary. If they bring with them people to clear and cultivate the land and provisions to support those they bring with them they will want very little assistance from Government after they arrive; but no soldier or other person in this settlement could at present accept of the assistance of convicts in cultivating the land which might be granted them on the conditions pointed out in the instructions - "of feeding and cloathing them." [64] I believe sir that it will be little less than two years from the time of granting the lands before those lands will support the cultivators. I may err but I give my opinion to the best of my judgment.  A settler who has to depend on his own labour will get on very slowly but as there are some places on which but little timber is growing such spots shall be selected for those non-commissioned officers and privates who may be inclined to settle; and I shall govern myself by the instructions I have received unless otherwise directed.  If the settlers first sent out are in addition to their knowledge as farmers possessed of some little property will it not sir act as a security for their industry? Men able to support themselves if intelligent and industrious I think cannot fail; but if people come out (and such I fear may offer) who are indolent and having nothing to lose want that spur to industry they may become a burthen to the settlement for they cannot be left to starve. Could an hundred of those who have been sent out to form this colony be removed it would be greatly benefitted since they are as great burthen here as they would be to their parishes if in England.  As it may appear that we have not made that advance towards supporting ourselves which may have been expected I will sir beg leave to observe that in addition to those untoward circumstances which have thrown the settlement so far back it never yet has been possible to direct the labour of more than a small part of the convicts to the principal object. A civil and military establishment form a considerable part of our numbers which is increased by women and children all of whom are undoubtedly necessary but are a deadweight on those who have to render the colony independent for the necessaries of life. Stores barracks and houses have required time and we have still stores and barracks to build in the stead of those temporary ones at first erected. Settlers will secure themselves and their provisions in a short time and everyone they feed will then he employed in cultivation.  As I thought the first settlers sent out might require more encouragement than those who might come out hereafter I proposed in my last despatches giving them a certain number of convicts for two years and supporting them during that time at the expense of the Crown. The number intended to receive that indulgence may be limited to the first fifteen; but I think sir much will depend on ensuring the success of the first settlers sent out and who I presume will be good farmers. [65] The assistance proposed for them will certainly put them at their ease if they are industrious men and would not I apprehend be any great loss to the Crown.  In order to know in what time a man might be able to cultivate a sufficient quantity of ground to support himself I last November ordered a hut to be built in a good situation an acre of ground to be cleared and once turned up it was put into the possession of a very industrious convict who was told if he behaved well he should have thirty acres. This man had said the time for which he had been sentenced was expired and wished to settle. He has been industrious has received some little assistance from time to time and now tells me that if one acre more is cleared for him he shall be able to support himself after next January which I much doubt but think he will do tolerably well after he has been supported for eighteen months. Others may prove more intelligent though they cannot well be more industrious.  FORM OF GRANT OF LAND  By His Excellency Arthur Phillip Esqr. Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in and over His Majesty's Territory of New South Wales and its Dependencies &c. &c. &c.  WHEREAS full Power and Authority for Granting Lands in the Territory of New South Wales to such Persons as may be desirous of becoming Settlers therein is vested in me His Majesty's Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in and over the said Territory and its Dependencies by His Majesty's Instructions under Royal Sign Manual bearing date respectively the Twenty-fifth day of April One thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven and the Twentieth Day of August One thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine.  In pursuance of the Power and Authority vested in me as aforesaid I do by these Presents Give and Grant unto P.S. His Heirs and assigns to have and to hold for ever One Hundred and forty Acres of Land in One Lot to be known by the name of THE VINE-YARD laying on the North side of the Creek leading to Parramatta and crossed by a Publick Road of One hundred feet in breadth; the said One hundred and forty Acres of Land to be had and held by him the said P.S. his heirs and assigns free from all Fees Taxes Quit Rents and other acknowledgments for the space of Five Years from the date of these Presents Provided that the said P.S. his heirs or assigns shall reside within the same and proceed to the improvement and cultivation thereof; such Timber as may be growing or to grow hereafter upon the said Land which may be deemed fit for Naval Purposes to be reserved for the use of the Crown and paying an annual Quit Rent of one Shilling for every Fifty Acres after the expiration of the Term or Time of Five Years before mentioned.  In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and the Seal of my Arms (The Seal of the Territory not being yet received) at Government house Sydney in the Territory of New South Wales this Thirtieth Day of March in the year of Our Lord One thousand seven hundred and ninety-one.  A.P.  You are sir pleased to express your regret at my being obliged to return to England on account of my health and I feel much satisfaction from the manner in which that circumstance is mentioned.  How far that part of your letter to which the above alludes may have been intended to convey to me his Majesty's permission to return I am doubtful and although I am inclined to think it has been written with that intention and feel how necessary it is for me to give up at least for a time the charge of this Government which is very far from what I wish to do at the moment the colony is approaching to that state in which I have so long and anxiously wished to see it; still sir I fear there is a possibility of its being expected that I should remain until permission to quit the Government is more fully and clearly expressed; and as there appears to be a wish that I should remain in this country some time longer I shall await the arrival of the next ships. [52]   The situation of the soldiers under my command who at this time have scarcely shoes to their feet and who have no other comforts than the reduced and unwholesome rations served out from the stores has induced me to assemble the captains of my corps for the purpose of consulting what could be done for their relief and accommodation. [61] Amongst us we have raised a sufficient sum to take up the Britannia and as all money matters are already settled with the master who is also an owner I have now to request you will interest yourself in our favour that you will by representing the necessities of my soldiers protect this ship from interruption as much as you can and that you will assist us to escape the miseries of that precarious existence we have hitherto been so constantly exposed to.  The arrival of the above ships [Britannia and Calcutta] put it in my power to increase the ration and which though at present little inferior to the full ration is from the nature of some articles and the deficiency of others very far from being satisfactory; nor can the present ration be continued many days longer if the Kitty does not arrive. The expences attending the supplying the colony with the provisions received from Calcutta by the Atlantic will be seen by the accounts which accompany this letter and I have only to observe that the different articles are very inferior to those of a similar nature which are furnished from Europe.  Eight casks of salt provisions which were sent from Calcutta on speculation though used as soon as landed were very bad but the small quantity of provisions in store obliges me to order it to be issued. It is sir also necessary to observe that the beef received from the Britannia is bad in kind; it has been surveyed by two officers a lieutenant and a master of the Navy. Their report states after weighing and examining a considerable number of casks:  "That the average loss on the hogsheads agreeable to the contents marked on them is thirty-six pounds and one-third and on the tierces twenty pounds and one-third. And that the whole of the beef appears to be lean bony and very coarse and inferior in quality to any we have ever seen issued in his Majesty's service."  In addition to the provisions received from Messrs. Lambert Ross & Co. a merchant the Hon. John Cochrane sent eight casks of the finest and of the second sort of flour and soojee and which he offered to warrant for a twelvemonth but when landed it was in such a state from being heated and from the weevil that it was necessary to cause it to be immediately issued. The enclosed extract from Mr. Cochrane's letter contains his proposal for furnishing this settlement with those articles. [...] [62]   Of the present state of this settlement I have the satisfaction of assuring you that the soil and its produce more than answer the expectations which I have formerly given. Our last year's crop of maize notwithstanding the long drought was 4844 1/2 bushels of which 26494 bushels have been issued as bread for the colony 695 bushels were reserved for seed and other purposes and not less than 1500 bushels were stolen from the grounds notwithstanding every possible precaution was taken to prevent it. From the time the corn began to ripen to the time it was housed the convicts were pressed by hunger and great quantities were stolen and concealed in the woods; several convicts died from feeding on it in its crude state when carrying the grain to the public granary. But in speaking of these people it is but just to observe that I can recollect very few crimes during the last three years but what have been committed to procure the necessaries of life.  One thousand acres of ground are in cultivation on the public account of which 800 are in maize the rest in wheat and barley at Parrarnatta and a new settlement formed about three miles to the westward of Parramatta and to which I have given the name of loon-gab-be a name by which the natives distinguish the spot. The soil is good and in the neighbourhood of this place there are several thousand acres of exceeding good ground. The quantity of ground in cultivation by the settlers is 416 acres and they have 97 acres more ground cleared of timber. By the land in cultivation some judgment may be formed as to the corn which may next year be carried into the store towards the support of the colony. And I flatter myself that the time now approaches in which this country will be able to supply its inhabitants with grain; but no dependance must be placed on a crop while it is in the ground consequently regular supplies of flour &c. from Europe will be necessary until there is sufficient quantity in store to serve the colony for one year at least. The grub as in all new grounds is very destructive. The crop may fail from a dry season or be lost from fire or other accidents and to which it may naturally be supposed the crops in this country are more exposed than in Europe.  My letters by the Supply Gorgon and Pitt will have shewn that I look to England for the necessary supplies of which we still stand in great need and which I doubt not are now on their passage; but the great length of time in which this colony has remained in its present state takes away hope from many and the consequences must be obvious. It has sir been my fate to point out wants from year to year; it has been a duty the severest I have ever experienced. Did those wants only respect myself or a few individuals I should be silent; but here are numbers who bear them badly; nor has the colony suffered more from wanting what we have not received than from the supplies we have received not arriving in time. [63]   If people for superintendents of such descriptions as have been pointed out can be found they will be very useful. Of those which have already been received one is become a settler and is doing well; a second has been discharged as useless in every respect; and a third who can be well spared will be discharged as wishing to become a settler.  Government General Order 29 January 1796  THE MANY robberies which have lately been committed render it necessary that some steps should be taken to put a stop to a practice so destructive of the happiness and comfort of the industrious. And as it is well known that a fellow known by the name of Black Caesar has absented himself some time past from hit work and has carried with him a musquet notice is hereby given that whoever shall secure this man Black Caesar and bring him in with his arms shall receive as a reward five gallons of spirits.  The Governor thinks it further necessary to inform those settlers or people employed in shooting who may have been occasionally supplied with powder and shot that if it shall be discovered hereafter that they have so abus'd the confidence placed in them as to supply those common plunderers with any part of their ammunition steps will be taken immediately for their punishment as they will be considered accomplices in the robberies committed by those whom they have so supplied.  JNO. HUNTER.  Governor Hunter to Duke of Portland. 3 March 1796  We HAVE NOW my Lord a band or two of banditti who have armed themselves and infest the country all round committing robberies upon defenceless people and frequently joining the natives for that purpose; but as I have lately issued an Order in which a reward has been held out for the detention of the villains as well as the discovery of another set of plagues who having been allowed a small quantity of ammunition for their own defence there is reason to suspect they are in league with and supply these depredators. [227] I have no doubt we shall soon be in possession of some of them. One of this gang (a black man convict) has since the publication of this Order been discovered and in the endeavour to secure him he attempted to shoot the man who spoke to him but there being two of them together the other in self-defence fired and shot him. The fate of this fellow who has long been a notorious offender will have its effect.  In my Letter of the 23d of Novr. last I informed you that I had sent a Colonial Vessel to Basses Straits the particulars of which I had communicated to the Secretary of State - It was reported to me soon after the French Ships sailed that a principal object of their voyage was to fix on a Place at Van Diemans Land for a Settlement and that the French Officers who had talked of it had pointed out a particular place i.e. what the French call Baie du Nord in Storm Bay Passage; with this Information I considered it my duty to establish His Majesty's Right to that Island being within the limits of this Territory I therefore despatched a Colonial Vessel under the direction of the Masters Mate of the Buffalo with the enclosed Instructions who conducted that Service very much to my Satisfaction and made an accurate Survey of King's Island and Port Phillip at the West entrance of Basses Straits.  Making the French Commodore acquainted with my intentions of Settling Van Dieman's Land was all I sought by this Voyage Mr. Robbins overtook them on the Day the Naturaliste parted Company with the Geographe to return to France I have the honor to enclose the French Commodore's Answer to my Letter with my Remarks thereon. [75]   Under all these Circumstances I judged it expedient to form a Settlement at Risdon Cove in the River Derwent the situation of which their Lordships will observe in Captain Flinder's Chart of Storm Bay Passage in Van Dieman's Land; This Measure I should have taken sooner if I had any proper Person to send on that Service; On the Glattons arrival Lieut. Bowen of that Ship offered his Services and being recommended by Captain Colnett who gave his Consent I took it upon me to appoint Mr. Bowen in conjunction with the Commander of the Porpoise to fix on a suitable Place and command the intended Settlement until I may receive Instructions on that Subject. As no Medical assistance could be spared from the Colony and the Surgeon of the Glatton having Captain Colnetts consent and recommendation I appointed him to the Medical Duty of the intended Settlement where his assistance to Lieut. Bowen will be very useful. My reasons for making this Settlement are : - the necessity there appears of preventing the French gaining a footing on the East side of these Islands; To divide the Convicts : - To secure another place for procuring Timber with any other natural production that may be discovered and found useful The advantage that may be expected by raising Grain; and to promote the Seal Fishery: For these reasons and Utility of a Naval Officer's conducting a Settlement of that kind I was induced to accept Lieut. Bowen's offer and Capt. Colnett's recommendation which I hope will meet their Lordships Approbation. It is my intention to dispatch the Porpoise and Lady Nelson on this Service as soon as possible after the Glatton's departure.  Terrible LOSS of HIS MAJESTY'S ARMED VESSEL PORPOISE and the CATO Upon WRECK REEF.  CAPTAIN FLINDERS late Commander of His Majesty's Sloop INVESTIGATOR and Mr. PARK Commander of the Ship CATO arrived at Government House at half past 3 in the afternoon of the 8th Instant with the following disagreeable Intelligence as communicated in the following LETTER to His EXCELLENCY.  "Sydney New South Wales Sept. 9 1803.  "SIR  "I have to inform you of my arrival here yesterday in a Six-oar'd Cutter belonging to His Majesty's Armed Vessel PORPOISE commanded by Lieut. FOWLER: which ship I am sorry to state to Your EXCELLENCY I left on shore upon Coral Rock without any prospect of her being saved in Latitude 22° 11' South and Longitude 155° 13' East being 196 miles to the N 38° E. from Sandy Cape and 729 miles from this Port! The Ship CATO which was in Company is entirely lost upon the same Reef and broken to pieces without any thing having been saved from her: but the crew with the exception of Three are with the Whole of the Officers Crew and Passengers of the PORPOISE upon a small Sand-bank near the Wrecks with sufficient Provisions and Water saved from the PORPOISE to subsist the whole amounting to 80 Men for Three Months.  "Accompanied by the Commander of the CATO Mr. JOHN PARK and Twelve Men I left Wreck Reef in the Cutter with Three Weeks' Provisions on Friday August 26th in the morning and on the 28th in the evening made the Land near Indian Head; from whence I kept the coast on board to this place.  "I cannot state the Extent of Wreck Reef to the Eastward but a Bank is visible in that direction six or seven miles from the Wrecks. In a West direction we rowed along the Reef twelve miles but saw no other dangers in the Passage towards Sandy Cape. - There are several Passages through the Reef and Anchorage in from 15 to 22 fathom; upon a sandy bottom the Flag-staff upon Wreck-reef Bank bearing South-East to South - South - West distant from three - quarters to one - and - quarter mile.  "After the above Statement it is unnecessary for me to make Application to Your EXCELLENCY to furnish me with the means of Relieving the Crews of the two Ships from the precarious situation in which they are placed since your Humanity and former unremitting Attention to the INVESTIGATOR and PORPOISE are Sureties that the earliest and most effectual means will be taken either to bring them back to the Port or to send them and myself onward towards' England.  "I enclose to Your EXCELLENCY a Letter from Lieut. FOWLER upon the occasion; and as he refers to me for the Particulars of the Wreck an Account thereof is also inclosed.  "I think it proper to notice to Your EXCELLENCY that the great exertions of Lieut. FOWLER and his Officers and Company as well as the Passengers belonging to the INVESTIGATOR in saving His Majesty's Stores have been very praiseworthy; and I judge that the precautions that were taken will exonerate the Commander of the PORPOISE from the blame that might otherwise be attached to the Loss of His Majesty's Armed Vessel.  "I have the honour to be  "Your EXCELLENCY'S  "Obedient humble Servant  "MATTHEW FLINDERS."  Lieutenant Bowen to Governor King  Risdon Cove 20 September 1803  SIR  After a passage of twelve days we arrived in the Derwent ourselves all well but the cattle very indifferent the effects of a severe gale on the second day we left Port Jackson which notwithstanding Captain Bunker did everything in his power even so far as heaving the ships to for their safety bruized them so much that we lost one cow three sheep and four lambs. Much more stock was lost belonging to myself and the settlers. Upon the whole I have been the greatest sufferer. On the Friday after we sailed it being calm Captain Bunker was fortunate enough to kill three sperm whales and it being light unfavourable weather we anchored three days successively about Oyster Island and was baffled with light winds two days in Frederick Henry Bay; however on Sunday the 12th. to my great satisfaction I found the Lady Nelson in Risdon Cove having been fortunate to arrive five days before us.  As I have not had time enough even to form a general plan I shall only relate my proceedings and opinion of the place since I have been here. There are so many fine spots on the borders of the river that I was a little puzzled to fix upon the best place but there being a much better stream of fresh water falling into Risdon Cove than into any of the others and very extensive valleys laying at the back of it I judged it the most convenient and accordingly disembarked all the men and stores and have been since wholly employed in securing ourselves from the weather. [142] We are situated on a hill commanding a perfect view of the river and the land with the fresh water at the foot Of it; the land excellent. I have been up the river rather higher than Captain Flinders went and have examined Herdsman's Cove which I am of opinion will be the best place for the settlers the Derwent being perfectly fresh all above it. The banks are more like a nobleman's park in England than an uncultivated country. Every part is beautifully green and very little trouble might clear every valley I have seen in a month. There are very few rocky spots except on the high hills and in many places the plough might be used immediately but our workmen are very few and very bad. I could with ease employ one hundred men upon the land about us; and with that number some good men among them we should soon be a flourishing colony.  The soldiers I have got are very discontented and appear to have had too easy a life for their present employment. I have only one sentry in the day and two at night which they call very hard duty and give me some trouble to put them to rights. I should wish if any more persona come down to see an officer or a very active sergeant with them as the present party will be of very little use even with my present establishment.  I have not seen a single native yet but some of the people found them on our first arrival but they appeared very shy and have since retired entirely from us. Not apprehending they would be of any use to us I have not made any search after them thinking myself well off if I never see them again  Our provisions and stores are pretty correct except a little damaged sugar and flour before it was landed which I intend to send back in the Lady Nelson who will sail from this in about a fortnight by which time I shall have the returns ready and shall be able to furnish you with a plan of our settlement.  I have &c.  JOHN BOWEN.  By my Letter No. 5 which I expect you will receive by the Schooner Edwin (a Duplicate of which accompanies this) your Excellency will be informed of my Intention of Proceeding to the Settlement established under your Authority at the Derwent.  As your Excellency requests that I will be unreserved in my communications respecting the Settlement with the direction of which I have been entrusted I shall proceed to state the motive that induced me to give the preference to the Derwent. The advantages which I must derive from establishing myself in a Place already settled had certainly great weight with me as I mention'd in the Letter which I had the honor of addressing to you by the Calcutta; but a still stronger consideration than this determined my Election of that Place. [76] Between the departure of Captain Woodruff and the Receipt of your last Dispatches I discovered an improper spirit among some of my Military who expressed a dissatisfaction at a daily Drill which I had found it necessary to order. Having received sufficient Evidence of their discontent and of a design to wait upon me in a Body to state What they deemed a grievance I resolved instantly to check it before it could proceed to any such unwarrantable length and caused two Privates (who I had reason to believe were the most dissatisfied) to be confined and brought them the following Day to a Court-Martial by which they were sentenced to receive each Nine hundred lashes of which Punishment I attended the Execution myself when one received Seven Hundred and the other five hundred lashes. The Public Order which I gave out upon this Occasion will be found in the continuation of my General Orders which I send herewith.  This Punishment appeared to be attended with the effect which I desired. Nevertheless on duly weighing the whole Circumstance together with the weakness of my party in point of Numbers I thought I could not do better than repair to the Derwent where by being joined by a Detachment of the New South Wales Corps a Spirit of Emulation would be excited and a check given to that discontent which had manifested itself among my own People.  By this addition of strength I should moreover never have much apprehension from a large Sick-List which indeed was once so great after the departure of the Calcutta Marines that I was obliged to reduce the number of my Centinels by day mounting a Picquet in the Evening. I also reflected that having but three Subalterns if I should lose an Officer or one of them be ill I could not hold a Court-Martial upon Offenders an inconvenience the occurring of which would be in some measure obviated by the Services of Lieu't. Moore.  These Sir were my Motives; it was my anxious wish to have had the Honour of establishing a permanent Settlement with no other aid than what I brought with me from England; but events which I could not foresee determined me at the Time to Proceed to Risdon Cove. I found Port Phillip wholly unfit for the Settlement and the idea of fixing one at Port Dalrymple I abandoned not only from the motives which I have stated but because I conceived the local Situation of the River Derwent more adapted for commercial Purposes. Its position at the Southern extremity of Van Dieman's Land gives it an advantage over every Harbour yet discovered in the Straits and I entertain a Hope that when it is generally known that an Establishment is formed so directly presenting itself as a Port of Shelter to Ships from Europe America or India either for Whaling or other speculation it will be greatly resorted to. [77] These advantages no doubt occurred to your Excellency and influenced you to take Possession of that part of the Country. I therefore thought that I ran no risk (as I had been obliged to quit the place to which I was destined) of incurring any Blame in fixing on a Spot which had before been thought by your Excellency an eligible Situation for a Settlement.  My General Letter No. 6 will inform your Excellency of my Proceedings since my arrival in the Derwent; and as the Purport of this Letter will be stated in my Dispatches to the Secretary of State it will afford me matter of great Satisfaction if the Propriety and expediency of the Measures which I have adopted shall receive your Excellency's Confirmation.  THE MEMORIAL OF CAPTAIN JOHN MACARTHUR  to the Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council appointed for the Consideration of the Matters of Trade and Foreign Plantations.  Most Respectfully states:  That as some doubts have been expressed of the practicability of increasing the production of Fine Wool in New South Wales to the extent that has been described in the Memorials which have been presented to the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury Your Lerdships Memorialist feels it incumbent upon him respectfully to endeavour to remove those Doubts by a repetition of the Principle Facts contained in the Representation he has already had the honor to make and to accompany it with such further Explanations and with a Reference to such Evidence as he humbly hopes may be considered conclusive.  When Your Lordships Memorialist left Port Jackson in 1801 his Flocks consisted of more than Two Thousand Sheep the whole of which had been bred from about Fifty Ewes in a little more than Seven Years - and by the Returns that he has received of 1802 his Flocks are increased to Three Thousand. He has not yet received any Accounts of the Year 1803 but he concludes there must then have been about Four Thousand beyond which he has no expectation they have much increased as most of the Lands contiguous to his Farms have since his Departure from the Colony been appropriated for Cultivation.  Your Lordships Memorialist brought with him to England as Samples Fleeces shorn from the Sheep imported from the Cape of Good Hope; Fleeces shorn from their progeny bred in New South Wales; and Fleeces shorn from sheep of the mixed Breed whose rams bore nothing but Hair or coarse Wool. When these Samples were shown to the most eminent Manufacturers and Merchants concerned in the Woollen Trade they all concurred in Opinion that the worst specimens of the mixed Breed would be valuable here and the specimens of the finest kind bred in New South Wales were much superior to the Wool of the original Sheep imported from the Cape of Good Hope and that they were equal to the very best we ever receive from Spain. Indeed some of the Manufacturers declared the wool to be superior to Spanish Wool in many respects and that if they could procure a sufficient supply it would enable them to surpass all other Countries in the Manufacture of the best Woollen Cloths. But of these Opinions perhaps it would be superfluous to say more as the numerous Memorials presented to the Lords of the Treasury from the Manufacturers and Merchants must contain more decisive Evidence than any other Testimony that can be offered on the Subject. [269]   Your Lordships Memorialist is entirely convinced from the Number of Sheep that have been already bred in New South Wales and from the Improvement which he has witnessed in the Quality of the Wool that Millions of Sheep may be raised in that Country and that in a few years the present Stock by proper attention may be so increased as to produce a greater quantity of fine Wool than we are now obliged to purchase from Spain - and which he has ascertained by the proposals of some eminent Ship Owners may be brought hither from New South Wales at no greater Freight than is paid for the Freight of Cotton Wool from the East Indies - namely three pence per pound in time of War and three halfpence in Peace.  Your Memorialist will no longer trespass upon Your Lordships attention than to say That if your Lordships shall be pleased to sanction him in the undertaking on behalf of a Company he will submit to Your Lordships consideration the names of the many respectable persons who have offered their assistance and declared their willingness to form a Company.  But should Your Lordships more approve making the experiment on a small scale upon the individual account of your Memorialist he will most cheerfully commence it with an allotment of Ten Thousand Acres of Land and permission to select thirty Convicts for Shepherds.  Your Lordships Memorialist would choose the Land Ten miles from any of the Settlements where there is Cultivation and he would engage in return for the Indulgence to supply the Public with all the Sheep it might be proper to kill at a stipulated Price by which means Your Lordships Memorialist humbly presumes the Expenses of Government in that Colony would be very much diminished in a few years.  Abridgement of General Orders  Published by Authority in March 1806  Abbreviations- For P. read penalty- for forf. read forfeiture; for M. read Magistrate; and for B.M. Bench of Magistrates.  Agreements- not cognizable unless written and registered; being witnessed by one person not a prisoner Nov. 13 1800.  Apprentices and Deserters- forbid to be harboured or inveigled- p. 6 months hard labour exclusive of penalties by law ordained if free; and if a prisoner 100 lashes with other penalties at discretion of a Bench. Sept. 22 1804.  Arms and Ammunition- prohibited to be landed without permit; p. forf. of bond and charter party. July 24 1802.  Assault- every description of persons to obtain redress by action or indictment; and persons beating prisoners assigned them to forfeit such future indulgence. May 5 1803.  Assignments- not cognizable unless drawn up at the Judge Advocate's Office and registered. Feb. 26 1802.  Bakers- to make bread of one quality only; viz. 24lbs of bran to be taken from 100lbs of wheat; to charge 4d in money or 2.5 lbs of wheat for a loaf weighing 2lbs. 1 ounce when new and 2lbs. If one day old- P. 5£. & otherwise at discretion of a Bench May 8 1801 and Feb 17 1804. (Note- In litigations relative to the above charges no other than the sterling value of money is to be considered- for which see the article Specie) [38]   Bakers- to pay no more than 1s per bushel for grinding wheat into flour. Feb. 17 1804.  Barrack Bedding & Furniture- prohibited to be purchased- p. indictment for receiving stolen goods; Mar 14 1801.  Boats- belonging to individuals to land only at the hospital wharf unless by permission- p. seizure. Feb. 6 1804.   --- - forbid to convey spirits without permit- p. seizure. Oct. 24 1801.   --- - employed in the Hawkesbury trade not to depart from thence or from Sydney without 3 days notice of departure- In case of attack to cut away masts and run on shore; and to be provided with an axe or tomahawk- p. exemplary punishment. Nov. 9 1800.   --- - those on the River Hawkesbury to be numbered registered and chained at night- and not to be rowed about after dark- p. confiscation.   --- - not to convey any person on board a vessel after notice of departure without permission from the Governor or Officer in Command; p. forf. the boat to informer and 5£ to Orphans. Nov. 19 1802.   --- - required to be all registered and numbered. p. forf. to Orphans. Nov. 19 1802.   --- - forbid being in Cockle Bay or Farm Cove either ashore or afloat after sunset; p. forf. to the Crown-- and all boats to be moored within the hospital wharf & hulk. Aug. 31 1803.   --- - conveying grain from Hawkesbury. No grain to be put into an open boat or one that is not trustworthy or no complaint of damage therefrom cognizable; but if more grain be received than consistent with safety the master to make good all loss or damage lose the freight and pay 5£ to Orphans; and 5£ also to Orphans should grain appear to have been wetted to increase its weight or measure- B.M. Feb. 21 1804.  British Seamen forbid shipping in foreign vessels during the war- p. 40£. Bench of Magistrates. Aug. 11 1804.  Butchers- none to vend carcase meat but such as are licensed- p. 5£ and imprisonment 1 year. - Licensed butchers to enter into recognizances to observe as follows- not to kill any breeding flock nor to send live stock or carcase meat on board vessels without permission; to deliver to the Governor a weekly return of stock killed purchased and sold; not to demand more than 1s. 8d. per lb. for beef 1s. per lb. for mutton & 8.5d. per lb. for pork; [39] and not to sell meat by the joint but by weight- p. forf. of license and Recognizances the latter to informer. Bench of Mag. Oct. 14 1804. (Payment to be regulated by the sterling value of money for which see Specie.)  Cedar growing at Hawkesbury not to be cut down or removed without permission- P. confiscation with that also of the cart or boat removing it to public use. April 2 1802.  Centinels- to oblige every person (except an Officer) to advance when challenged; and to confine every person who presumes to answer "Officer" without authority. Dec. 14 1804.   --- - when stores &c. are to be placed in charge of a centinel application must be made to the Serjeant of the Guard from whom he is to receive instructions- otherwise the centinel not accountable. Nov. 12 1803.  Certificates- No person to be employed unless he produces his certificate if a freeman or his ticket of leave of a prisoner- P. employer to pay 5£. and 2s. 6d. for each day the man has been employed- and should he prove to be a prisoner without permission P. 20£ and 2s. 6. per diem to Orphans. B.M. Aug. 4 1804.   --- - to persons about to depart the colony will not be granted unless their names be published one week previous to leaving the cove. March 30 1805.  Colonial vessels- to be registered; and pay Fees to Orphans for Register 10s. for Permission to got to Botany Bay or Hawkesbury 2s. for Re-entry 2s. to go beyond Broken or Botany Bay 5s. Re-entry 5s. Oct. 15 1800.   --- - clearing for or from any dependent Settlement prohibited taking any person on board unless authorised- P. forf. of bond and recognizance. B.M. Sept. 27 1804.   --- - not to be allowed a clearance with more than 80 gallons of spirits for 26 men; 50 gallons for 18 men; 30 gallons for 12 men; and 18 gallons for 6 men if going on a sealing or whaling voyage. June 16 1805.   --- - person having families not to enter on board unless provision be made by the owners for their families while absent- the owners to find security also to return such persons when their engagement expires. [40] Owners to maintain their men while on shore or the latter may relinquish their contract. Sept. 5 1805.  Colonial vessels- Owners to provide sufficient provisions for the support of their men. P. by civil action. Sept. 5 1805.   --- - not to depart for oiling and sealing until bonds be entered into by the owners binding themselves in 500£ and two Sureties in 50£ each to perform as follows- - To take no person without permission and regular notice of departure; - to obtain a clearance; - not to navigate beyond the Limits; namely 10° 37' and 43° 39' S. and 135° E. from Greenwich; - not to entice seamen or entertain deserters; - to provide sufficient provisions for the support of their men; - not to break bulk until entered and the fees paid; not to authorise strange vessels taking away British subjects from the gangs; - not to purchase or receive more than 26 gallons of spirits from any vessel they may meet without the Governor's permission. Sept. 29 1805.  Constables- forbid releasing persons taken in charge until discharged by a Magistrate. May 14 1802.  Convicts not to employ others to do their work; to which all overseers are strictly to attend- P. at discretion of Magistrates. Oct 3 1800.   --- - not to strike or be struck by free persons- P. 200 lashes the prisoner and gaol gang 12 months; a free-man to pay 40s. for first offence and be bound over; & for 2d offence 5£ and security doubled. Feb. 19 1802.   --- - Those assigned to be of no expence whatever to the Crown. June 11 1801.   --- - Their persons not attachable for debt. Au. 8 1801.   --- - Those taken off the stores to be employed on their master's grounds only and in no case be permitted on their own hands or let to hire; P- to Orphans the master to pay 10£ and 2s. 6. for each day the servant has been absent from public labour; B.M. Jan. 12 1802.  Convict servants- not to be beaten by their masters; who are to complain to a Magistrate when necessary on pain of forfeiting such future accommodation. Mar. 5 1803.   --- - Those off the store not to charge exorbitant prices for their labour (for Regulations in which see Labour) or otherwise misbehave. P. recalled & other punishment according to offence. Aug. 4 1804.   --- - Masters to clothe and maintain them with a ration equal to that issued by Government; [41] to provide for them a sheltered lodging; the servant to work in his own time for his maser in preference to any other person and never absent himself without leave; in case of misbehaviour the master is to prefer his complaint to a magistrate who will order punishment as the case shall require. Persons secreting or employing such servants during Government hours will be punished for a breach of Public Orders on that [?]. Jan. 6 1804.  Convict Servants - Those indented for not to be suffered on their own hands; P. the master to pay 2s. 6d. per diem and 1s. for each day the servant shall be discharged before the term indented for expires. Ibid.  Copper Coin - Importation and exportation above 5£ prohibited; p. treble the value. Also; 5£ and not above a legal tender. Nov. 19 1800. For local value see Specie.  Creek Bridge - Tolls as follow: Each foot passenger 4d. or 10s. per ann.; each horse single or in draught 2s. 6d. or 2l. 10s. per annum: - waggons or 4 wheel carriages with not more half a ton lading 1s. 6d. or 1l. 10s. per annum; - a cart or carriage with 2 wheels laden or not 1s. 6d. or 1l. 10s. per an. - Sheep under a score 2d. each; and by the score 2s. 6d. or 2l. 10s. per ann. - Swine or Goats the same as sheep. - Passengers horses carts and carriages to pass and repass the same day with one ticket. May 25 1802 and March 7 1806.  Cur Dogs - such as are dangerous to stock or apt to fly at horses to be destroyed; and if damage be sustained the owner of the dog to forfeit a treble amount. Feb. 17 1801.  Debts - Wheat & live stock at Government prices a legal tender Jan. 7 1801.   --- of deceased Persons - Priority of claims for: 1st medical attendance; 2d debts and duties to the King; 3rd judgments; 4th recognizances; 5th rents; 6th obligations bill final and protested; 7th single bills; 8th wages; 9th book debts &c. Dec 15 1800.  Deeds Bonds &c. - to be executed by the Judge Advocate as Notary Public; individuals prohibited the exercise of any part of such office; p. removal. June 2 1805.  Deserters - see Apprentices.  Detainer - Applications respecting such to be made in writing at the Secretary's Office. April 7 1805.  Detainers - to be lodged within ten days after notice of departure ; [42] otherwise not cognizable unless the party about to depart remain 20 days after the notice has elapsed. Nov. 2 1805.  Extortion - to be punished as circumstances may require. May 26 1802.  Fees - High Court of Appeal before the Governor: To Provost [...] : No Appeal is allowed from the Verdict of the Civil Court to the Governor unless Appellant gives good Security to prosecute it and answer Condemnation Money with costs and damages in case the Verdict of the Civil Court be affirmed Nor from the Governor's award to the King on Council without giving good Security in twice the sum sued for to prosecute the Appeal in one year or as soon after as circumstances will admit; to answer Condemnation Money with such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded by His Majesty in Council in case the Sentence or judgment of the Governor be affirmed.   --- to Provost Marshal on Civil Actions Execucions &c. 5 per cent in proceeds of auctions on Execution; 5 per cent Levy Money for food downwares; 4 per Cent ditto from 100£ to 500£; 3 per Cent from 500£ to 1000£; 2 and a half per Cent. From 1000£ upwards; for a Man to keep possession 2s. 6d. per day for 5 days.   --- on Civil Actions - A writ or warrant of execution above 10£. and not exceeding 20£. [...]    --- to Secretary's Clerks receiving no salary: Free Pardons 5s. Conditional ditto 2s. 6d.; each person leaving the colony by certificate 2s. 6d.  Female Stock - prohibited to be sent from the Territory or its Dependencies: p. as for breach of Orders. Oct. 14 1804.   --- - prohibited to be killed; p. 20l. to informer and hard labour 2 months. B.M. Feb. 10 1804. [43]   Fires - No person to fire stubble until his neighbours are warned and prepared; p. by action remuneration of all damage; also no person to smoke pipes or make fires near a stack; p. exemplary [NN]. Nov. 10 1805. & former Orders.  Fire-Arms - forbid to be discharged between sun-set & sun rise; p. for breach of orders Aug. 19 1803.  Fines - Persons removed to a different settlement for misdemeanor not to return until the expiration of sentence; p. corporal punishment Jan 11 1803.  Foreigners - not permitted to settle or reside here without permission. Aug. 4 1804.  Forgery - subject to prosecution on a written as well as on a printed form. - Persons concealing such offence p. as for compounding felony Aug. 3 1803.  Fort Phillip - Every person cautioned from purchasing repairing or building huts near the esplanade; the limits explained by Mr. Alcock. April 1 1805.  Fustick - forbid to be cut without permission Sept. 20 1801.  Goats - not to be suffered to range without a herd; p. forf. to Orphans. Feb. 17 1801.  Grants of Land - forbidden to be transferred within the term of 5 years; p. cancel. April 1803.  Grants and Leases of buildings erected at the public expence and grounds allotted for public purposes to revert to the Crown at the Governor's discretion. June 11 1801.  Guard sent on board merchant vessels - Instructions to: To suffer no one to board but the Pilot or Officer authorised; and not article sent on shore until the Admission Flag is hoisted; not to suffer Spirits Wines or other strong Drinks to be sent from the ship but by Permit; to admit no unauthorised person on board without a pass at any time; and to suffer no shore boats to board after Sunset; if insulted or interrupted in their duty to report the same to Head Quarters. Oct. 10 1800.  Hogs - forbid to be sent on board vessels without permit; Jan. 31 1801.  Hospital Servants - forbid vending or prescribing medicines and applications to be made to the Medical Gentlemen for relief. Oct. 19 1805.  Idlers - loitering about the wharfs to be sent to hard labour and if after sunset imprisoned. July 22 1804.  Initials of the Governor Commissary and Deputies if forged to be considered as full signatures. Sep. 27 1802.  Interest - not more than 8 per cent. to be exacted; p. subject to the laws against usury. July 14 1804. [44]   King's Stores - Articles for the use of families granted from (comprising annual and extra supplies) not to be retailed; p. forf. future indulgence. June 20 1801.  Labour - hours of public labour from sunrise to 8 o'clock. And from 9 till 3. Saturdays from sunrise to 9 o'clock.  [...]   Licensed Persons - bound by recognizance to the due assize of Weight and Measure; to permit no Gambling Drunkenness Indecency or Disorder; to pay due respect to existing Regulations; not to entertain person from Tap-too beating to the following Noon nor during Divine Service; P. forf. of License and Recognizances the latter to informer; and 5l. to Orphans. B.M. Oct. 1800 and Oct. 26 1805.   --- not to credit more than 20s.; p. forf. of debt. Not to sue soldiers seamen servants or prisoners; p. nonsuit [sic] with treble charges. Ibid.   --- vending or receiving liquors distilled in the colony that practice being strictly prohibited; p. forf. of licence and recognizance. Sept. 29 1805.   --- receiving Permits for spirits to craw it themselves; and not dispose spirits on any other person's account; p. forf. of Licence and Recognizance with all spirits to informer. Dec. 20 1801.  Merchandize - Not more than 20 per cent. on the importer's prices admitted on the retail; in doubtful cases to be estimated by Courts; if sued for by allowing from 80 to 100 per cent. on the prime cost of English or India Cooes [NN] are 20 per cent. on the retail. Notes of Hand for debts so confiscated not cognizable as evidence unless the account of articles be produced with prices annexed. Oct. 1 1800. [45]   Merchandize - to be landed at the hospital wharf and no where else; p. confiscation. Oct. 10 1800.   --- brought from the Eastward of the Cape of Good Hope to pay to Orphans 5 per cent. ad valorem on the prices laid in at exclusive of wharfage and wine and spirit duties - British manufacturers exempt. Jun 14 1802.  Musters - Persons neglecting to attend; p. (if free) to be treated as vagrants; and (if prisoners) gaol gang 12 months. - Persons returning false accounts at discretion of B.M. July 27 1805.  Natives - not to be treated with inhumanity or injustice; pros. And indictment. June 30 1802.  Natives of New Zealand Otaheite &c. - All to be considered as under the protection of the Crown - To be properly treated and maintained by their employers; and not to be sent on any voyage without the Governor's permission. May 26 1805.  Newcastle - Coals and timber the exclusive property of the Crown Coals prohibited to be worked by individuals; but to be procured by Government at 1s. per ton and Cedar at Three Half pence per superficial Foot exclusive of other Duties and Fees viz. License 2s; Clearance 1s; Harbour Dues at Sydney at rates established (for which see "Colonial Vessels"; Entrance and Clearance from the River 2s.; Entrance at Sydney 1s - King's Dues for Orphans: Coals for home Consumption or for Exportation 2s. 6d. per ton; Timber for Home Consumption 3£ per thousand square feet; ditto for Exportation 4l. per ditto; Metage [sic] per Ton on Coals 2s.; Measure of Timber per thousand feet 2s. No vessel to go to Hunter's River without a specific License; and the Masters to enter into Recognizances themselves in 50l. and two Sureties in 25£ each to abide by the following regulations; viz. To take a regular Clearance; to observe the Orders of the Officer in Command; not to interfere with People at Public Labour; not to be riotous or troublesome; not to land until Permission be obtained; to use Baskets to contain 100 Weight; to make daily Returns to the Commandant of Coals and Timber taken in; to give two days Notice of Departure to the Officer in Command and receive his Certificate and Letters; not to sail between Dusk and Daylight; to land at the place directed only; to employ no prisoner without permission and pay 3s 6d. per day for the [NN] of each of them permitted to be employed; to give no strong Liquors to any Prisoner nor to land [NN] without Permit. Likewise; to enter into further Recognizances the Matter in [...] to take no person on board without authority. March 24 and May 2 1804.  Parramatta - Persons passing the barracks to give a satisfactory account of themselves to the Commanding Officer when repaired; [46] and no person to carry a musket without permission from the Magistrate. June 7 1805.  Passage Boats - not to convey any person (unless a settler) without a Pass; p. confiscation. The boats to be kept tight carry 4 Oars one Mast and Sail Boatmen to treat passengers civilly; to give notice half an hour before they depart by bell ringing; not to stop more than ten minutes by the way nor go along side a vessel without acquainting the Wharfinger. The Proprietors to keep Entry Book; p. forf. [NN] & Recognizances. To make the following Charges; Each Passenger 1s Children 6d.; Luggage 1s per cw.; Wheat or shelled Maize 6d. per Bushel; Maize in cod 8d. per nett bushel; each Chair [NN] 6d; Sheep and Goats 6d. each; Pigs and Packages to 1s; Liquids 1d. per gallon; Porter 3' per Hnd; Planks 2s 6d. per 100 feet; Fowls and Ducks 1s per dozen; Geese and Turkies 1s 2d per ditto; Parcels weighing 2lbs. 3d. and private letters 2d. each. Hire of Boat 1£ 1s. June 26 1813.  Passes - No person (unless a settler) to leave his place of settlement without such; which he is to produce to the Chief Constable of the Settlement expressed in it and to return it to the Officer who granted it. p. 3 months labour if free; and if a Prisoner corporal punishment at discretion of one Magistrate not exceeding 100 lashes. Aug 4 1804.  Permits - for removing half a gallon of spirits &c. to be granted by commissioned Officers Superintendents and licensed retailers. Oct 7 1801. See Spirits &c.   --- obtained by fraud and collusion; o. if free and licensed; one year's labour and license forf.; and if a prisoner at discretion of B.M. Feb. 1 1805.  Petitions - signed by more than one person to be sanctioned by 3 Magistrates; p. prosecution. June 8 1805.  Prisoners - not to be conveyed on board vessels about to depart; p. forf. of boat and persons rowing it 2 months imprisonment. B.M. April 27 1805.   --- not to be seduced or diverted from the public harvest; p. 10£ half to informer. B.M. Dec. 9 1801.  Provisions; including Wheat Flour Bread Meat &c. - not to be sent on board vessels but by permit. May 17 1802.  Public Registers - applications respecting to be made to the Secretary only. Feb 23 1805.  Public Roads - prohibited to be incroached upon: persons agrieved thereby to obtain redress by complaint to the nearest Magistrate. Nov. 3 1804.  Rations - The following proportions to be issued as a full ration when the stores admit; [45] viz. 7 lbs. of beef or 4 lbs. of pork; flour or meat 8 lbs. or an audition of a quarter of a pound to each pound of wheat; if it cannot be ground; pease or other [NN] 3 lbs. Six ounces of sugar instead of butter to the Civil and Military. June 14 1802.   --- allowed to prisoners prohibited to be purchased or exchanged; p. indictment; and if exchanged for spirits all such found in the house staved; if a licensed person forf. of license also. B.M. Dec. 31 1800.   --- forf. if not applied for at time of issue. May 19 1804.  Sabbath - strict observance and general attendance at divine service required: during the performance of which all strollers to be confined. Oct. 4 1800.  School-house and Chapel at Hawkesbury erected by Government for the benefit of the Settlers in that District. - All for whom the benefit is designed invited to become subscribers for supporting the institution and maintaining the Chaplain and Preceptor by the payment of two-pence for each acre of land they possess. All regulations to be determined on by six subscribers and 2 Magistrates one of whom to be the Principal Chaplain. Aug. 10 1804.  Seamen - Any person trusting or retaining such shall lose his or her money and be proceeded against; and forfeit 5£ for each day and night (after the first offence) should he be a deserter; but if ignorant of his being such p. 10s. per diem only. B.M. March 30 1805.   --- Deserting a ship and found after her departure p. 31 lashes and hard labour ibid.  Sedition - Transgressors amenable to existing laws: In addition to which the following Regulations for the effectual suppression of such crime against His Majesty's Government and the Public Tranquillity are strictly to be enforced; viz. Persons using seditions words or actions to receive exemplary punishment; and all persons knowing but concealing such offence to be treated as accomplices; Any house in which seditious meetings are held to be demolished. B.M. April 2 1801.  Slop Clouthing - sale and purchase prohibited; p. indictment for receiving stole good. Sept. 10 1801.  Specie - Table of sterling value; viz. a Guinea 1l. 2s: a Johanna 4£; a Half Joe 2£; a Ducat 9s. 6d.; a Gold Mohur £1.17.6; a Pagoda 8s.; a Spanish Dollar 5s.; a Rupee 2s. 6d.; a Dutch Guilder 2s.; an English Shilling 1s. 1d.; a Copper Coin of One Ounce 2d. [48]   Spirits and other Strong Drinks - if landed without permit; p. forf. to informer; wherever found with all such found in the House. May 11 1801.  Spirits - not to be removed but by permit; p. from the person received from 5£ to Orphans. Oct. 7 1801. See Permits.   --- No greater Quantity than half a Gallon to be removed but by a Permit signed by a Magistrate; p. forf. Oct. 30 1800.   --- landed by Masters or Vessels without License; p. forf. of Bond immediate departure &c. Dec. 16 1801.   --- Persons licensed to retail to pay 3l for each License to Orphan Fund and 2s. to Clerk.   --- drawn for domestic purposes forbid to be transferred P. forf. and if bartered for Wheat forf. to the Crown of Wheat. Spirits and Premises. Dec 20 1801.   --- prohibited to be smuggled landed without Permit or sold without a license p. confiscation &c. Oct. 1 1801.   --- brought without the Governor's Permission from the Eastward of the Cape to pay additional Duties following if permitted to be landed viz. 5£. For every 100 Gallons not to be charged more than 6s. per Gallon including Duty of 2s. per Gallon. 5 per cent ad valorem and 5s Wharfage for each cask or case of a hundred Gallons May 28 1804.   --- of not permitted to be landed here no Colonial Vessel within the Limits to receive such spirits; p. confiscation with Vessel also half to informer. April 27 1805.   --- not to be sold or bartered for more than 20s. a Gallon. p. the Excess of 20s. to be returned and future indulgence forf. and if licensed forf. of License also. Jan 21 1806.  Stallions - not to be suffered to run loose; p. 5£ to informer and 10s per night: if no claimed within a week forf. to Orphans. B.M. March 26 1805.  Stock - furnished by Government to Individuals. Oxen hired to such approved Settlers as procure ploughs or carts to be paid for in wheat each March. Quarter in the proportion of 10 bushels a year for two years when each head is to be purchased for 70 bushels of wheat or be returned to Government: such cattle not to be ill treated or applied to any other than agricultural purposes on pain of being reclaimed. In case of disease or accidental death the Superintendent of Stock to be informed thereof or the settler responsible for the loss - Cows one remove from the Bengal breed valued at 28£ a head occasionally to be bartered for as follows - To be paid in wheat into the Store on delivery of the cow - Or if accepted in two half yearly payments in failure of payment when due the stock to be reclaimed and the payment already made forf. - The stock and produce to the third generation unalienable unless by the Governor's permission for their sale; and no person to purchase any such stock without the Governor's sanction Feb. 6 1804. [49]   Stock - if impounded their description to be sent to the nearest Magistrate or Constable of the District immediately; to be properly fed and if near a Town made public thrice a week for one month by the common Cryer; p. 2£ for each head &c all other Costs. But owners of Stocks running at large to pay all damage sustained by. B.M. Sept. 29 1805.   --- Breeding Stock furnished by Government to individuals with its increase prohibited to be made away with or sold without permission and a fire tender made therof to Government at market prices: p. forfeiture with twice the value from seller and buyer; the original stock to the Crown the other penalties to informer. Bench of Magistrates. July 31 1802.  Stills - prohibited to be used: p. if free privation of indulgence and removal; if prisoners at discretion of B.M. - Also all liquors and utensils found to be seized and destroyed. Gov. Hunter's Order of Feb. 28 1799 Repeated &c. Aug. 31 and Sept. 29 1805.  Stream running into the Tanks at Sydney - no person to throw Filth into; nor to wash clean Filth or erect Pig-Styes near; nor to take Water up but at the Tank; p. 5£ to Orphans if free and the House razed; if a prisoner imprisonment and hard labour 12 months. B.M. Oct. 14 1802.  Strikes - none to be used for measuring wheat but such as are stamped by Superintending Carpenters who are to charge 1s. each. P. 5£ and 1s. for each bushel of grain measured. Nov. 28 1802.  Sureties - persons becoming so for people of indifferent character; p. full amount of recog. if forf. Mar 9 1801.  Swine - found at large without ring and yoke forf. to Orphans. Aug. 19 1803.  Tap too Beating - persons passing after to answer Centinels when challenged and to carry a lantern; None but known Housholders [sic] to pass except Officers of Vessels who are to make themselves known; and no unauthorised person to answer "Officer." P. confinement. Jan. 15 1803 Dec. 14 1806.  Timber - to be taken for Government purposes wherever found. No private individual to damage remove any but by permission from the owner or from the Governor if upon Crown Lands. Fuel from fallen woods to be removed with wheel barrows or single horse-carts. p. prosecution. And all Timber exported to be [...] [50]   Timber - Exotics exempted from the general claim of Government and to be the executive property of the owner; but if disposed of the Crown to have the preference; July 7 1804.  Vagrants and Idle or Disorderly Person to be sent to public labour; time discretional; 1 M. Oct. 26 1804.  Vendue - no person to sell goods by unless licensed those exempt by Act of Parliament excepted; p. 50£ to Orphans. Jan. 15 1801.  Vendue Master - to give a daily account of sales to the Treasurer of the Orphan Fund to which one and a half per cent to be paid by the Proprietor who is to furnish a List of Articles to the Treasurer previous to the Sale. P. forfeiture of Recognizances Jan. 15 1805.  Vessels - to pay the following Dues and Fees on Entry: - To Orphans: An English Merchant Ship with merchandize in Government service 15s; Ditto not in government service 1£ 10s; A Whaler with merchandize 15s; Ditto with no articles for sale 10s.; A Foreign Ship 2£ 10s.; General Permission to Trade 10s.; Each Bond 3s. 6d.; To Water on Orphan Lands 10s; To wood on ditto or on Government Grounds 10s; Clearance and Bonds returned 5s; Permit to Land or Remove Spirits 6d. To Gaol &c. - For every gallon of Spirits taken out of the Vessel 1s; Ditto of Wine 6d.; and Berr 3d; Wharfage for each Cask or Package 6d; Oct. 18 1800.   --- no person to go on board until the Admission Flag be boiled. Oct. 1 1800.  Vouchers for grain &c. furnished the stores - to be finally settled Quarterly otherwise not cognizable viz. 1st of Jan. 3rd of March 30th of June and 30th Sept. July 14 1801.   --- not to break bulk until reported & entered Oct. 15 1800.   --- To hoist their Colours upon public days; in case of refusal all intercourse to cease. Oct. 25 1802.   --- taking Spirits from hence not to be allowed communication with any dependent Settlement unless the Master produces a Letter from the Governor or Officer in Command (to relieve distress excepted); and no Spirits landed unless the Governor's Certificate of price &c. be produced. Mar. 10 1805.   --- Commanders forbid to entice Seamen from another ship: p. 15£ half to the King & half to Informer. B.M. Mar 30 1805.   --- Masters to give security previous to any communication themselves in 500£ and 2 sureties in 50£ each To take no person away without regular authority; Not to depart without leave under an additional penalty of 50£. (the usual Bond not to land persons from hence in India China &c. without Certificate to be also exacted). [51] Owners of private Colonial Vessels to renew the above security the 1st of Jan. annually for the conduct of Masters in their employ. April 4 1805.  Vessels Masters shipping seamen to make application to the Secretary in writing stating whether they have been prisoners; the ship they came in and where tried April 7 1805.   --- No communication to be held with after chaining clearance: p. boat forf. & 2 months imprisonm. April. 27 1805.   --- Crews to be put on a Ration agreeable to existing circumstances.   --- Not to be built within the Limits of more than 14 feet keel without Permission from the Governor (unless in case of shipwreck). P. Confiscation &c. May 26 1804.   --- Under foreign colours not to be cleared for any Sealing Voyage or to return hither; but to clear out for a Port of Discharge. Aug. 11 1804.   --- Masters not to disregard Colonial Regulations. P. All intercourse to cease to depart immediately and not permitted to return. Dec 28 1805.  Weights & Measures - to be true and stamped as such; p. 10£ to Orphans for each Weight or Measure defective. B.M. Jan. 1 1802.  Major Johnston to Viscount Castlereagh  Headquarters  Sydney  N.S. Wales  11 April 1808.  MY LORD  A series of almost incredible circumstances have imposed on me the distressing task and responsibility of superseding the authority vested in Governor Bligh by His Majesty's Commission and of assuming the government of this colony until His Majesty's pleasure shall be signified or until the arrival of an officer authorized to relieve me in the command.  Whenever the facts that have influenced me throughout so solemn a transaction shall be laid before my gracious Sovereign I humbly trust His Majesty will approve of my conduct and that it will be apparent I had no alternative but to put Governor Bligh in arrest to prevent an insurrection of the inhabitants and to secure him and the persons he confided in from being massacred by the incensed multitude; or if the Governor had escaped so dreadful an end and retained his authority to see His Majesty's benevolent and paternal government dishonour'd by cruelties and merciless executions.  The event that I have the honor to report to your Lordship took place on January 26 and although such a space of time has since elapsed I have found it impossible to prepare that arranged detail and that connected chain of evidence which so uncommon a subject has made it my indespensible duty to transmit to your Lordship. [...]   In a short time after a letter was presented to me imploring me instantly to put Governor Bligh in arrest and to assume the command of the colony. This letter was also approved of by all the officers of the Corps present at headquarters; and at the events I had myself witnessed left me no cause to doubt the propriety and necessity of complying with this requisition t immediately ordered the Corps under arms and directed four officers to proceed to Government House and summon Governor Bligh to resign his authority. The Corps quickly followed attended by the civil officers and a considerable number of respectable inhabitants. [70]   The four officers who had carried the summons met me at the Governor's door and reported that he was nowhere to be found nor any information to be obtained of him although the strongest assurances had been given that his person should be strictly guarded from insult or violence.  After a rigid search the Governor however was at last discovered in a situation too disgraceful to be mentioned and which I solemnly declare to your Lordship would have been most gratifying to my feelings had it been possible to have concealed from the public.  As soon as Governor Bligh made his appearance I assured him of his personal safety and of every attention in my power to offer him.  Governor Bligh to Viscount Castlereagh  Government House  Sydney  New South Wales  30 April 1808.  MY LORD  Mr Campbell Mr Palmer Mr Arndell and Mr Williamson retired to dine with me some time after five o'clock. About sunset we heard that Mr McArthur was liberated from the gaol by Major Johnston's order in writing as follows: - 'To the keeper of His Majesty's gaol at Sydney.  'You are hereby required and directed immediately to deliver into the custody of Garnham Blaxwell and Nicholas Bayly Esqrs. the body of John McArthur Esq. who was committed by warrant dated the 25th inst. signed by Richard Atkins Thomas Amdell Robert Campbell and John Palmer Esquires...  'Given under my hand and seal at Sydney New South Wales 26 January 1808.  'GEO. JOHNSTON J.P  'Lieut-Governor and Major commanding N.S.W. Corps.'  [...] Immediately followed an operation of the main guard at our gates priming and loading with ball cartridges and the whole body of troops began to march from the barracks led on by Major Johnston the band playing the 'British Grenadiers.' and colours flying. [...] In five minutes the whole house was surrounded by an armed force. consisting of between three or four hundred men all their muskets loaded with ball cartridges the officers attending in their proper places. Without ceremony they broke into all parts of the house (even into the ladies' room) and arrested all the magistrates: Mr Gore Provost Marshal Mr Fulton the clergyman and Mr Griffin my secretary. [71] Thus the civil power was annihilated and the colony in the hands of the military guided by McArthur and Bayly. Nothing but calamity upon calamity was to be expected even massacre and secret murder.  I had only just time to retire upstairs to prevent giving myself up and to see if anything could be done for the restoration of my authority; but they soon found me in a back room and a daring set of ruffians under arms intoxicated by spirituous liquors which was given them for the purpose and threatening to plunge their bayonets into me if I resisted seized me. I was now obliged to go below where I found the rooms filled with soldiers and presently Lieutenant Moore came forward and presented me with a letter from Major Johnston a copy of which follows: - 'Head-quarters 26 January 1808.  Sir  I am called upon to execute a most painful duty. You are charged by the respectable inhabitants of crimes that render you unfit to exercise the supreme authority another moment in this colony; and in that charge all the officers under my command have joined.  I therefore require you in His Majesty's sacred name to resign your authority and to submit to the arrest which I hereby place you under by the advice of all my officers and by the advice of every respectable inhabitant in the town of Sydney.  I am etc.  GEO. JOHNSTON  Acting Lieu't-Gov. and Major commanding N.S.W. Corps.  To William Bligh Esq. F.R.S. etc. etc. etc.  I had just read this infamous and rebellious letter when I received a message from this Lieutenant Moore that the Major wished to see me in the adjoining room. When I went I found him at the head of his armed men and in the presence of Doctor Townson John and Gregory Blaxland Garnham Blaxwell Charles Grimes Surgeon Jamison Nicholas Bayly Hannibal McArthur and Edward McArthur; he pronounced a speech similar to the letter before stated. I was now directed to have no communication with any person whom I had been accustomed to see as a friend; even my secretary Mr Griffin was ordered from me and was hurried before a committee - martial law having been proclaimed - and in the midst of terror interrogated respecting my conduct and concerns as Governor.  The first subject to which I should wish to call your attention and one to which I believe His Majesty's Ministers have attached the greatest importance is the Criminal Jurisdiction of the Colony. This is undoubtedly imperfect in every point of view; but the greatest defect and the one which seems to make the strongest impressions upon the minds of the publick is the variety of duties which are by the Patent imposed upon the Judge-Advocate which seem to be incompatible with the due performance of his duties as a judge. In the first instance he is obliged to prepare and examine into the evidence for the prosecution. He is in fact the prosecutor. He has then to draw up the indictment of the legality of which he is afterwards to judge and it is by him to be exhibited to the court and is in the nature of an information exhibited by His Majesty's Attorney-General.  The execution of these previous duties is apt to bias the mind and to render a proper attention to the subsequent and most important part of his office more difficult or at least more open to suspicion.  By the Patent the Judge-Advocate is constituted the president of the Criminal Court and it is reasonable to suppose that where he is a professional man the rest of the members of the court will be greatly influenced by his opinion which therefore should be as little exposed as possible to the danger of previous suspicion.  Another defect which I should wish to point out to you sir upon this subject is the very great similarity the court as it is at present constituted hears to a court-martial. [28] This similarity and the nature and form of its proceedings its meeting at ten o'clock and adjournment regularly at three and other circumstances also have made many of the publick suppose that it was in fact a court-martial; and many of those officers who have often sat as members of the court have always considered it as a court-martial.  I am fearful sir that I have already taken up too much of your time; yet my anxiety to represent to you as far as I am able the true state of the judicial department of the colony induces me to trespass a little longer upon it in order to give you some idea of the mode of doing business in the Court of Civil Judicature and of the inherent defects of its constitution.  This court sir was very well calculated to answer the purposes for which it was created in the infant state of the colony; but as the population has very much increased since its first establishment and with that the trade of the colony it has now become very deficient in many respects. It is a court that is well adapted for the purpose of investigating questions of simple debt or breach of contract; but the very summary mode of its proceedings are but ill-suited to the deciding of questions of a complicated nature when the interests of third parties are concerned; yet questions of this nature are frequently brought before it.  There are some cases indeed in which I have thought myself obliged to depart from the strict letter of the Patent in order to do justice.  The Patent directs "that upon complaint to be made in writing to the said court by any person against any other person residing etc. of any cause of suit the said court shall or may issue a warrant in writing under the hand and seal of the said Judge-Advocate" against the party complained of. It appears from hence that these warrants are issuable strictly only during the sitting of the Civil Court. But the number of writs applied for is so great and the residences of the persons upon whom they are to be served are frequently so distant and in cases when defendants are about to leave the colony the necessity of issuing writs immediately is so pressing that I have taken upon myself to sign and issue writs at all times even when a Court of Civil Judicature is not sitting making them returnable before the next court. This mode has the good effects of preventing defendants from defrauding their just creditors and at the same time of giving them an opportunity of preparing their defence to the action and also of saving the time of the court which would otherwise be completely occupied in the issuing of writs and on the other hand no injustice is done to either party.  Between the 1st day of January last and the 19th day of March when the Civil Court met between 350 and 400 writs were issued one of which was for the sum of £20000 upon which £10000 was paid in part and the action stayed upon security being given for the rest; another for £30000 in an action of false imprisonment and a third for £10000 in a similar action. Besides these there were actions brought which were referred to arbitrators by order of the court on consent of parties which involved property to the alleged amount of £30000. Previous to the meeting of the court I ordered all actions meant to be tried to be entered with my clerk and tried them in the order entered. The actions entered amounted to 251 of which 240 were actually tried. The amount of the verdicts given by the court exclusive of costs was £4585. 17s. 6d. [29] Except Saturdays and Sundays the court sat every day for three weeks.  The meetings of the courts are uncertain; but it would be greatly to the advantage of the publick were they to meet four times a year at certain fixed times for the writs issued could then be made returnable at a day certain which now cannot always be the case.  It is a great hardship upon the poorer suitors of the court and those who reside at a great distance that there are no proper agents or attornies whom they can employ to manage such actions as they are obliged to bring for the recovery of the debts due to them. This want of proper attornies falls also very heavily upon the Judge-Advocate as very much of his time is taken up by attending to complaints which are perfectly frivolous; and in those which appear to rest on good grounds he is often obliged to give his advice altho' it is a subsequent part of his duty to determine upon them.  This is peculiarly unpleasant to a person sitting as a judge whose wish and duty it is to come into court perfectly unbiased.  If a few - three or at most four -- attornies were to come out here whose characters were respectable complainants would naturally have recourse to them to be informed of the legal mode of obtaining redress and the expence necessarily incurred by them in adopting this step would be the means of preventing any frivolous litigation.  With a trifling encouragement afforded them by government three or four attornies by being allowed to practice here under control of the Civil Court might at least obtain a very comfortable livelihood.  If this should ever be the case a certain distinct mode of pleading would be introduced which would oblige the parties to take issue upon one or two distinct points and the court would more easily and more satisfactorily form their opinions as to the verdict.  In the present constitution of the court it is a great difficulty to find two fit persons to sit with the Judge-Advocate; for the sittings of the court are long and the persons who are usually appointed as members have extensive concerns to manage and all endeavour to avoid as far as they can the performance of a duty which requires the sacrifice of so much time.  I own it would give me a very great pleasure to see the trial by jury introduced also in this court; but I am not so clear that it would be equally adviseable. And I conceive that a court consisting of one two or three permanent judges having also the powers of a Court of Equity and also a regular Registrar or clerk to record the orders decrees and rules of the court would be the most eligible and most adapted to the circumstances of this colony.  By his Excellency Lachlan Macquarie Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over His Majesty's Territory called New South Wales and its Dependencies etc. etc.  By virtue of the powers vested in me I have assigned you William Henry now of Sydney in this Territory Missionary my Justice to keep His Majesty's peace in and over the Island of Taheite otherwise called Otaheite and the islands adjacent and for the preservation thereof and the quiet rule and government of His Majesty's people within the said Islands.  Given under my hand and seal at Government House Sydney this eighteenth day of September 1811.  L. MACQUARIE  Oath  I William Henry of Sydney in this Territory Missionary Do Swear that as a Justice of the Peace in the said islands in all articles as a Justice of the Peace I will do equal right to the poor and the rich after my cunning wit and power and after the laws and customs of the realm and statutes thereof made. And I will not be of council of any quarrell hanging before me; and that I hold sessions after the form of the statutes hereof made and the issues fines and amerciaments that shall happen to be made and all forfeitures which shall fall before me I will cause to be entered without any concealment or embezzling and truly send them to the King's Exchequer in this Territory. I will not let for gift or other cause but well and truly do my office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf; and that I will take nothing for my office of Justice of the Peace to be done but of the King and fees accustomed and costs limited by statute; and I will not direct or cause to be directed any warrant (to be made) to the parties but direct them to the Provost Marshal of this Territory or other the King's Officers or Ministers or other indifferent persons to do execution thereof.  So help me God.  Wm. Henry  Sworn before me His Majesty's Judge Advocate in and for the Territory of New South Wales this eighteenth day of September 1811.  Ellis Bent Judge Advocate  Declaration  I William Henry do declare that I believe that there is not any transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper or in the elements of Bread and Wine at or after the consecration thereof by any person whatever.  Wm. Henry [25]   These are to certify that Mr. William Henry Missionary of Sydney made and subscribed the foregoing declaration against transubstantiation previous to his being sworn in a Justice of the Peace at which time he also took the Oaths of Allegiance Supremacy and Abjuration.  Dated this 18th day of September 1811.  Ellis Bent J.A.  GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL ORDERS.  The GOVERNOR has observed with great Regret the Reluctance of the SETTLERS in general throughout this Colony in coming forward to supply His Majesty's Stores with GRAIN in the present alarming Season of Scarcity; and that instead of manifesting a due Sense of Gratitude for the repeated Favors and Indulgencies they have received from Government they seem determined to take every Advantage of its Necessities by withholding their Tenders to as late a Period as possible to give them an Opportunity of exacting a most exorbitant Price for their Grain knowing that it must be submitted to from the Necessities of the Times.  THE Conduct of those Persons who stand considerably indebted to the Crown for Cattle issued to them from the Government Herds as well as for various Articles which have been furnished them on Credit from the King's Stores is still more inexcusable and reprehensible in their not coming forward with their Grain at such a Crisis. Such Persons can no longer expect any Lenity or Forbearance; and the GOVERNOR will accordingly direct that they shall be sued for their respective Debts at the next Court of Civil Jurisdiction. - Settlers of a different Description. and especially those who are in opulent Circumstances principally owing to the Assistance they have derived from the Bounty of Government in originally granting them Lands Stock Provisions and Government Men to cultivate their Grounds ought to have been the first to come forward at such a Season to supply Government with such Grain as they could conveniently spare at a reasonable and moderate Price. - The GOVERNOR however laments to find he has been disappointed in almost every Instance and therefore conceives it a Duty he owes to the Crown and to the Trust reposed in him by His Majesty to signify to the Settlers of this Colony in this public Manner that unless he shall find in their future Conduct more Promptitude in coming forward to supply His Majesty's Stores with Grain on reasonable Terms and discharging the Debts they have incurred to the Crown he shall be under the painful Necessity of resorting and entirely trusting to Foreign Markets for supplying the King's Stores with Wheat and such other Grain as may be required; which it may not be amiss to remind them can he done at Half the Price now paid for that purchased in this Colony; The GOVERNOR however will very reluctantly resort to this Expedient and only in the Event of the Settlers manifesting the same Disposition at the ensuing Harvest they have shewn on the present Occasion. The GOVERNOR therefore trusts this Communication of his Sentiments will have its due Effect on their Minds and that they will see the Necessity of observing a more fair and becoming Line of Conduct in future. He also strongly recommends to the lower Class of Settlers to adopt Habits of Industry and sedulous Attention to the Cultivation of their Farms so as to provide a sufficient Quantity of Grain not only for the Consumption of their own Families but to enable them to supply the Government with this Article at a reasonable Rate.  WHILST the GOVERNOR has thus bad Occasion to animadvert on the Reluctance of the Settlers in general to furnish their Grain to Government he is desirous thus publicly to make his Acknowledgments to one individual Settler; namely THOMAS GILBERTHORPE in the District of Pitt Town. - This Person was the first to come forward in the present Season of Scarcity with the lowest and most reasonable Tender to supply Government with all the Wheat and Maize he could spare and was the only Settler in the Colony who last Year delivered into the Store the complete Quantity he had tendered at the stipulated Rate although Grain had advanced in Price considerably after he had sent in his original Tender. - Such an Instance of fair and upright Conduct is entitled to the GOVERNOR's present Commendation and Acknowledgment with an Assurance that his meritorious Conduct on both the Occasions alluded to shall not pass unrewarded.  The GOVERNOR directs the foregoing General Order to be read on Sunday the 13th and Sunday the 20th Instant by the Chaplains in the several Churches of the Colony.  By Command of His Excellency the Governor  J. T. CAMPBELL SECRETARY.  PROCLAMATION  By His Excellency Lachlan Macquarie Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief of His Majestys' Territory of New South Wales and its DEPENDENCIES &c. &c.   WHEREAS PETER MILLS late Acting Deputy Surveyor of Lands at His MAJESTY'S Settlement of Port Dalrymple Van Diemen's Land in the Territory of New South Wales and GEORGE WILLIAMS late Acting Deputy Commissary of Stores and Provisions at the said Settlement have unlawfully absconded and fled from their usual Habitations and Employments at the said Settlement into the Woods and retired Places in the Neighbourhood of the same with Intent to support and maintain themselves by Rapine and Violence have there armed themselves at the Head of divers profligate and disorderly Persons (as well Convicts as others) also armed who have at various times fled from the Service of Government or from other their lawful Masters and Employers at His MAJESTY'S Settlements in Van Diemen's Land into the Woods or retired Places in the Neighbourhood of the said Settlements to lead a Life of Idleness and Debauchery or to avoid the Punishment due to their Offences.  And whereas the said PETER Mills and GEORGE WILLIAMS and other profligate Persons aforesaid being so armed and confederated together as aforesaid for unlawful and wicked Purposes aforesaid and in fulfilment of the same have feloniously and wickedly committed many atrocious Robberies and Depredations upon the peaceable Inhabitants of the Settlements by feloniously and violently driving away and stealing their Sheep and Cattle and feloniously violently and burglariously breaking into their Houses and then and there stealing divers of their Goods and Chattels to the great Damage and Terror of His MAJESTY'S Subjects in the said Settlements and the utter Subversion of all good Order and Government : - It is therefore hereby ordered declared and publicly notified by His Excellency LACHLAN MACQUARIE Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief as aforesaid that the said PETER MILLS and GEORGE WILLIAMS and also the several Persons hereafter named namely: [69] [...]   SHALL and they are hereby severally required in the Name and on Behalf of His MAJESTY peaceably and upon their Allegiance as Subjects of His MAJESTY to return to His MAJESTY'S Settlements of Hobart Town and Port Dalrymple in Van Diemen's Land aforesaid on or before the First Day of December next ensuing the Date of this Proclamation and then and there severally to surrender themselves to one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace or to the Chief Constable in the said Settlement or either of them. And it is further ordered and declared by the Authority aforesaid that if the said several Persons above named or any or either of them shall make Default in or shall neglect or refuse to surrender himself or themselves at the Time aforesaid to one of His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace or to the Chief Constable at the said Settlements or either of them they shall severally be deemed and taken to be Outlaws and be dealt with and treated accordingly.  PROVIDED Nethertheless and it is hereby and by the Authority aforesaid declared promised and publicly notified to the said several Persons above named that if any of the said several Persons shall on or before the First Day of December next surrender himself or themselves in Obedience to this Proclamation and according to the Tenor and Intent thereof; and shall peaceably return to their lawful Occupations he or they so surrendering himself or themselves and returning to their lawful Occupations as aforesaid shall be pardoned and saved harmless from all Offences (save and except the Crime of Wilful Murder) by him or them committed during his or their unlawful Absence from their respective Habitations and Employments as aforesaid any Thing herein contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.  Given under my Hand at Government House Sydney this  Fourteenth Day of May 1814.   Lachlan MACQUARIE  God Save The KING!  By COMMAND of His EXCELLENCY  JOHN THOMAS Campbell  The want of any Court of Criminal Jurisdiction and of a Court of Civil Jurisdiction of sufficiently extensive powers renders the situation of the island of Van Diemen's Land truly deplorable. The new Charter has partly provided for its wants by the establishment of the Lieutenant Governor's Court but as the jurisdiction of this court is wholly civil and extends only to matters not exceeding the value of fifty pounds much is still wanted. The expense and difficulty of bringing causes to trial at Sydney when the parties and witnesses reside at Van Diemen's Land are so enormous that the honest creditor is not only defrauded but insulted. In criminal cases similar causes have the effect either of permitting the escape of offenders altogether unpunished or of sanctioning their punishment contrary to law. It is hardly possible to convey to your Lordship's mind an accurate idea of the state of misrule and uncontrolled profligacy in all classes at that settlement from these and other causes. They render the establishment of distinct Courts of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction in that island a matter of the most urgent necessity.  Knowing how much the inhabitants of the settlements there are split into parties I should advise the committing the administration of civil justice in every case whatever might be its nature or amount in the first instance to a single judge provided that judge were a barrister reserving an appeal in all cases exceeding one hundred pounds in value to the Supreme Court of Sydney granting to such judge such powers and authorities as are essential to the effectual administration of justice. The administration of criminal justice I should in all cases entrust to a court to consist of the same judge and a certain number of the magistrates of the island under such provisions as are usual or might be thought necessary.  Government Order.  GOVERNMENT HOUSE SYDNEY SATURDAY 19th AUGUST 1815.  1. It appearing that the Government Public Notice bearing Date the 22d September 1810 and published in the Sydney Gazette of that Date prohibiting all Persons from walking in the Government Garden and Domain at Parramatta unless properly authorised to do so has not been fully understood or attended to; His Excellency the GOVERNOR is now pleased to direct and command that no Person shall hereafter enter or walk in the said Garden or Domain except for the Purpose of transacting Business with His EXCELLENCY or some Person of his Establishment or having a written Order for that purpose from the GOVERNOR or from one of the Gentlemen of His Family or from Mr. Richard Rouse the Superintendant of Government Works at Parramatta; who is hereby authorised to grant Permission at his Discretion to any respectable Free Persons who may wish to see the Grounds taking Care that the Gardener shall be on such Occasions in Attendance on them.  The Gardener and all the other Servants at Government House in Parramatta are at the same Time strictly prohibited from admitting Strangers either into the Domain or Garden or to view the Inside of the House unless with such written Order as is herein prescribed.  2. Persons presuming to force a Thoroughfare or Passage through the Government Garden or enclosed Domain after this Notification will be prosecuted for the Trespass according to Law. All Animals found feeding in the Domain and not belonging to Government are to be impounded until due Compensation shall be made for the Injury sustained; and any Person who shall be found to drive Sheep Pigs Goats or other Animals into the Domain will be punished in a most exemplary Manner.  3. The Government Garden and Domain at Windsor being now also fenced in and enclosed the same Regulations in all Respects are to take place there as are prescribed for the Government Garden Domain and House at Parramatta except that instead of Mr. Richard Rouse giving Permissions in Addition to those from His EXCELLENCY or the Gentlemen of his Family they are only to be granted at Windsor by Mr. Richard Fitzgerald the Superintendant of Public Works at that Place.  His Honor the Lieutenant Governor Officers at the Heads of Departments and the Magistrates of the Territory are to be exempt from the above Regulations and have at all Times an unrestrained Access to the Gardens and Domains of Government both at Parramatta and Windsor.  by Command of His Excellency the Governor  John Thomas CAMPBELL Secretary  However painfully indivious I feel it my duty also here to suggest that I cannot but entertain strong apprehension that the Charter as to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court will too soon be found altogether insufficient upon any modifications of practice or proceedings in its intended beneficial operation to the dependency of Van Diemen's Land from the delay the necessarily VERY HEAVY expenses personal inconveniences and losses the nature difficulty and uncertainty of the only communication and the various casualties and circumstances attendant upon the proceedings of a court of so distant an establishment: [39] while it is too certain and perhaps may account amongst other causes for the present unfortunate state of that dependency that the inhabitants bear with any invasion upon their property and frequently their persons sooner than incur the certain personal inconveniences and consequences of bringing the offenders here before the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction. It has been suggested and certainly would prove (as I have an opportunity of judging from having very soon after arrival yielded to the wish of the Governor to preside at the weekly Bench of Magistrates here) of beneficial and wholesome provision if the Justices of V.D. Land and indeed even in this territory were enabled legally to form and act as a sort of Sessions for the cognizance of petty offences; but it appears to me that all the criminal jurisdiction of and in the territory and its dependencies belongs only to and can be exercised only by the Court of Record erected by the Charter except so far as given to magistrates summarily under particular Acts of Parliament.  We have had the honor to receive Your Lordship's letter of 29th July transmitting to us the copy of a letter which has been addressed to Your Lordship by the Judge Advocate of New South Wales on the subject of a conviction which had taken place in that colony of two offenders for forging and uttering knowing to be forged a store receipt purporting to be drawn by the Commissariat Clerk stationed at Windsor and passed by him in the Government account; and requesting that we would take the case as stated in the Judge Advocate's letter into our consideration. [265]   The Judge Advocate in his letter states it as his opinion that the offence with which the parties are charged and of which they have been found guilty is not a felony and that the crime of forgery committed in South Wales can only be punished as a misdemeanor at Common Law.  He appears to have founded this opinion on a supposition that the enactments in the 45 Geo. 3rd are specifically confined to Great Britain and that the law making forgery a capital felony in England depends upon that Act; but looking at the former statutes upon the subject as well as considering the preamble and the words of the 8 sect. of the 45 Geo. 3rd itself we are of opinion this Act is not to be construed as confining either the provisions of the former Acts making felony a capital crime or the enactment of this statute itself to Great Britain but as extending all the provisions of the former Acts to every part of Great Britain many of which did not at the time extend to one part namely Scotland.  The first Act recited in the 45 Geo. 3rd is the 2 Geo. 2nd chap. 25; this makes the forgery of certain instruments therein enumerated a capital felony but it specifically provides that it shall not extend to that part of Great Britain called Scotland; the 7 Geo. 2nd and the 31 Geo. 2nd were passed the one to supply omissions of and the other to remove doubts that had arisen upon the 2d Geo. 2nd; and being made with reference to and as amendments of the former Act they did not extend to Scotland in consequence of the proviso contained in such former Act; on referring to the title as well as the preamble of the 45 Geo. 3rd it is obvious that the main object of that Act was to extend the provisions of the former statutes relative to forgery to Scotland and therefore it re-enacts almost in specific terms such acts of forgery as were already capital offences in England and then enacts that the clauses and provisions of that Act shall extend to every part of Great Britain. No new felony is created by this statute nor is any former Act thereby repealed; it merely re-enacts the provisions of former statutes for the purpose of extending them to Scotland. We are therefore of opinion the 45 Geo. 3rd does not restrain the operations of any former Act nor of that Act itself to Great Britain but specifically extends both the one and the other to every part of Great Britain for the purpose of including Scotland.  This being so the question as far as it relates to the present case is whether forgery would be a capital felony in New South Wales if the 45 Geo. 3rd had contained no enactment relative to its extending to every part of Great Britain.  The criminal law of England is the law by which crimes committed in New South Wales and the nature of their punishment are to be ascertained and decided; for without resorting to the general principle that in all new settled colonies not acquired by conquest or cession the settlers carry the law of England with them. The Act of Parliament of 27 Geo. 3rd chap. 2 by which His Majesty is empowered to establish a court of criminal jurisdiction for the trial and punishment of offences enacts that such court is to be established for the trial and punishment of all such outrages and misbehaviours as if committed within this realm would be deemed according to the laws of this realm to be treason or misprision thereof felony or misdemeanor; and by the Charter of Justice granted by His Majesty under this statute a court is established which is "to try and punish all treasons misprision of treason murders felonies forgeries and other crimes committed in New South Wales such punishment to be 'inflicted being according to the laws and customs of that part of Great Britain called England as nearly as may be"; [266] whatever question might arise whether a felony created since the 27 Geo. 3rd would become a felony in New South Wales unless the provisions of the Act were in terms extended to the colonies or to the particular settlement of New South Wales it is clear that all criminal laws which were in force in the 27th Year of the King extend to New South Wales unless repealed. The 45 Geo. 3rd repeals none of the former Acts relative to forgery; it merely repeats the enactments of former subsisting statutes and extends them all to the parts of Great Britain to which some of them did not before extend.  We are therefore of opinion that the law of England making forgery a capital crime in the cases enumerated in the statutes in force in the 27 Year of His Majesty applies to the Colony of New South Wales in the same manner as it applied to that colony before the 45 Geo. 3rd. And that if the forged receipt in question is a receipt for money or goods it is a capital forgery having been so made by the 2d Geo. 2 chap. 25 which statute remains unrepealed.  The Humble Petition of the Gentlemen Clergy Settlers Merchants Land-Holders and other free Inhabitants of His Majesty's Territory of New South Wales in a general Meeting duly assembled  To His Royal Highness the Prince Regent in Council. Most humbly Sheweth That your Petitioners hitherto unaccustomed to approach the Throne are now induced to exercise that invaluable priviledge for the purpose of most humbly laying before Your Royal Highness a Statement of the restrictions disabilities and inconveniences under which His Majesty's Colony labours respecting the several matters herein after stated matters of the most vita consequence to its interests interest and prosperity.   THAT the population of this Territory consists of upwards of 25000 Souls English Scotch and Irish-born Subjects of His Majesty and their Children the greater part of whom in the proportion of five sevenths are free Settlers Merchants Land and House-holders. THAT on the Settlement of this Colony in the year 1788 a Court of Criminal Judicature was established by His Majesty's Letters Patent a cursory review of the Constitution of which Court clearly shews that it could be intended only for a very small Community and a state of society very much confined; but your Petitioners most humbly shew that that state of society has long since past away that the free and respectable Population is numerous intelligent and as to Horned Cattle Sheep and Land in cultivation comparatively wealthy; that their habits customs and feelings are entirely British; that there is very little or no admixture of foreign Inhabitants Manners or Customs among them and yet the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction has undergone no alteration since its establishment at the very infancy of the Colony.  [It is] a Court in its formation and proceedings contrary to all our habits feelings and opinions as Englishmen a Court unknown in our Mother Country a Tribunal from a review of whose formation We most humbly beg leave to state to Your Royal Highness we do not consider our lives and our liberties can be so well secured as those of British Subjects should be nor can the Laws of our Country be administered with sufficient purity and impartiality. [312] And humbly shew that there are now resident in this Colony a great number of free respectable Inhabitants sufficient and perfectly competent for Jiirymen; Men by whose Property Exertions and Labour the Country has been cleared and cultivated Towns built and a thriving Colony (notwithstanding the many disabilities it labours under) reared up and established. [...]   Your Petitioners having thus most humbly approached Your Royal Highness with a statement of the Disabilities restraints and inconveniences under which the Inhabitants of this His Majesty's peculiarly British rising Colony labours with regard to the insufficiency of its Jurisprudence the obstructions to its Agriculture the impediments to its Navigation with our Mother Country the operation of the Duties applying to its productions imported to England as well as of those Colonial Duties imposed on its Exports here they do most humbly trust that Your Royal Highness will lend a gracious Ear to their Complaints and of your Royal Clemency direct that His Majesty's Colony may be put on the same footing with His Majesty's other Colonies as regards the several matters herein before humbly set forth.  (i) An Opinion of Messrs. Shepherd and Gifford. We have had the honor to receive your Lordship's letter of the 23rd December 1818 transmitting for our consideration the copy of a dispatch received from Governor Macquarie enclosing an opinion of Mr. B. Field the Judge of the Supreme Court in New South Wales relative to the illegality of raising the taxes which have from time to time been imposed in those settlements; and your Lordship is pleased to request that we would report to you our opinion whether the Governor can legally enforce the payment of those taxes which have been heretofore paid in that colony almost from its first establishment and whether he can under the instructions of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent acting in the name and on the behalf of His Majesty impose from time to time such additional duties as may be necessary to defray the internal expenses of the colony; your Lordship is also pleased upon this point to call our attention to the distinction drawn by Mr. Field between what he has denominated "King's duties" and those which he describes as port duties or market and turnpike tolls with a view of ascertaining the specific duties the levy of which Mr. Field asserts to be free from objection; and your Lordship is pleased further to request that in the event of our considering the levy of duties as heretofore by the Governor under His Majesty's Instructions to be illegal and unauthorized. we would report to you our opinion as to the form in which it would be proper to legalize the duties which at present exist and those which it may be thought necessary hereafter to impose. [264]   We have taken the several questions stated in your Lordship's letter into our consideration and beg to report to your Lordship; that the part of New South Wales possessed by His Majesty not having been acquired by conquest or cession but taken possession of by him as desert and uninhabited and subsequently colonized from this country we apprehend His Majesty by his Royal Prerogative has not the right either by himself or thro' the medium of his Governor to make laws for the levying of taxes in such colony; but that such taxes can only under the present circumstances of that colony be imposed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Even if the power of imposing such taxes were in the King or in those to whom he should delegate such power the imposition of them by the Governor (in this case) was not warranted because his commission does not invest him with any such authority. If however his Majesty had a right by virtue of his prerogative to impose taxes in a colony of this sort the defect in the present imposition might speedily have been remedied by an Order of his Majesty in Council; and future taxes (when thought advisable) might be imposed by a similar order. But we think as we have before observed that the only mode of legalizing the taxes in this colony is by an Act of the United Parliament and that future taxes can only be imposed by the same authority as the law now stands the colony having no representative assembly of its own by which such taxes can be imposed.  Whether considering the peculiar circumstances of this colony and the nature of a large portion of its population Parliament would invest His Majesty in Council with a power to impose such duties as might be deemed necessary for the better support of the expenses of the colony or for the attainment of the beneficial objects stated in the Governor's letter is a question on which we cannot venture to form a conjecture; but if it will not the United Parliament appears to us to be the only constitutional authority which can legalize the past or impose future imposts.  With respect to the distinction taken by Mr. Field between duties which he denominates King's taxes and port duties or market and turnpike tolls; we apprehend that if the King erects a new port or a market or fair or opens a highway in or over his own soil he may as owner of the soil legally demand and receive from the persons availing themselves of the advantage thus open to them a reasonable sum for anchorage or toll in order to compensate him for the expense he has been at in making the port and keeping it in repair and for the use of his land etc. for the purposes of a market or fair or of a highway; so as such reservation of duty or toll be coeval with the erection of the port market or fair or with the original opening or use of the highway; but even in such cases we think the right should be cautiously exercised.  It must never be forgot that this is at present a Convict Country Originally established for their punishment and Reformation; that at least Nine-tenths of its present Population Consist either of Convicts Persons who have been Convicts or the Offspring of Convicts; and that the principal part of the property in the Colony at this day is possessed by the two latter Classes. Consequently some Consideration appears to be justly due to so very large a Portion of the Population of the Country. [...]   You already know that above Nine-tenths of the Population of this Colony are or have been Convicts or the Children of Convicts. You have Yet perhaps to learn that these are the people who have Quietly submitted to the Laws and Regulations of the Colony altho' informed by the Free Settlers and some of the Officers of Government that they were Illegal! these are the Men who have tilled the Ground who have built Houses and Ships who have made wonderful Efforts Considering the Disadvantages under which they have Acted in Agriculture in Maritime Speculations and in Manufactures; these are the Men who placed in the balance as Character both Moral and Political (at least since their Arrival here) in the opposite Scale to those Free Settlers (who Struggle for their Depression) whom you will find to preponderate.  THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE EMANCIPATED COLONISTS OF THE TERRITORY OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND ITS DEPENDENCIES.  To the King's most Excellent Majesty.  Most humbly sheweth [...]   Yet that your Petitioners retrospectively and prospectively are to be considered as Convicts attaint without personal Liberty without Property without Character or Credit without any one Right or Priviledge belonging to free Subjects; And are now after thirty Years of good Conduct and Industry whereby they have attained to Wealth Character and Rank in Society to be thrown back at once and for ever to that state of degradation from which they have by worthy Conduct they hope not undeservedly arisen; And for this one single reason that the names of Your Petitioners have not been inserted in any General Pardon under the Great Seal of England without which Ceremony the Courts of Civil Judicature in this Territory have as aforesaid adjudged that the Instruments of remission granted by the Governors of this Colony are of no force effect or Validity whatever; whereas your Petitioners most humbly submit unto Your Majesty that the insertion of their Names respectively in any General Pardon under the Great Seal of England is a circumstance in which your Petitioners have no Controul or interference whatever nor does it lie upon or with them to have the same performed; for on the contrary that Ceremony by the Act of Parliament is directed to be performed by one of Your Majesty's principal Secretaries of State. . [...] And your Petitioners further most humbly represent unto your Majesty that these decisions of the Courts of Justice in this Colony will have the effect of introducing and perpetuating party distinctions unpleasant discussions irritable feelings and Jealousies heats Animosities and diversions between Your Majesty's free Subjects in these Territories not only of the present Generations but for Generations to come; Will entirely take away all Encouragement incentive and Stimulus to good Conduct and reformation of manners for how can these good consequences be expected where all hope of reward is with-drawn; Will almost entirely destroy the Spirit of Industry for Industry cannot flourish where there is no Security for the enjoyment of its fruits As well as the confidence and Credit that ought to exist between Man and Man for the foundation of all Confidence and Credit namely the Security of Property Will be thereby taken away and the sure result of these fatal consequences will be most irretrievably to endanger if not totally annihilate the Agriculture and Commerce of the Colony and so destroy possibly for ever the Labour and Fruits of Thirty Years of Laborious Industry and throw back these Your Majesty's Territories upon which so much of the Public Money has been expended and which is now in the Progress of fully Answering the purposes for which it was established to that State of immorality Poverty and Distress which prevailed during the early period of its establishment and from which it has emerged solely through the beneficial operation and influence of that System of humane and benevolent Policy by which it was founded and has been hitherto Governed. [314] Your Petitioners do therefore with the most profound humility approach Your Majesty and in confident reliance on your Majesty's royal Grace and Clemency; Most Humbly pray that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to take into your royal Consideration the Condition in which we your Majesty's Petitioners are placed in by this State of the Law as interpreted and acted upon by the Courts of Civil Judicature in this Territory and afford your Petitioners such relief as our Situation and Circumstances in Your Majesty's Royal Wisdom shall seem to deserve.  WM. REDFERN Chairman &c.  In reference to the query "Whether I have experienced any and what difficulty in applying the provisions of the statute and common law of England to any description of offences committed in this colony and the grounds upon which I have hesitated so to apply them"; it does not seem incumbent on me in this communication to do more than unfold the principle upon which certainly as to several statutes I have not been able to free myself from the hesitation alluded to and the grounds may be explained in very few words. The Court of Criminal Jurisdiction under the terms of the statute 29 G. 3 ch. 2 is to be "a Court of Judicature for the trial and punishment of all such outrages and misbehaviours as if committed within this realm would be deemed and taken according to the laws of this realm to be treason or misprision thereof felony or misdemeanor."  By force of this enactment it is clear as observed by His Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor General in their communication to Earl Bathurst upon a case of this nature referred to them dated 29th August 1818 that "all criminal laws which were in force in the 27th year of the late King extend to New South Wales unless repealed . . . whatever question might arise whether a felony created since the 27th G. 3 would become a felony in New South Wales."  But the question still remains whether the commission of an act in New South Wales must necessarily become triable as a felony before the colonial court because the same act committed in England has been declared by statute to be a capital felony. If the legislature has provided previously to the 27th Year of His late Majesty without confinement to the actual place of commission or any other local or peculiar restriction any particular offence to be a capital felony then the offender committing a like offence in this territory would be subject to the jurisdiction of the Criminal Court here. [267] It may explain to adduce instances of the question by reference to positive statutes in point. The Stat. 12 Ann Stat. I ch. 7 s. I enacts that any person who shall steal goods of the value of 40s. or more being in a dwelling house although not actually broken etc. shall be absolutely debarred of clergy. Under the 27 of G. 3 the court could clearly try and capitally convict any person who had been adjudged guilty of stealing above the value of 40s. from a dwelling house in the territory. But if a charge was exhibited by the Judge Advocate here against a prisoner under the 43 G. 3 ch. 58 (and no statute provisions can be of more important and serious operation in the colony) the matter of difficulty arises; for it is enacted that if "any person or persons shall either in England or Ireland wilfully and maliciously shoot at any of His Majesty's Subjects or present point or level any kind of loaded fire-arms at any of His Majesty's Subjects etc. with intent to obstruct them resist or prevent the lawful apprehension and detainer of etc. the person so stabbing etc. shall suffer death without benefit of clergy." Passing by any question that may arise as to this enactment taking effect at a period subsequent to the Act giving criminal jurisdiction to the colonial court here it appears to me that to shoot or stab any of His Majesty's Subjects in New South Wales or Within the local jurisdiction of our court cannot be adjudged a capital felony under this Act; for the offence is not committed at the place where only if committed it is declared a capital felony such an offence therefore here cannot be deemed and taken "according to the laws of this realm" to be a felony to which if committed at certain other particular specified places the punishment of death is affixed. In short such an offence committed in this Colony would not upon conviction in the English courts render the party liable to suffer death - it is a capital crime in England and Ireland but not in Scotland even nor any where else.  There are several other statutes to which reference might be made involving the like question but trusting that I have already made myself fully understood at least as to my views and doubts on this subject it may be unnecessary on this occasion to enter further into the discussion.  Sidney July 21st.  GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL ORDERS.  Government House Sidney Monday July 16th 1821.  CIVIL DEPARTMENT. His Excellency the Governor in Chief having returned a few days ago to the seat of Government from his late tour of inspection through the dependency of Van Dieman's land deems it expedient to give publicity to the following narrative of his voyage to his progress through and his return from that dependency; especially for the information of those who may be desirous of being acquainted with the nature of the soil and the state of cultivation to which that dependency has arrived. [122]   1. His Excellency family and suite embarked in the ship Midas Captain Beveridge for Van Dieman's Land on the 4th of April last. At an early hour on the next morning the ship got clear of the heads of Port Jackson and had proceeded some way to the southward when the wind became contrary and blew so strong that she was obliged to return in the evening of the 6th to Port Jackson.  Early on the 13th the ship got again under weigh and arrived at Hobart Town on the River Derwent in Van Dieman's Land on the morning of Tuesday the 24th after a voyage of eleven days.  His excellency's arrival being expected his landing was marked by every degree of attention and respest [sic] by his Honour Lieutenant Governor Sorell the civil and military Officers of Government and the principal inhabitants which his station or personal regard could dictate. [123]   2. It was with much satisfaction his Excellency beheld the numerous changes and improvements which Hobart Town had undergone since the period of his former visit in 1811. The wretched huts and cottages of which it then consisted being now converted into regular substantial buildings and the whole laid out in regular streets; several of the houses being two stories high spacious and not deficient in architectural taste. The principal public buildings which have been erected are a Government House a handsome church a commodious military barrack a strong jail a well constructed hospital and a roomy barrack for convicts which latter is now nearly completed.  The Governor had the curiosity to ascertain the number of houses and population of the town; the former he found to consist of no less than 121 houses and the inhabitants to amount to upwards of 2700 souls.  On the stream which passes through the town there have been four watermills erected for the grinding of grain and a neat battery has been constructed on Mulgrave Point at the entrance of Sullivan's Cove; [124] and on Mount Nelson a signal post and telegraph have been established. The Governor observed also with much pleasure the well directed attention which has been displayed towards the accommodation of the shipping interests in the planning of a large substantial pier or quay which is now in progess [sic] in Sullivan's Cove for the convenience of ships or vessels trading thither in the loading and unloading of their cargoes; which work combined with the natural facilities of the place will render Sullivan's Cove one of the best and safest anchorages in the world.  3. The industry and spirit of enterprise exhibited generally by the inhabitants of Hobart Town bespeak a favourable opinion of their manners; and the numerous comforts enjoyed by them as the result of their application mark the certain reward which will ever be attendant on persevering industry; whilst the prevailing desire for the improvement of the town bids fair to render it one of the handsomest and most flourishing Australia. [125]   4. In this tribute to the inhabitants it would be injustice not to refer much of the prevailing spirit of industry to the wise regulations and judicious arrangements of his Honour Lieutenant Sorell under whose administration during the short period of little more than four years all the principal public buildings and the greater part of the private ones have been erected; and the various other improvements have flowed from the same source.  Beholding these rapid extensive and ornamental improvements of Hobart Town the Governor cannot sufficiently express his admiration of the superior talents and exertions of Lieutenant Governor Sorell by whom they have been thus so happily produced or so effectually promoted.  5. Having surveyed with much pleasure all the public works and buildings at this time in progress or already completed in the town and neighbourhood of Hobart Town the Governor proceeded on. his tour to Port Dalrymple on the 5th of May for the purpose of inspecting the settlements in that part of the Island; [126] and in addition to his personal staff and suite was accompanied by his Honour Lieutenant- Governor Sorell and the Honourable Judge Advocate Wylde. On the 10th his Excellency arrived at Launceston being received by Lieutenant-Colonel Cimetiere Commandant of Port Dalrymple the officers civil and military and the prinpal [sic] inhabitants of that station with the most marked attention and respect.  6. After spending a few days at Launceston during which he inspected the several public establishments at that place the Governor proceeded by water down the river Tamer to the lately erected settlement of 11 George Town seat at York Cove near the entrance of Port Dalrymple and within a few miles of Bass's Straits.  His Excellency felt agreeably surprised at beholding the very considerable progress lately made in the erection of the more immediately requisite public buildings at this new station much of which progress may be attributed to the personal superintendance of the Commandant whose head quarters had been with that view removed thither from Launceston in May 1819. [127]   To Lieutenant-Colonel Cimetiere the Governor is accordingly much indebted for the zeal and attention he has so beneficially exhibited in carrying his instructions in regard to George Town into effect.  His Excellency derived particular satisfaction from observing that the troops and convicts have been respectively most comfortably accommodated; -the former having a very good barrack and the latter neat huts with gardens adjoining sufficiently large to supply vegetables in abundance.  The chief buildings completed in George Town are - the Commandant's house; quarters for the civil and military officers; a commodious parsonage house; a jail; a guard-house; and a temporary provision store; and there is a temporary chapel and a large schoolhouse in progress and nearly completed. The situation of George Town is not only beautiful but also admirably adapted for all the purposes of trade being situated on the banks of a river navigable for ships of large burthen and but -a short way removed from the sea in Bass's Straits; and has the advantage of a plentiful supply of fresh water from springs in its immediate neighbourhood. [128]   The Governor having spent three days in admiring the progress of the new settlement of George Town returned to Launceston on Saturday the 29th of May taking his route by land with the purpose of examining the road some time since opened between those stations being a distance of 54 miles. Owing to the original bad construction of this road his Excellency found it nearly impassible for any sort of wheel carriage which induced him to give directions for its being immediately and thoroughly repaired for the accommodation of the inhabitants at each place.  7. The Governor having found the original public buildings at Launceston in such a state of dilapidation and decay as to be altogether incapable of being repaired; whilst at the same time such buildings are indispensable has given orders for the following to be forthwith erected viz.  1. A Jail. [129]   2. A Military Barrack.  3. An Hospital.  4. A Commissariat store and granary.  5. A Barrack for one Military Officer; and  6. A Barrack for an Assistant-Surgeon.  The only good building for the public service being confined to a school-house and temporary chapel which has been lately built and is strong and substantial.  8. Having surveyed with much pleasure the principal agricultural settlements near Launceston the Governor took leave of that part of the Island and proceeded on the 28th of May on his return to Hobart Town visiting the intermediate agricultural and pasturage farms including the districts of New Norfolk and Macquarie situated on the banks of the river Derwent above Elizabeth Town.  On his route from Launceston to Hobart Town his Excellency was induced from local circumstances to mark out sites of four townships; namely  1 "Perth" - on the left bank of the river South Esk; 14 miles from Launceston. [130]   2. "Campbell Town" - on the north bank of the Elizabeth River; 28 miles from Perth.  3 "Oatlands" - on the bank of Jericho Lagoon in Westmoreland Plains; 50 miles from Campbell Town; and   4. " Brighton" - on that part Bagdad Plains formed by the River Jordan and "Strathallan Creek" 85 miles from Oatlands and 15 from Hobart Town; -  All of which are arranged with a due consideration to the accommodation and convenience of new settlers they being all seated in the midst of extensive tracts of rich hand and forming at the same time a regular chain of stations between Hobart Town and Launceston whereby the journeying between those places will be rendered both safe and convenient.  With this view of the importance of these townships his Excellency has instructed the Lieutenant-Governor of Van Dieman's Land to pay an early attention to their establishment and to encourage useful mechanics to establish themselves at them.  9. On Saturday the 9th of June the Governor arrived at Hobart Town and has to express himself much surprised and highly gratified by the rapid state of improvement in which he found the several districts through which his route from Launceston to Hobart Town had led him. [131]   10. On the 20th June the Governor accompanied by Lieutenant-Governor Sorell and their respective suites made an excursion to the districts of Pitt Water and the Coal River and was particularly gratified in beholding the highly improved state of those beautiful and rich agricultural settlements :-the agricultural settlers carrying on their farming concerns there on a much more extensive scale than any others in Van Dieman's Land.  In the district of Pitt Water a portion of land having been reserved for the purpose of a township his Excellency finding it admirably circumstanced for that object being in the midst of a rich soil and well watered approved of its location; and in compliment to Lieutenant Governor Sorell named the township "Sorell." - Some progress has been already made at this place in buildings: [132] - a jail has been erected and the site of a schoolhouse and temporary chapel marked out which is to be shortly commenced.  11. The various roads well constructed leading from Hobart Town to the different settlements in the interior together with the strong bridges thrown across the streams and creeks crossing those roads could not fail to excite his Excellency's surprise and admiration finding that thereby the intercourse between Hobart Town and all the principal farming establishments on both sides of the River Derwent was rendered so very easy and convenient.  On the great line of road from Hobart Town to Port Dalrymple one portion extending as far as the north side of Constitution Hill being nearly completed; another line extends as far as the Coal River and Pitt Water district; and a third leads to the Macquarie district through New Norfolk and including the settlements there on both sides of the Derwent. These roads which have been projected by and executed under the superintendence of Major Bell C. B. of the 48th regiment acting Engineer and Inspector of Public Works at Hobart Town appear to have been most judiciously laid out and expeditiously constructed and reflect much credit on that gentleman's zeal for the public service. [133] It is unnecessary to dwell on the innumerable benefits resulting from the country being thus intersected with good roads the advantages being felt and duly appreciated by the settlers at large; and the entire line from Hobart Town to Launceston a distance of 120 miles which is now in rapid progress from both extremities will be completed as soon as the numerous gangs placed on it can possibly effect so very great and important an undertaking.  12. From this interesting excursion his Excellency returned to Hobart Town on the 22d ultimo; and it now chiefly remains for him to express the high feelings of gratification which he experienced throughout every part of his tour arising from the happy situation of the people the fertility of the soil and the beauty of the country at large; all aided by the wise judicious and successful exertions of his Honour Lieutenant-Governor Sorell who appears to be indefatigable in projecting and carrying into effect all those measures which by being persevered in must raise Van Dieman's Land at no very distant day to the proud distinction of being one of the most valuable colonies belonging to the Crown. [134] The recent influx of several respectable free settlers with considerable property will not fail under the auspices of Lieutenant-Governor Sorell to hasten that period at which Van Dieman's Land will hold a high rank among the settlements of the British empire. According to a census which had been completed only some little time previous to the Governor's arrival at Hobart Town his Excellency is enabled to state the following particulars; namely - That the population of Van Dieman's Land is 6372 souls exclusive of the civil and military officers; and that it contains no less than 28838 head of horned cattle 182468 sheep 421 horses and 10683 acres of land in cultivation.  His Excellency was also happy to observe that by the introduction of the Merino breed of sheep some of which have been lately imported direct from England and still many more sent by this Government from the extensive flocks of the pure Merino breed belonging to John M'Arthur Esq. that the wool is much improved and though perhaps it may not altogether rival that produced in this part of the territory yet it will soon attain such a degree of perfection as will render it a most valuable export to the mother country. [135]   13. His Excellency has much pleasure in declaring that every information he required from the public departments in Van Dieman's Land was furnished with the utmost promptitude and correctness and the officers civil and military at the heads of those departments are entitled to and he hopes for their acceptance of his thanks and approbation of their conduct therein.  And his Excellency further feels it due to every class of the inhabitants in Van Dieman's Land to express himself much gratified by the marked attention kindness and respect which he experienced invariably from the inhabitants during the whole period of his tour; and he will always retain a pleasing remembrance of the good will and obliging disposition manifested by them towards his Excellency personally. [136]   14. All the objects of this tour of inspection being effected his Excellency family and suite and accompanied by the Honourable Judge Advocate Wylde embarked on board the ship Caroline at Hobart Town on the 30th ultimo; and arrived safe at Sydney on the 12th instant after an absence of nearly three months from head-quarters.  By order of his Excellency  FREDERICK GOULBURN   Colonial Secretary.  Finding on my arrival many persons free who had come out originally as convicts and sustaining unblemished characters since their emancipation but treated with rudeness contumely and even oppression as far as circumstances permitted by those who had come out free and viewed with illiberal jealousy the honest endeavours of the others to attain and support a respectable station in society I determined to counteract this envious disposition in one class by admitting in my demeanour and occasional marks of favour to both no distinction where their merits pretensions and capacities were equal. I considered this as the first step towards a general reformation of the manners and habits of the motley part of the population of New South Wales as it then existed; and I am happy to add that twelve years of experience of its effects has fully justified my most sanguine expectations. [311]   The question respecting the validity of the Governor's Proclamation is more important than the former in proportion as the consequences involved in it will be the more extensive. In support of the right of legislation thus asserted by the Governor it is argued that the constitution of the Colonies depends upon the Commissions issued by the King to the Governors and upon the Instructions accompanying them; that the King has in many cases delegated to the Governors of Colonies the power of making local Ordinances not repugnant to the laws of England and that what has been done in other cases may legally be repeated in that of New South Wales. [315]   To these arguments it is answered that according to the first principles of the Constitution the King cannot make laws binding on his subjects except with the consent of Parliament; that the only exceptions to this rule are first the case of foreign Settlements acquired by His Majesty's Arms where he excercised a legislative power as conqueror and Secondly the case of Settlements ceded to the Crown in which at the time of the Cession there existed a lex loci adapted to the habits and wants of civilized Society in which case it is s-aid the King succeeds to the legislative rights whatever they may have been of the former Sovereign. It is denied however that New South Wales falls within either of these exceptions Since that colony was acquired neither by conquest nor cession but by the mere occupation of a desert or uninhabited land.  It is insisted that His Majesty's subjects settling in a country thus acquired carry with them the Law of England so far as it is adapted to their peculiar circumstances; that the invariable usage in all such cases has been to require the Governor to convene an Assembly elected by the freeholders within the Colony; that thus the Colonists have lived under the constitution of England varied only so as to meet the new circumstances in which they have been placed; and that for His Majesty to confer a legislative power on the Governor alone and without the controul of a local Assembly would be to deprive the Colonists of the constitution and laws which it is admitted they are to carry with them.  To the best of my judgment this reasoning is well founded; and supposing the present question confined to the single point whether the Governor of New South Wales has or has not the power to make laws binding on the King's subjects within that Settlement I should venture to express my opinion that in general he has no such authority.   An Act to provide until the First Day of July One thousand eight hundred and twenty seven and until the End of the next Session of Parliament for time better Administration of Justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land and for the more effectual Government thereof; and for other purposes relating thereto. 4 Geo. IV. c. 96.  XXIV. And Whereas it may be necessary to make Laws and Ordinances for the Welfare and good Government of the said Colony of New South Wales and the Dependencies thereof the Occasions of which cannot be foreseen nor without much Delay and Inconvenience be provided for without entrusting that Authority for a certain Time and under proper Restrictions to Persons resident there: And Whereas it is not at present expedient to call a Legislative Assembly in the said colony; Be it therefore enacted That it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors by Warrant under His or Their Sign Manual to constitute and appoint a Council to consist of such Persons resident in the said Colony not exceeding Seven nor less than Five as His Majesty His Heirs and Successors shall be pleased to appoint; and upon the Death Removal or Absence of any of the Members of the said Council in like Manner to constitute and appoint such and so many other Person or Persons as shall be necessary to supply the Vacancy or Vacancies; and the Governor or Acting Governor for the Time being of the said Colony with the Advice of the Council to be appointed as aforesaid or the major Part of them shall have Power and Authority to make Laws and Ordinances for the Peace Welfare and good Government of the said Colony such Laws and Ordinances not being repugnant to this Act or to any Charter or Letters Patent or Order in Council which may be issued in pursuance hereof thereof or to the Laws of England but consistent with such Laws so far as the Circumstances of the said Colony will admit: Provided always always that no Law or Ordinance shall be passed or made unless the same shall first by the said Governor or Acting Governor be laid before the said Council at a Meeting to be for that Purpose convened by a written Summons under the Hand of such Governor or Acting Governor to be delivered to or left at the usual Place of Abode of the Members of such Council respectively; provided also that in case all or the major Part of the Members of the said Council shall dissent from any Law or Ordinance proposed by such Governor or Acting Governor at any such Meeting as aforesaid the Members of the said Council so dissenting shall enter upon the Minutes of such Council the Grounds and Reasons of such their Dissent and in every such Case such proposed Law or Ordinance shall not pass into a Law; provided nevertheless that if it shall appear to the Governor or Acting Governor for the Time being of the said Colony that that such proposed Law or Ordinance is essential to the Peace and Safety thereof and cannot without extreme Injury to the Welfare and good Government of the said Colony be rejected then and in every such Case if any one or more Member or Members of the said Council shall assent to such proposed Law the said Governor shall enter upon the Minutes of the Council the Grounds and Reasons of such his Opinion; and in every such Case and until the Pleasure of His Majesty His Heirs and Successors shall be made known in the said Colony respecting the same such Law or Ordinance shall be of full Force and Effect in the said Colony and the Dependencies thereof any such Dissent as aforesaid of the Majority of the Members of the said Council notwithstanding. [319]   XXV. Provided also and he it further enacted That in case any Rebellion or Insurrection shall have actually broken out in the said Colony or if in the Judgment of the Governor or Acting Governor thereof for the Time being there shall be good and sufficient Cause to apprehend that any such Rebellion or Insurrection is about forthwith to break out therein then and in every such Case it shall and may be lawful for such Governor or Acting Governor to promulgate and enforce within the said Colony and its Dependencies any Law or Ordinance which may be necessary for suppressing or preventing any such Rebellion or Insurrection as aforesaid although every Member of the said Council should dissent from any such Law or Ordinance.  XXVI. Provided also and be it further enacted That it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors by any Order to be by Him or Them issued by and with the Advice of His or Their Privy Council to make and establish any Law or Ordinance which may have been previously laid before and dissented from by the whole or the major Part of the said Council in case such Law or Ordinance shall appear to His Majesty His Heirs and Successors to be necessary for the better Government of the said Colony and its Dependencies. [320]   XXVII. Provided also and be it further enacted That the said Governor and Council shall not impose any Tax or Duty upon any Ship or Vessel trading with the said Colony or the Dependencies thereof or upon any Goods Wares and Merchandize imported into or exported from the same nor any other Tax or Duty except only such Taxes or Duties as it may be necessary to levy for local Purposes; and the Purposes for which every such Tax or Duty may be so imposed and to or towards which the Amount thereof is to be appropriated and applied shall be distinctly and particularly stated in the Body of every Law or Ordinance imposing every such Tax or Duty.  XXIX. And be it further enacted That no Law or Ordinance shall by the said Governor or Acting Governor be laid before the said Council for their Advice or Approbation or be passed into a Law unless a Copy thereof shall have been first laid before the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales and unless such Chief Justice shall have transmitted to the said Governor or Acting Governor a Certificate under the Hand of such Chief Justice that such proposed Law is not repugnant to the Laws of England but is consistent with such Laws so far as the Circumstances of the said Colony will admit.  XXX. And be it further enacted That every Law or Ordinance so to be made as aforesaid shall within Six Months from the Date thereof be transmitted by the Governor or Acting Governor for the Time being of the said Colony to One of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State for the Time being; and that it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors from time to time as He or They shall think necessary to signify through One of His or Their Principal Secretaries of State His or Their Approbation or Disallowance of all such Laws and Ordinances; and that from and immediately after the Time when such Disallowance shall be published in the said Colony by a Proclamation to be for that Purpose issued by the said Governor or Acting Governor all such Laws and Ordinances shall be null and void; but in case His Majesty His Heirs and Successors shall not within the Space of Three Years from the making of such Laws and Ordinances signify His or Their Disapprobation or Disallowance thereof as aforesaid then and in that Case all such Laws and Ordinances shall be valid and effectual and have full Force.  XXXI. Provided also and be it further enacted That all Laws and Ordinances to be made in the said Colony and all Orders to be made by His Majesty His Heirs and Successors with the Advice of His and their Privy Council in pursuance of this Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within Six Weeks at latest next after the Commencement of each Session.  XXXIII. And be it further enacted That in case of the Death Absence or permanent Incapacity of any Member or Members of the said Legislative Council the Governor or Acting Governor for the Time being of the said Colony shall and may appoint some fit and proper Person to act in the Place and Stead of such Person or Persons until the Vacancy or Vacancies so created shall be filled up by an Appointment to be made by His Majesty His Heirs and Successors in Manner aforesaid.  An Act to provide until the First Day of July One thousand eight hundred and twenty seven and until the End of the next Session of Parliament for the better Administration of Justice in New- South Wales and Van Diemen's Land and for the more effectual Government thereof; and for other Purposes relating thereto. 4 Geo. IV. c.96.  XLIV. Provided always and be it further enacted That in case it shall at any Time seem fit to His Majesty His Heirs and Successors to constitute and erect the Island of Van Diemen's Land and any Islands Territories or Places thereto adjacent into a separate Colony independent of the Government of New South Wales it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors so to do any thing hereinbefore to the contrary contained in any wise notwithstanding; and in that Case it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors by any Order to be by Him or Them issued by and with the Advice of His or Their Privy Council to commit to any Persons or Person within the said Island of Van Diemen's Land and such Islands Territories or Places as aforesaid such and the like Powers Authorities and Jurisdictions as by virtue of this present Act or of any other Act of Parliament are or may lawfully be committed to any Person or Persons within the Colony of New South Wales and its Dependencies from the Judgments Decrees Orders and Sentences of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall cease and determine; and from and after the making of any such Order all Instruments in Writing whereby any Governor or Acting Governor or Van Diemen's Land and its Dependencies shall remit or shorten the Term or Time of Transportation of any Felons or other Offenders shall have such and the like force effect and virtue in the Law as any such Instruments in Writing to be made by any Governor or Acting Governor of New South Wales and its Dependencies can or may lawfully have by virtue of the before mentioned Act passed in the Thirtieth Year of the Reign of His late Majesty King George the Third or by virtue of this present Act.  A great deal of the present anomalous system of government in New South Wales may be placed to the account of the manner in which the colony was at first peopled - the first emigrants from England were a body of convicts with as many marines as were necessary to guard them - the first government of the colony was that of a gaol and the first law little more than prison discipline. In a new country such as this was at the landing of the expedition under Governor Phillip the second object after providing for the care and correction of the prisoners was that of procuring sustenance every thing necessarily centered in the Governor as the primum mobile of the machine - the police the roads the market the importation of supplies the cultivation of provisions and even the prices of every article of daily consumption were regulated by the orders of the Governor - these Jirmans entered into some of the minutest matters of domestic life and gradually became so familiar to the inhabitants that instances are to be found of domestic quarrels being referred to the fountain head of authority and there settled with all the form and sanction of legal supremacy.  This was a very natural order of things a government situated like that of New South Wales necessarily became patriarchal; and had the colony continued for centuries in the same state I should have listened with reluctance to any innovation how beautiful soever in theory. I have lived under various forms of government I have been a close observer of the memorable changes which have taken place throughout the world in my own life I have read a great deal upon the subject and reflected a great deal more; and the sum of my deductions is that governments are founded in opinion and formed by events - that all changes except such as are wrought by time are revolutionary and mischievous and that whoever abruptly attempts to make violent alterations merely because they are better in the abstract is a traitor or a maniac. Were any exception to be made to this rule of following events in the formation of governments it would seem to be in case of the colonies and especially in such as this where the people are not of the production of the place but for the most part emigrants from England and Ireland and annually bring with them the opinions and habits of the countries from which they came.  It was the misfortune of General Macquarie that he did not perceive the effect of this principle upon the colony - he found it a gaol upon a large area - he governed it like a good governor of a gaol and he resisted as an innovation upon his authority every attempt to change the early policy of the colony and to render penal labor subsidiary to the purposes of a free settlement. There had been a time when wiser heads had questioned the expediency of the change - but that time had gone by; and whatever degree of confidence he might have felt in the soundness of his own views he was bound to defer to the instructions of his superiors. [71] To this reluctance of Governor Macquarie to surrender his authority I attribute the utter neglect of every civil institution during his protracted administration - he was certainly a very industrious person and descended to the lowest details of the public service - the plump folio which you caused to be sent to me at Portsmouth to amuse my leisure hours during the passage to Botany Bay is a tolerable record of his assiduity in legislation - and every useful or ornamental public work in the colony was created or commenced during his administration - yet he did absolutely nothing for the civil government of the colony - his laws were framed without authority; he never attempted to introduce the parish and county usages and customs of the parent country; he quarrelled with every judge; and never amidst all his splendid edifices appears to have discovered that a court-house was at all necessary to the state. Yet year after year his government was increasing with emigrants from England India and other parts of the world; who brought with them the light of latter times; and whom it was impossible to persuade that because their servants were prisoners they likewise were liable to prison-discipline. They naturally complained - their complaints produced inquiry - and the inquiry that was instituted under our friend Bigge led to events in which I had the honor to become associated with you and which are too familiar to your recollection to require more than adverting to - the result was a change only not a revolution in this colony - the abrupt transition from the despotic authority exercised by the Governor; the creation of a superior power in the legislative body; the erection of a judicatory upon the basis and with the united powers of the English courts at Westminster; the broad recognition of English law as the only rule of subjection were so many decisive innovations upon the old system of gaol government that I only marvel at the moderation of the people in witnessing these changes and not running into greater excesses.  That these innovations were necessary and indeed unavoidable I readily admit - but I think that it forms a very grave charge against the government of the colony that for the vulgar fame of being first in all things and the poor incense of an ignorant multitude it should suffer this promising young colony to grow up like a neglected stripling ignorant of the first elements of education and attain an age when much must be unlearned and many propensities subdued before any good or permanent instruction can be conveyed. We have now been in the colony three years and certainly a great deal has been effected - but we are only at the threshold of our work yet and I fear there is much to be done in clearing the "Stables of Macquarie" before our labors can be availably directed to any other task.  I consider it as a given point that since the passing of the New South Wales Act the policy of Great Britain towards this settlement is upon the broad basis of her colonial policy - that the laws of England are essentially the laws of New South Wales that the government is essentially an English government and that the courts are essentially the Courts at Westminster. These data are plain - but in giving effect to the principles they involve a whole volume of detail lies before us.  1. First Charter of Justice for Tasmania (1823)  There shall be within that part of our Colony of New South Wales called Van Diemen's Land a court which shall be called the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land and We do hereby create direct and constitute the said Supreme Court of Van D. Land to be a Court of Record.   2. And We do further will ordain and appoint that the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall consist of and be holden by and before one judge who shall be and be called the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court at Van Diemen's Land which Chief Justice shall be a barrister in England or Ireland to be named and appointed from time to time by Us Our Heirs and Successors by Letters Patent under Our and Their Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland; and such Chief Justice shall hold his office during the pleasure of Us Our Heirs and Successors and not otherwise; and every Chief Justice to be appointed after the date of these presents shall be of not less than five years standing at the Bar. [113]   3. And We do hereby give and grant to Our said Chief Justice rank and precedence above and before all Our subjects whomsoever within the island of Van Diemen's Land aforesaid and the islands territories and places dependant thereupon excepting the Governor Lieut. Governor or acting Governor for the time being of the said island and excepting all such persons as by law or usage take place in England before Our Chief Justice of Our Court of King's Bench.  4. And We do further grant ordain and appoint that the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall have and use as occasion may require a seal bearing a device and impression of Our Royal Arms within an exergue or label surrounding the same with this inscription "The Seal of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land". And We do hereby grant ordain and appoint that the said seal shall be delivered to and kept in the custody of the said Chief Justice.  5. And We do further grant ordain and declare that the said Chief Justice so long as he shall hold his office shall be entitled to have and receive a salary of one thousand two hundred pounds sterling by the year; and Our Lieut. Governor for the time being of the said island of Van Diemen's Land is hereby directed and required to cause such salary to be paid to the said Chief Justice by four quarterly payments at the four most usual days of payment in the year in bills of exchange to be drawn by such Lieut. Governor as aforesaid on the Lords Commissioners of Our Treasury in England payable to or to the order of such Chief Justice; and which bills shall by Our said Lieut. Governor be accordingly delivered to Our said Chief Justice.  6. And We do further grant ordain and declare that the said salary shall commence and take place in respect to any person who shall be resident in Great Britain or Ireland at the time of his appointment upon and from the day on which any such person shall thereupon embark or depart from Great Britain or Ireland for Van Diemen's Land to take upon him the execution of the said office; and that the salary of any such Chief Justice who shall at the time of his appointment be resident in Van Diemen's Land aforesaid shall commence and take place from and after his taking upon him the execution of such his office; and that such salary shall be in lieu of all fees of office perquisites emoluments and advantages whatsoever; and that no fee of office perquisite emolument or advantage whatsoever other than and except the said salary shall be accepted received or taken by such Chief Justice in any manner or on any account or pretence whatsoever. Provided nevertheless that it shall be lawful for the said Chief Justice to occupy and inhabit any official house or residence within the said island of Van Diemen's Land which hath been or may hereafter be provided for his residence and occupation without paying to Us Our Heirs and Successors any rent for the same and without being obliged to repair uphold or maintain any such house or official residence at his own costs and charges. [114]   7. And We do further grant appoint and declare that no Chief Justice of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall be capable of accepting. taking or performing any other office or place of profit or emolument. on pain that the acceptance of any such other office or place as aforesaid shall be and be deemed in law de facto an avoidance of his office of Chief Justice and the salary thereof shall cease and be deemed to have ceased accordingly from the time of such acceptance of any such other office or place.  8. And We do hereby constitute and appoint Our trusty and well beloved John Lewes Pedder Esquire to be the first Chief Justice of the said Supreme Court of Van D. Land the said John Lewes Pedder being a barrister in England.  9. And We do hereby ordain appoint and declare that there shall be and belong to the said court the following officers that is to say a Registrar or Prothonotary a Master and a Keeper of Records and such and so many other officers as to the Chief Justice of the said court for the time being shall from time to time appear to be necessary for the administration of justice and the due execution of all the powers and authorities which are granted and committed to the said court by these Our Letters Patent. Provided nevertheless that no new office shall be created in the said court unless the Governor L. Governor or acting Governor for the time being of Our said island shall first signify his approbation thereof to Our said Chief Justice for the time being in writing under the hand of such Governor Lieut. Govr. or acting Governor as aforesaid. And We do further ordain and direct that all persons who shall and may be appointed to the several offices of Master Registrar Prothonotary or Keeper of the Records of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land or to any offices in the said court whereof the duties shall correspond to those performed by the Master Registrar Prothonotary or Keeper of Records of any or either of Our Courts of Record at Westminster shall be so appointed by Us Our Heirs and Successors by warrant under Our or Their Royal Sign Manual; and that all persons who shall and may be appointed to any other office within the said Supreme Court of Van D. Land shall be so appointed by the Chief Justice for the time being of the said court. And we do further direct and appoint that the several officers of the said court so to be appointed as aforesaid by Us Our Heirs and Successors shall hold their respective offices during Our and Their pleasure; and that the several officers of the said court so to be appointed as aforesaid by the Chief Justice thereof shall always be subject to be removed by the said court from their offices therein upon reasonable cause.  10. And we do hereby authorise and empower the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land to approve admit and enrol such and so many persons having been admitted barristers at law or advocates in Great Britain or Ireland or having been admitted writers attornies or solicitors in one of Our Courts at Westminster Dublin or Edinburgh or having been admitted as proctors in any Ecclesiastical Court in England to act as well in the character of barristers and advocates as of proctors attornies and solicitors in the said court; and which persons so approved admitted and enrolled as aforesaid shall be and are hereby authorised to appear and plead and act for the suitors of the said court subject always to be removed by the said court from their station therein upon reasonable cause. [115] And We do declare that no other person or persons whatsoever shall be allowed to appear and plead or act in the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land for and on behalf of such suitors or any of them. Provided always and We do ordain and declare that in case there shall not be a sufficient number of such barristers at law advocates writers attornies solicitors and proctors within the said island competent and willing to appear and act for the suitors of the said court then and in that case the said Supreme Court of Van D. Land shall and is hereby authorised to admit so many other fit and proper persons to appear and act as barristers advocates proctors attornies and solicitors as may be necessary according to such general rules and qualifications as the said court shall for that purpose make and establish. Provided that the said court shall not admit any person to act in any or either of the characters aforesaid who hath been by due course of law convicted of any crime which according to any law now in force in England would disqualify him from appearing and acting in any of our Courts of Record at Westminster.  In compliance with the instructions conveyed to me in your letter the 9th September 1822 the Surveyor General was despatched on the 22nd of last October in His Majesty's Cutter Mermaid to examine Port Bowen Port Curtis and Moreton Bay with the Country immediately adjoining; and his report upon the Capacity of the two latter for the purposes of Convict Settlements I have now the pleasure to enclose as it commences a new era in the History of the Continent of New Holland by the discovery of a large and important river.  The first part of your Lordship's Commands having been thus carried into its fullest effect by the zeal and Intelligence of Mr. Oxley the Second will be proceeded upon the moment that the rainy Season concludes by the Establishment in Moreton Bay of a few not exceeding fifty Souls for the purpose of providing accommodation for themselves and for the reception of any number of Convicts it may be deemed expedient to send hereafter.  THE RESPECTFUL ADDRESS AND HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF THE LANDHOLDERS MERCHANTS AND OTHER FREE INHABITANTS OF VAN DIEMEN'S LAND  To the King's most excellent Majesty.  May it please your Majesty  We have viewed also with anxious attention the Consideration given by your Majesty's Ministers to the general and individual Interests of the people of this Island and have learned with the liveliest Satisfaction their solicitude on our behalf as more especially manifested by the introduction of the Clause in the late Act of Parliament contemplative of the elevation of this Island to a separate and independent Colony.  That this Island originally considered as a mere penal Settlement has under the benign auspices of your Majesty's Government and especially during the Administration of Lieutenant Governor Sorell progressively advanced in improvement as regards its internal economy and has attained a corresponding importance in its external relations.  That the increased tide of Emigration so wisely directed to its Shores by your Majesty's Ministers and bringing along with it so considerable an influx of Capital has infused an active spirit of agricultural and pastoral improvement has enlarged the facilities of Trade and stimulated commercial enterprize and must necessarily tend to the rapid developement of the great natural resources of the Country.  That these resources in some respects almost unlimited are in general so important and valuable as to render the Colonists entirely independent of any supplies or assistance from New South Wales to whose necessities moreover they have happily been able to administer; whilst the large acquisition of respectable population of Capital and of operative skill leads them to contemplate a higher state of Society within themselves and a comparative extension of commercial intercourse with other parts of the world to the various quarters of which their productions or their Money have already found their way.  That although the people of this Island have had to combat with all the difficulties incident to a new Country without many of the aids and facilities enjoyed by the Colonists of New South Wales they have nevertheless made proportionably greater advances. But as in Soil Climate and Geographical relation this Island essentially differs from that Country as its present State moral and physical cannot be referred to the same Causes neither can their future welfare and prosperity be identified with or promoted by the same policy and measures and which however applicable and advantageous they may be to that Settlement have been recently felt alike unsuited to the Condition and prejudicial to the welfare of this Colony. [343]   And we most humbly submit to your Majesty that the true Interests of this Colony its agricultural pastoral and commercial prosperity can be rightly understood protected and encouraged only by the observation experience and solicitude of a resident Government acting by wise Counsels and not subject to the Controul or dependent on the authority of the local Government of New South Wales.  The deep interest we feel in the stability and future prosperity of this land of our adoption we presume to plead with your Majesty in excuse of this lengthened memorial of our dearest hopes and wishes and most respectfully renewing the expression of our sincere Loyalty and Attachment to your Majesty's sacred person and Government and our heartfelt Gratitude for the Benefits already conferred upon us through your Majesty's Grace and favor.  We most humbly pray that your Majesty may be graciously pleased to take the same into your Royal and Paternal Consideration and to constitute and erect the island of Van Diemen's Land into a separate Colony independent of the Government of New South Wales.  And your Majesty's Memorialists and dutiful and loyal Subjects as in duty bound shall ever pray etc. etc. etc.  Finding they [i.e. bushrangers] did not avail themselves of my late Proclamation which expired on the 20th inst. I have ordered an increased number of constables for the present with Soldiers and aborigines to accompany them with a reward of £5 for every Bushranger; these as they are brought in shall be sent on board the Hulk and removed as necessary to Moreton Bay which I should recommend as the Second place of punishment viz. Port Macquarie for first grave offences; Moreton Bay for runaways from the former and Norfolk Island as the ne plus ultra of Convict degradation.  I have had the honor to receive a Dispatch from your Lordship No. 25 rather intimating it as Your Lordship's opinion that Moreton Bay should be open to Colonization.  As Port Macquarie has become almost useless as a penal Settlement from the many facilities afforded to the escape of Prisoners by the extension of Settlers along Hunter's River and as Norfolk Island would not be sufficient to contain the persons whom it is found necessary to remove for minor offences to remote parts of time Colony I have thought it would not be assuming an unsound discretion if I should take measures for immediately preparing Moreton Bay for the reception of Prisoners; and I have adopted this step with less diffidence as the Establishment of Penal Depots is the best means of paving the way for the introduction of free population as the example of Port Macquarie abundantly testifies.  For minor offenders. [...] I have thought Morton Bay would be the fittest Depot on account of its distance and almost impossibility of escape Its means of immediately affording employment and subsistence for the Prisoners who may be sent there and the facilities that a penal settlement in the first instance will afford to the free Settlers when it may be deemed expedient to throw open that part of the Colony. [...]   While we are bidding Your Excellency farewell we feel that we can entirely rely upon your watchfulness to embrace all opportunities which may offer on your return of suggesting to His Majesty's Government the pressing necessity which exists for the immediate establishment in this Colony in all their plenitude of those two fundamental principles of the British Constitution Trial by Jury and Taxation by Representation. We are not ignorant that upon both these subjects Your Excellency's opinion has long been accordant with the general opinion of the Colony. Your Excellency cannot but have felt the inconvenience of directing the efforts of a Free People left at large as it were to guide themselves by the analogies and recollections of English Law and English usage in the absence of their ancient free institutions; a People whose good sense moral feeling and patriotism alone have prevented them from a louder expression of their impatience when their English prejudices have been outraged by the unavoidable vexations of a Government so anti-British in its structure and operation that it would be difficult to designate it by a just name. [322]   With respect to Trial by Jury the Magistrates of Sydney have already expressed the voice of' the people in their answer to the patriotic interrogatory put to them by Your Excellency; and as to that other great first principle of the British Constitution Taxation by Representation we are aware how much Your Excellency has needed the assistance of a deliberative Assembly which to prevent the influence of party faction ought to consist of at least one hundred Members a number which our population can readily furnish of men in every way qualified to discharge that duty to their fellow Colonists.  The Inhabitants of New South Wales composed exclusively of British-born subjects and their descendants now amount to nearly fifty thousand: A population exceeding the entire white population of the Colonies in the West Indies; and as far as good morals are necessary for the enjoyment of enlarged Civil Rights Your Excellency's extensive acquaintance with the other Colonies must have convinced you that we excel them all in this great particular. The orderly state of Sydney although a sea-port the great attention and encouragement which schools and religious Societies receive from all classes and the peace and order of our streets on the Sabbath day all demonstrate that the seeds of Religion and good morals have taken deep root in Australia.  We will not however hide it from the Representative of Our Most Gracious Sovereign that there are Colonists of rank and wealth here and of very great influence at home who are inimical to the establishment in New South Wales of the British Constitution. These persons were also unfriendly to the late substitution of English Law in the place of the arbitrary Regulations of preceding Governors. But the history of every institution which has eminently blessed mankind will shew the impolicy of withholding a great and general benefit until those for whom it is calculated should be unanimous in their petition to obtain it.  Now therefore in execution of the power and authority in me vested by the said order of His Majesty in Council it is ordered as follows: - [59]   1. That the respective rules and orders forms and manner of practice and of proceeding in His Majesty's Superior Courts at Westminster that is to say in the Courts of King's Bench Exchequer and High Court of Chancery and in the Ecclesiastical Court within the Diocese of London called the Consistory Court shall from and after the date of this order be adopted and followed in the exercise of the several jurisdictions of the said Supreme Court of New South Wales so far as the circumstances and condition of the said colony shall require and admit and so far as such rules orders and forms of practice shall or may not be herein or at any time hereafter altered by some rule or form specifically provided and adapted to the conduct of business in the said Supreme Court.  2. That the proceedings of the said Supreme Court within its several and respective jurisdictions as aforesaid be commenced and continued in a distinct and separate form.  3. That such and the like fees as are established by law or sanctioned by usage and received for the conduct of business in the said several courts in England be taken and received by the several officers and practitioners for the conduct of business in the Supreme Court of New South Wales and that no other fees be taken or received: Provided always that no duty shall be charged or allowed in any case for stamps. (See further as to costs Rule 58.)  4. Appointing the terms. (See Rule 14.)  5. That the office of the said Supreme Court be open every day both during term and in vacation for the issuing of process the filing of pleas petitions and affidavits and the doing and performing of all other necessary acts and things in the said office; and that all writs &c. (The subsequent part revoked.)  6. Filing plaints &c.  7. That all writs summonses or other process to compel the appearance of any person residing within the town of Sydney or within eight miles thereof shall not have less than six days between the day of issuing the same and the return thereof; or if such person shall reside within the townships or districts of Parramatta Liverpool or parts immediately adjacent not less than eight days; or if such persons shall reside within the townships of Wilberforce or Windsor or the districts of Appin or Airds not less than twelve days; or if such person shall reside in any other places at greater distances than those abovementioned there shall be such time between the teste or issue and return of such writ as (respect being had to distance or local circumstances) may be requisite for the execution thereof and as the Chief Justice shall order. (Subsequent part revoked.)  8. Setting down cases for trial. (See Rule 29.)  9. It is ordered that so much of the Rules of Practice of the Supreme Court made and published by the Chief Justice on the twenty-second day of June in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and twenty-five as relates to the following particulars namely the fixing of the terms; the teste and return of writs and other process during term; and the allowing of further time to the Sheriff for the return thereof; the filing of plaints and the entry of causes for argument hearing or trial in the clerk's book shall be and the same are hereby revoked from and after the first day of October next; and that the following rules and orders shall then commence and take effect: - [60]   10. That every action at law which shall hereafter be commenced in the said court shall be entered in a short manner setting forth the form of the action and the nature of the process which may be required in a book to be kept in the office of the Supreme Court for such purpose and called the "Clerk's Book" and shall be signed by the plaintiff in such action or by his lawful attorney.  11. That the ordinary process of the said court to compel the appearance of the defendant in any such action shall be by summons in the following form namely  George the Fourth by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland King Defender of the Faith;  To Our Sheriff of New South Wales or his lawful Deputy Greeting; We command you to summon (the defendant or defendants) to appear before Our Supreme Court of New South Wales at Sydney on the  day of next; at o'clock in the forenoon then and there to answer (the plaintiff or plaintiffs) in an action (here set forth the nature of the action according to the form the same is entered in the clerk's book) as will more particularly be set forth in a declaration to be then and there exhibited against (him her or them). And have you then there this writ.  Witness Esquire Our Chief Justice of Our said Court at Sydney the day of in the year of Our reign.  Registrar of the Supreme Court.  12. That every writ or warrant of arrest in any action as aforesaid shall he in the following form namely  (Titles and attestation as in Rule 11.)  We command you to take (the defendant or defendants) and safely keep (him her or them) so that you have (his her or their) body (or bodies) before Our Supreme Court of New South Wales at Sydney on the day of next at o'clock in the forenoon then and there to answer (the plaintiff or plaintiffs) in an action (here set forth the general nature of the action according to the form the same is entered in the clerk's book) as will more particularly be set forth in a declaration to be then and there exhibited against (him her or them). And have you then there this writ.  13. That all such writs and process as aforesaid shall be made returnable on the first lawful day in the respective months of February May August and November in every year provided there shall be the number of days between the issuing of such process and the return thereof required by the aforesaid rules and orders of the said court; and that the court shall be held as of term for the return of such process: Provided also that in case there shall not be the requisite number of days between the issuing of such writ and the next ensuing return day to admit of the service and return thereof as directed by the before recited rules and orders and it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court that the case is urgent or that material injury may be sustained by delay then and in such case the said judge may under such terms as shall be deemed equitable allow such process to be made returnable on the first day in the next ensuing term. [61]   14. That there shall be four months in each year which shall be called the terms of the said court; and the said terms shall be the months of March June September and December and shall commence and determine on the first and last days of the said months respectively:  Provided that if the said months shall commence or end upon Sunday the said terms shall commence the Monday following or end the Saturday preceding: and that each of the said terms shall be divided into four weeks and the first week in each term shall be computed from the first day of such term to such day week and so on till the completion of four weeks; and every day which may then remain over shall be reckoned as of the last week of such term.  15. That as often as any defendant shall be arrested by the process of the said court and shall give bail to the Sheriff or his Deputy the condition of the bail bond shall be that such defendant shall appear in such action (according to the exigency of the writ) and if he shall be condemned in the same he shall satisfy the costs and condemnation money or render himself to the custody of the Sheriff or that his bail will do it for him.  16. That in all cases in which bail shall be taken as before directed the Sheriff or his Deputy shall return the names and description of such bail on or before the return day of the writ and the same shall be minuted in the clerk's book under the entry of the action; of which said bail no further notice shall be necessary; and if the plaintiff shall intend to except to such bail such exception shall be entered in the clerk's book and notice thereof given to the defendant and also to the Sheriff respectively within fourteen days after the return day of the writ; and in case such exception shall not be entered and notice thereof given as aforesaid the said bail shall become absolute and the Sheriff shall be discharged from all further liability for the appearance of such defendant; and all further proceedings in respect of justifying or amending such bail may be had before any judge at Chambers or by the order of such judge before any Commissioner duly appointed for such purpose.  17. That as often as any defendant shall be arrested by the process of the said court he may be rendered at any time after the return of the writ by producing his body at the said court or before a judge at Chambers and delivering him into custody of the Sheriff or his Deputy; which render shall be entered in the clerk's book and no further notice thereof shall be required and the conditions of the bail bond shall thereupon be deemed satisfied: Provided however that in case of such render being made after proceedings commenced upon the bail bond such bail shall not be discharged without payment of the costs incurred thereby.  18. That as often as any defendant against whom any process of the said court shall have issued shall appear thereto such appearance shall be entered in a brief form in the office of the Supreme Court in the clerk's book under the entry of the action appeared to; and when any such defendant after being duly served with such process shall fail to appear on the day required by such process the plaintiff may cause an appearance to be entered for such defendant in like manner as aforesaid and proceed as if such defendant had duly appeared in the said court.  19. That as often as the process of the said court shall be issued to compel the appearance of two or more defendants and one or more of such defendants cannot be found or otherwise served with such process upon a return to such effect being made by the Sheriff or his Deputy and verified upon oath the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court may order the Sheriff to cause notice of the action commenced against such defendant or defendants to be inserted in the Sydney Gazette (or other official newspaper for the time-being) which notice shall set forth in a brief manner the names of the parties and the nature of the action and shall require the defendant or defendants upon whom such process may not have been served to appear at a certain future day and answer the said action; and if at such day such defendant or defendants shall fail to appear according to such notice the plaintiff may upon due proof thereof enter a suggestion to such effect in the said court and the same shall be minuted in the clerk's book; and the plaintiff may thereupon proceed in such action in like manner as if such defendant or defendants had been outlawed by due course of law. [62]   20. That on or before the day appointed for the return of the writ or process in any such action as aforesaid the declaration or particulars of demand shall be filed in the office of the Supreme Court; and the clerk of the said court shall mark on the back of such declaration or particulars of demand the day on which the same may have been filed and likewise minute the same in the clerk's book; and in case such declaration or particulars of demand shall not be filed within the time hereby limited then a non-suit may be entered against the plaintiff in such action.  21. That in any action at law as aforesaid the plaintiff may in the place and stead of a declaration file an account of the particulars of his demand in all cases where such particulars are required by the practice of the Court of King's Bench at Westminster; and such particulars shall be subject to the same rules as are observed in reference to the form and qualities of particulars of demand by the said Court of King's Bench; and in all other cases the plaintiff may file a short declaration setting forth in a plain simple and compendious manner the true cause for which the plaintiff brings his action and particularly avoiding all superfluous forms and unnecessary matter.  22. That in actions of trespass and trespass on the case the plaintiff shall not be liable to be non-suited nor shall a demurrer be allowed for any mistake in the form only of any such action; but the same may be amended as of course at any time and in any stage of the cause without payment of costs.  23. That after the declaration or particulars of demand shall be filed as hereby ordered and within eight days inclusive after the return day of the writ the defendant in such action shall file his plea demurrer or defence to such action in the office of the Supreme Court; and the defendant shall in all cases be bound to abide by such plea demurrer or defence without any motion or rule of court for such purpose; and the clerk of the said court shall mark on the back of such plea demurrer or defence the day whereon the same was filed and also minute the same in the clerk's book; and in case such plea demurrer or defence shall not be filed within the time hereby limited then judgment by nil dicit may be entered against such defendant: Provided however that the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court may upon good and sufficient cause being shewn allow further time for pleading in any particular cause by order to be made at Chambers and under such terms as may be deemed equitable so as application for such further time be made before the expiration of the time herein-before limited for filing such plea demurrer or defence. [63]   24. That as often as the nature of the defence intended to be relied on will admit of a general denial of the plaintiffs cause of action the defendant in such action may instead of a special plea plead the general issue and file notice of the special matter upon which he intends to insist in evidence; and such notice shall conform as nearly as may be to the like form and requisites and shall be subject to the same rules as are made and observed in reference to notices of set-off by the Court of King's Bench at Westminster; and no evidence shall be admitted of any particulars or matters of defence not included in such notice: Provided however that if any new matter shall arise in the course of the trial and it shall appear that evidence of such new matter may be received without prejudice to the plaintiff and the justice of the case the judge at the trial may allow the defendant to amend his said notice and admit evidence of such new matter as aforesaid.  25. That after plea demurrer or defence shall be filed as hereby ordered and within twelve days inclusive after the return day of the writ the plaintiff shall file his replication or demur or join in demurrer to such plea; and every such replication shall be made to conform as nearly as the case will admit to the form and manner hereinbefore directed for the plea or defence; and after the filing such replication or demurrer or joinder in demurrer and within sixteen days inclusive after the said return day the defendant shall in like form and manner file his rejoinder; and thereupon the cause shall be considered to be at issue and may be set down for hearing or trial as the case may require at the ensuing term; and if any further pleading shall be necessary the same shall be filed with as little delay as possible or in default thereof shall be delivered ore tenus at the trial and shall be briefly minuted by the parties or their attornies in open court under the direction of the judge and shall be signed by the parties respectively or their attornies and filed with the other pleadings in such cause. And in case either party shall fail to reply demur or join in demurrer or rejoin within the time respectively limited for such purpose the adverse party may have judgment of non pros or nil dicit as the case may require: Provided however that the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court may on good and sufficient cause shewn and upon such terms as such judge may think equitable allow further time for replying demurring or rejoining in any particular clause by order to be made at Chambers and minuted in the clerk's book so as application for such further time be made before the expiration of the time hereby appointed for replying demurring or rejoining respectively.  26. That in all cases where from the nature of any action the general form of declaring or pleading hereinbefore directed may be sufficient to maintain or defend such action and shall be so signified by the Judge before whom the same shall be tried no more or higher costs shall be allowed than would have been allowed in case the general form of pleading ordered by these rules had been observed.  27. That the parties plaintiff and defendant in every such action as aforesaid shall be bound to take notice of the respective days herein-before appointed and limited for the filing of the several pleadings in such action; and that no notice or copy or service or rule or demand of any such pleading shall in any case be necessary or allowed in taxing costs.  28. That as often as any cause shall be at issue on any matter of law or of fact the party desiring to have the same argued or tried as the case may require shall at least eight days before the next ensuing term if the cause shall he at issue before term or at any time in term if issue shall be joined during term make application in writing to the clerk of the Supreme Court to have such cause entered for argument or trial in which application shall be expressed the day (such day being made conformable to the rules of the court) on which such party does intend and will be prepared to argue or try the same; and if the party by whom such application shall be filed shall not proceed to argue or try such cause accordingly he shall (unless upon good cause shewn to the contrary) pay such costs to the opposite party as he shall have incurred thereby; and the daily attendance of the attornies during the time any cause may stand in the paper for trial as well as on the trial of such cause shall be reckoned for three attendances and no more shall be allowed in taxing costs. [64]   29. That the clerk of the court shall immediately after the receipt of any application as aforesaid prepare a paper or list in which the several causes for argument or trial shall be entered from time to time and according to the priority of such application; and such list shall be fixed up in some public part of the office of the said court and shall be of the like force and effect as notice of trial duly served on the opposite party; and the said causes shall be called on heard and tried according to the order in which they shall have been entered by the clerk as aforesaid unless the court shall make other rule or order therein.  30. That when any cause shall be entered for trial as hereby ordered and the defendant shall intend to move the court to have such trial postponed to a future day such defendant shall at least two days before the ensuing term if the cause shall be at issue before term or at any time in term if issue shall be joined during term file a notice of his intended motion in the office of the Supreme Court; and at the same time file an affidavit of the grounds on which such motion is about to be made; and in all cases where either party shall move to postpone the trial of any cause on account of the absence of a material witness the affidavit shall specially set forth the nature of the evidence to which it is intended that such absent witness shall be examined and such other circumstances as may satisfy the court that such witness may be material and that there is reasonable expectation of procuring his attendance at the time to which the trial is prayed to be postponed and that there have been no laches or neglect on the part of such party: Provided however that if the circumstances upon which any such motion as aforesaid may be made shall not have become known to the party making such motion in sufficient time to admit of the same being made within the time hereby limited for filing such notice and affidavit as aforesaid the court upon being satisfied thereof may allow such trial to be postponed.  31. That all motions for postponing the trial of any issue joined before term as aforesaid shall be made and cause if any shewn against the same on the first day of the ensuing term unless the court may specially appoint some other day for such purpose; and when issue shall be joined in term such motion may be made on any convenient day during the said term.  32. That in any cause now depending or which shall at any time hereafter be commenced in the said court if any witness in such cause shall be about to depart from New South Wales and may thereby be prevented from attending at the trial of such cause a summons under the hand of the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court shall issue at the request of the plaintiff or defendant at any stage of the cause to such witness so about to depart requiring his attendance at a certain day hour and place named in such summons to give testimony in such cause; and such summons shall be served upon such witness at least twelve hours before the time appointed for his examination; and notice of such summons specifying the name of the witness and the day hour and place of his attendance shall within the like time be served upon the opposite party; and the depositions of such witness shall be taken viva voce in the presence of the party or parties attending by the judge or in his absence by the Master of the said court or other person specially appointed for such purpose and shall be immediately sealed up and indorsed and filed in the office of the said court with the other proceedings in such cause; [65] and in case the opposite party shall neglect to attend such examination the service of such notice as aforesaid shall be proved upon oath before the judge or Master or other person appointed as aforesaid and shall be certified together with such depositions; and if at the time of the trial of such cause such witness shall not be in attendance the depositions of such witness taken and filed in manner as aforesaid shall be allowed and read and shall be deemed good and competent evidence at any trial or hearing between the parties in such cause.  33. That if any witness in any cause now depending or hereafter to be commenced in the said court shall be beyond the seas or aged or infirm or otherwise disabled from attending the trial of such cause the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court shall at the request of the plaintiff or defendant in any stage of such cause grant a commission for the examination of such witnesses de bene esse in like manner and form as commissions for the examination of witnesses on interrogatories are granted by the Court of King's Bench at Westminster; and such examination being duly taken and returned shall be allowed and read at any trial or hearing between the parties in such cause.  34. That on the days respectively appointed for hearing or trying any cause as aforesaid the clerk of the said court shall carry into court the original pleadings in such cause together with his book of minutes relating thereto; and such pleadings shall be in the place of and of the like force and effect as a record of nisi prius regularly made up and passed.  35. That all issues in law joined in manner as aforesaid before term shall be argued and judgments of non-suit or by nil dicit shall be given in the first week in the ensuing term; and all such issues joined during term shall be argued and such judgments given in the last week in such term; and in all cases of judgment by nil dicit or on demurrer the court shall proceed forthwith to enquire into and assess damages therein and final judgment may be entered immediately unless stayed by the court.  36. That all issues in fact joined in manner as aforesaid before term shall be tried in the second and third weeks of the ensuing term; and all such issues joined during term shall be tried in such week after term as the court shall from time to time specially appoint for such purpose.  37. That all verdicts which shall be found on any issue in fact joined as aforesaid shall be immediately noted down by the clerk and read in open court; and shall be entered in the clerk's book next after the entry of the several pleadings; and where a special verdict shall be found the notes of such special verdict shall immediately be drawn by counsel for the respective parties; and in case any difference shall arise the court shall settle such special verdict upon the facts found by the assessors or jury. [66]   38. That as often as the plaintiff or defendant in any action which shall have been tried during term shall intend to move for a new trial or in arrest of judgment he shall file a notice of such intention in the office of the Supreme Court on or before the last day of the third week in each term; or in case such action shall have been tried after term such notice shall be filed before the first day of the next ensuing term; and the clerk of the court shall mark on the back of every such notice the day on which the same shall be filed; and such notice shall set forth in a brief manner the grounds on which such motion is intended to be made; and the filing of such notice as aforesaid shall be of the like force and effect as the service of a rule nisi on the adverse party; and if the party intending to move for a new trial or in arrest of judgment as aforesaid shall fail to file such notice within the time and in the manner hereby appointed for such purpose judgment as the case may require may be signed at any time without any rule or other notice in such respect.  39. That all motions for new trials and in arrest of judgment and all special cases stated and points reserved at the trial of any issues shall be heard in the last week of the term in which the trial of the cause was had; or if such trial was had after term such motions shall be heard in the first week of the next ensuing term: Provided however that the court may for convenience postpone the hearing or determining of any such motion as aforesaid to any future day; and if such future day shall be out of term the same shall be considered of the preceding term; and the court may proceed to pass judgment or make such order in the premises as it might have done during term; and such proceeding shall be entered and entitled as of the last day of the preceding term.  40. That immediately after judgment shall be pronounced in any such action as aforesaid it shall be entered in the clerk's book and such entry shall set forth the debt damages costs or thing recovered and the day on which such judgment was pronounced. And the party obtaining such judgment shall before execution file in the office of the Supreme Court a roll of such judgment wherein shall be set forth in a compendious manner the substantial parts only of the proceedings; viz the style of the court the term and time of signing judgment the names of the parties and of their respective attornies the nature of the action the material parts of the pleadings and the judgment of the court.  41. That whenever the plaintiff shall become non-suit or discontinue his action without the consent of the defendant such defendant may have his costs taxed at any time after such non-suit or discontinuance; and may proceed to recover the same either by attachment or execution.  42. That execution may be taken out at any time after judgment obtained and entered as aforesaid (unless in cases where an appeal from such judgment may be allowed and duly entered); which execution shall be tested in the name of the Chief Justice for the time being and signed by any judge of the said court.  43. That all writs of execution shall not be returnable in less than one month from the day of issuing any such writ if the same shall require to be executed in Sydney or within forty miles thereof; and if the same shall require to be executed above forty miles from Sydney there shall be such time between the issuing and returning of any such writ as from circumstances may be requisite for the execution thereof and as shall be ordered by any judge of the said court. [67]   44. That upon every writ of execution the sum bona fide due shall be endorsed by the party or his attorney suing out such writ before the same shall be delivered to the Sheriff or his Deputy; and the Sheriff shall be required to levy accordingly: and if a larger sum be so endorsed than shall be bona fide due restitution shall be awarded by summary application to the court and the levy fees for the surplus shall be paid out of the plaintiff's own pocket.  45. That every plaintiff who hath obtained or shall hereafter obtain judgment for any penalty shall at the time of taking out execution besides endorsing the sum that may be claimed as due on such execution deliver into the office of the said court an account of what is justly and bona fide due to him attested upon oath before the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court if such plaintiff shall be within the colony of New South Wales or if such plaintiff shall be absent from the colony such account shall be delivered and attested by the agent or attorney of such plaintiff according to the best of his knowledge and belief; and until such account shall be attested and delivered as aforesaid execution shall be stayed.  46. That in all cases where execution shall issue and the defendant shall allege that his freehold lands or tenements levied on are more than sufficient to satisfy such execution the defendant may point out to the Sheriff or his Deputy at any time before the day of sale what part or parts of such lands or tenements he will have first sold and the same shall be first sold accordingly; but if such parts shall not be sufficient to satisfy such execution then the Sheriff or his Deputy shall proceed on the same day to sell the whole of the defendant's lands or tenements or such other parts thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the debt and all costs thereon; and the Sheriff or his Deputy shall in all cases pay back to the defendant or his attorney the surplus if any arising from any levy within six days after he shall have received the same.  47. That all writs of scire facias shall be made returnable within the time herein-before ordered for the return of process to compel the appearance of any defendant and a copy of every such writ shall be served upon the defendant without any summons and upon proof of such service shall amount to a scire feci; and in case the defendant cannot be found or service otherwise duly performed the Chief Justice or any judge of the said court may order the Sheriff to cause notice of such writ to be inserted in the Sydney Gazette or other official newspaper requiring such defendant to appear at a certain day and shew cause according to the exigency of such writ; and if such defendant shall fail to appear according to such notice such default shall be as sufficient to found a judgment as two nihils returned by the law and practice of the King's Courts at Westminster.  48. That every writ of scire facias served or notified as herein-before ordered shall be in the place and stead of a declaration; and any defendant who shall appear to such writ shall within the like time as hereinbefore limited for filing pleas either plead such matter as he may have to allege why execution should not be issued or shew the same for cause in like manner and form as in ordinary cases of shewing cause against any rule of court. [68]   49. That as often as the bail bond herein-before ordered to be taken shall become forfeited the same shall be filed in the said court and a writ of scire facias shall issue against such bail in like manner as if such bail had become bound by recognizance in court.  50. That where judgment by default shall be obtained against any person who at the time of such judgment shall have been absent from New South Wales and such person shall at any time within two years after the passing of such judgment appear before the said court and allege that more money hath been levied under such judgment than was due the court shall in a summary way proceed to enquire into the case; and if it shall be proved that more money hath been so levied or paid than was justly due the court shall order the surplus together with the levy fees thereon to be restored by the plaintiff; and upon his refusal to make such restitution the sum so ordered to be restored together with costs shall be levied by execution.  51. That where judgment shall pass by default against any infant or person being non compos mentis such judgment may be enquired into and set aside in the like summary manner by the said court at any time within five years after such disability shall be removed; provided however that no such summary proceeding shall be allowed in cases where by the laws of England infancy is not assignable for error.  52. That judgment shall in no case be entered upon any warrant of attorney which shall bear date or be executed after the first day of December next ensuing the publication of these rules unless such warrant of attorney shall be executed in the presence of an attorney duly admitted in this court or in the presence of some Justice of the Peace residing within or near the district or place where such warrant of attorney shall be executed; and such attorney or Justice of the Peace respectively shall subscribe his name to such warrant of attorney and shall previous to the execution thereof caution the party about to execute the same as to the nature and consequences of his act.  53. That in any action suit or other proceeding whatsoever already or hereafter to be commenced in the said court if the plaintiff or defendant shall happen to die at any time before final judgment the heirs executors or administrators of the party so dying according as the case may require may have a rule against the opposite party (either in term or during vacation) to shew cause why such heirs executors or administrators should not be made parties to such action suit or other proceeding in the place and stead of the party dying as aforesaid; and if such action suit or other proceeding might have been originally prosecuted or maintained by or against the heirs executors or administrators of the party dying as aforesaid and any right liability or interest in respect thereof shall or may have descended or survived to or against any such heirs executors or administrators the said court or judge at Chambers may in the discretion of such court or judge and under such terms as shall appear equitable order such heirs executors or administrators to be made parties to such action suit or other proceeding as aforesaid; and thereupon a suggestion of the death of the original party and the admission of his heirs executors or administrators in his stead shall be entered in the clerk's book and such action suit or other proceeding shall be continued in like manner as if such heirs executors or administrators had been originally parties thereto. [69]   54. That as often as any plaintiff or defendant in any such action suit or other proceeding being a feme sole at the commencement of such action suit or other proceeding shall afterwards intermarry it shall be lawful for the plaintiff or defendant to have a rule in like manner and to the like effect as herein-before ordered with respect to persons dying; and for the said court or judge at Chambers to permit the husband of such plaintiff or defendant to be made party to such action suit or other proceeding either jointly with his wife or alone as the case may require; and thereupon a suggestion shall be entered to such effect and the said action suit or other proceeding shall be continued in like manner as if the husband of such plaintiff or defendant so marrying as aforesaid had been originally party thereto.  55. That no action suit process or other matter pending in the said Court shall abate or be discontinued or put without day through the absence of the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the said Court but every such action suit process or other pending matter shall be continued to any future day on which the Chief Justice or other Judge may hold Court as of the day whereon the Court was originally intended to be holden.  56. That no motion petition rule or order shall be allowed in any case where by the practice of the King's Courts at Westminster such motion petition rule or order might be made or had as of course; but that every act matter or thing which might be had or done in any cause upon such motion or petition without notice shall be had or done without any such motion petition rule or order and that in any case any such motion petition rule or order shall be made or had the same shall be disallowed in taxing costs.  57. That the foregoing rules and orders being made for the convenience of parties in the ordinary course of proceeding in the said court and with a view to promote economy and dispatch by avoiding all unnecessary and vexatious forms in the spirit of such view and in furtherance thereof the court may from time to time dispense with any particular rule that may be attended with inconvenience or hardship to either of the parties and may make such special order in any particular case or in any stage of the proceedings as shall be within the power of the court and may facilitate the ends of justice.  58. That the fees and costs of all proceedings not comprehended within the before-mentioned rules and orders of the said court made on the 22nd day of June 1825 shall until a particular schedule shall be made and published be taxed as nearly as may be according to the rate of fees and costs allowed and taxed in other proceedings in the said court.  59. That the said court shall hold its sessions in four certain months in every year for the hearing and determining of crimes and misdemeanors and the delivery of the gaols (or oftener as occasion shall require); and the said months shall be February May August and November respectively; and the said court shall sit on such days of the said months as may from time to time be convenient and shall be appointed for such purpose.  60. That writs certiorari for the removal of all proceedings in criminal matters before Justices of the Peace in or out of sessions may be moved for and returned at any time during the said months of February May August and November respectively; and the same shall for such purpose be considered as of term.  This was an action for intrusion brought by the Crown against Robert Cooper who had started to erect buildings for a brewery and distillery on the Paramatta Road at a place called the Blackwater Swamp. The Attorney-General on behalf of the Crown claimed that the land in question had not been ceded to any individual and remained therefore in the possession of the Crown. The defendant who was represented by Dr. Wardell and William Charles Wentworth obtained the empanelling of a jury with the consent of the Attorney-General under the terms of the New South Wales Act 1823. It was the first jury empanelled in civil proceedings in Australia. The defendant asserted that his occupation of the land had been authorised by the Surveyor-General although this was disputed by the Crown.  The Chief Justice in his charge to the jury remarked upon the novelty of the case. The information of intrusion is a Crown proceeding. The jury have to try the matters of fact - the law being the province of the court. The law of England must govern this as well as every other court. To constitute a right to lands there must be a regular grant with the appendage of the great seal. It is to be regretted that such solemnity has been departed from. The Crown can only make a grant in a formal way and nothing short of the actual possession of the grant can warrant a defence. Local usages must not derogate from the laws of the land neither must they derogate from the prerogative of the Crown. No such local custom as has been stated can be legally existing. The Governor cannot himself make a valid title unless in conformity with His Majesty's Instructions. The instructions of the Crown are not to be dispensed with. The court must not adopt the loose practice that has been regarded in this colony.  It did not appear to His Honour that anything like a legal title had been made out for the defendant. In point of fact the Governor had never given his consent to the bestowment of this ground for the defendant. Neither did it appear that the Surveyor-General had been privy to the transaction. It could not even be looked upon as a licence of occupation the Governor having refused his sanction. [269]   His Honour however adverted to the extreme hardship under which the defendant laid. He had incurred a heavy expense which must have originated in a mistake of the Assistant Surveyor as to the particular instructions given him by the Surveyor-General. But the court had nothing to do with mistakes - only with right and the defendant had no right. But the peculiar hardship of the case the court observed should not pass unnoticed and therefore was recommended to be kept in sight by the jury. The jury retired for three quarters of an hour. Upon their return the foreman recited the following verdict: "The jury specially find that Mr Cooper has obtained possession of the land in question agreeable to the practice hitherto in the colony".  Under all of the circumstances of the case the jury recommended Mr. Cooper to the favourable consideration of the Colonial Government. 