 The humble Petition of the Gentry Merchants Landholders Housekeepers and other Free Inhabitants of His Majesty's Colony of Van Diemen's Land in Public Meeting assembled by the Sheriff Most humbly sheweth - That your Petitioners beg leave to approach your honourable House to express their feelings of unshaken loyalty to His Majesty's Government and attachment to your honourable House in which feelings though so far separated from the Mother Country they are not surpassed by any class of subjects in any part of His Majesty's dominions. [344]  That your Petitioners are desirous of conveying to your honourable House their expressions of unfeigned gratitude for the introduction into this Colony of the privileges which have been conferred under the Act passed in the fourth year of His Majesty's reign entitled "An Act to provide until the 1st day of July 1827 and until the end of the next session of Parliament for the better Administration of Justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land and for the more effectual government thereof and for other purposes relating thereto" under which Act the Inhabitants of this Colony have enjoyed greater protection in their persons and property by the erection of the Supreme Court of Judicature and the partial introduction of Trial by Jury.  That your Petitioners beg most respectfully to impress upon your honourable House that your Petitioners are British subjects and that they have been accustomed to enjoy all the rights and privileges of the British Constitution and whilst your Petitioners express their gratitude for the creation of the means by which these privileges have been partially enjoyed they cannot refrain from conveying to your honourable House their most ardent desire for the perfect introduction of Trial by Jury and a participation through their own Representatives in making those laws and enactments which may be necessary for the future Government of the Colony or for the protection and expenditure of its revenue and although your honourable House did not consider when the Act was passed to grant a Legislative Assembly or a Trial by Jury your Petitioners now cherish the hope that the time is arrived when your Petitioners are not only fit to enjoy such benefits but that your honourable House will be pleased to grant them.  That your Petitioners beg to remind your honourable House that the Colony of Van Diemen's Land was not acquired by conquest and that it is with the sister Colony of New South Wales unlike any other of His Majesty's Plantations inasmuch as it is a British Colony entirely peopled by Britons and governed by British Law alone.  That although the Juries in the Criminal Court composed of seven British Officers and though two Magistrates as assessors in the Civil Court may have acted in every instance with integrity yet your Petitioners admiring the British Constitution cannot consider themselves secure or happy under any Institutions which may be offered as a substitute for them which are not only the pride and birth-right but also the safeguard of every Briton - Trial by Jury and Legislation by Representation. [345]  These the earnest wishes and desires of your humble Petitioners they submit to your honourable House in full confidence that their importance and necessity will obtain that share of consideration from your honourable House which they merit; and from the experience which your Petitioners have had of the paternal regard and solicitude of your honourable House for the prosperity and happiness of His Majesty's subjects your Petitioners entertain the confident hope that your honourable House will not withhold from this Colony of Van Diemen's Land blessings so dear and valuable.  And your Petitioners will ever pray etc.  Without entering upon the consideration of its prospective advantages or future Importance I beg leave to state briefly That the Climate is equally healthy as that of the Cape and New South Wales; that it permits Europeans to labor throughout the day and in every Season of the Year; That according to the Testimony of an experienced Person who accompanied me the Soil is admirably calculated for every Species of Cultivation;  That the Territory is abundantly supplied with fresh Water; And finally that in the Neighbourhood of Swan River there is Safe Anchorage which may easily be converted into one of the finest Harbours in the World.  The above mentioned recommendations point it out as a spot so eligible for Settlement that it cannot long remain unoccupied. It is not inferior in any natural essential qualify to the Plain of Lombardy and as by its position it commands facilities for carrying on Trade with India and the Malay Archipelago as well as with China and as it is moreover favourably circumstanced for the Equipment of Cruizers for the annoyance of Trade in those Seas Some foreign Power may see the Advantage of taking possession should his Majesty's Government leave it unappropriated.  It having been resolved by His Majesty's Govt. to occupy the Port on the Western Coast of New Holland at the mouth of the River called "Swan River" with the adjacent Territory for the purpose of forming a Settlement there His Majesty has been pleased to approve the selection of yourself to have the command of the Expedition appointed for that Service and the superintendance of time proposed Settlement.  You will accordingly repair with all practicable despatch to the place of your destination on board the Vessel which has been provided for that purpose.  As Swan River and the adjacent Territory are not within the limits of any existing Colony difficulties may easily be anticipated in the course of your proceedings from the absence of all Civil Institutions Legislative Judicial and financial.  Until provision can be made in due form of law for the government of the projected Colony the difficulties to which I refer must be combated and will I trust be overcome by your own firmness and discretion.  You will assume the Title of Lieut. Governor and in that character will correspond with this Department respecting your proceedings and the wants and prospects of the Settlement you are to form.  Amongst your earliest duties will be that of determining the most convenient site for a Town to be erected as the future Seat of Government. [83]  You will be called upon to weigh maturely the advantages which may arise from placing it on so secure a situation as may be afforded on various points of the Swan River against those which may follow from establishing it on so fine a port for the reception of Shipping as Cockburn Sound is represented to be; and more effectually to guard against the evils to be apprehended from an improvident disposal of the land in the immediate vicinity of the Town you will take care that a square of three Miles (or 1920 acres) is reserved for its future extension; and that the land within this space is not granted away (as in ordinary cases) but shall be held upon leases from the Crown for a term not exceeding 21 years. You will from the commencement of the undertaking be observant of the necessity of marking out and reserving for public purposes all those peculiar positions within or in the vicinity of the projected Town which from natural advantages or otherwise will probably be essential to the future welfare of the Settlement. In laying the foundations of any such Town care must be taken to proceed upon a regular plan leaving all vacant spaces which will in future times be required for thoroughfares and as the Sites of Churches Cemetries and other Public Works of utility and general convenience.  You will cause it to be understood that His Majesty has granted to you the power of making all necessary locations of land. For your guidance in this respect ample instructions will at a future period be prepared. In the meantime I enclose a copy of the Instructions of the Governor of New South Wales on this subject to which you will adhere as closely as circumstances will admit.  You will bear in mind that in all locations of Territory a due proportion must be reserved for the Crown as well as for the maintenance of the Clergy; support of Establishments for the purposes of Religion and the Education of youth concerning which objects more particulars will be transmitted to you hereafter.  I think it necessary also to caution you thus early as land on the Sea or River side will naturally be the first to be located that you must be careful not to grant more than a due proportion of Sea or River Frontage to any Settler The great advantage to be derived from an easy water communication will of course not escape your consideration and this advantage should be divided amongst as many settlers as can conveniently benefit by their position in the vicinity.  In regard to the surveys and explications of the Country which you may think it right to set on foot it is perhaps premature to give you any instructions upon a point where so much must be left to your own discretion and the intelligence as to the nature of the soil and of the Country which you may obtain on the spot; hooking however to the future c prospects of the Settlement and to the advantages of its local position I should be inclined to think that it will he expedient to make the Country South of Swan River the scene of your labors rather than the tract of Country North of that Stream and that you will do well to invite the Settlers to locate themselves according to this suggestion. [84]  You will endeavour to settle with the consent of the parties concerned a Court of Arbitration for the decision of such questions of Civil right as may arise between the early Settlers and until a more regular form of administering Justice can be organized.  You will recommend by your Counsels and example the habitual observance of Sunday as a day of rest and Public Worship as far as may be compatible with the circumstances in which you may be placed.  With these few and general instructions for your guidance assisted by the oral and written communications which have taken place between yourself and this Department you will I trust be able to surmount the difficulties to which you may be exposed at the outset enhanced though they will be by the want of any regular Commission for administering the Government.  An instrument of that nature accompanied with all the requisite instructions will be transmitted to you as soon as the indispensable forms of proceeding in such cases will allow.  GOVERNMENT ORDER  Colonial Secretary's Office Sydney Oct. 14 1829   His Excellency the Governor directs it to be notified with Reference to the 5th Paragraph of the Government Order of 5th September 1826 No. 35 that the Boundaries of the Colony within which Settlers will be permitted to select Land have been fixed for the present as follows viz. -   On the North[226]  The River Manning from the Sea-Coast Westward to the Chain of Mountains at the Head of that River; and that Chain extending in a general Direction nearly Westward from Mount Royal to a Conical Summit distant four and a half Miles North 46 ° West from the Burning Hill at Wingan and continuing thence Westward by Oxley's Peak and Pandora's Pass to where it is intersected by a Line due North from the Station at Wellington Valley; so as to include all the Streams Valleys and Ravines which descend to the Rivers Goulburn and Hunter.  On the West  The Line above-mentioned to the Station on the Junction of the Rivers Bell and Macquarie at Wellington Valley; thence the Macquarie to the Junction of the Currigurra Rivulet at the North-Western Angle of the County of Bathurst; thence the Western Boundary of that County as described below and a Line in Continuation thereof bearing due South to the Pic of Pabral a remarkable Mountain of a Conical Form; and thence the Mountains of Warragong a lofty Chain which extends first Southward from Pabral and then Eastward.  On the South  The Chain of Mountains extending from Mount Murray the highest Point of Warragong Chain by the Twins two remarkable Pics in the Latitude of Bateman Bay named Tindery by the Natives; and thence an East Line to the Shoal-Haven River at the South-Western Angle of the County of Saint Vincent and that River and the River Murroo according to the County Boundary as described below to the Sea-Coast.  On the East  The Sea-coast from the Mouth of the Murroo to the Mouth of the Manning.  Contents  Thirty-four thousand five hundred and five 34505 Square Miles or Twenty-two Million Eighty-three thousand and two hundred 22083200 Acres.  An Act to provide until the Thirty-first Day of December One thousand eight hundred and thirty-four for the Government of His Majesty's Settlements in Western Australia on the Western Coast of New Holland. 10 Geo. IV. c.22. [346]  Whereas divers of His Majesty's Subjects have by the Licence and Consent of His Majesty effected a Settlement upon certain wild and unoccupied Lands on the Western Coast of New Holland and the Islands adjacent which Settlements have received and are known by the Name of Western Australia: And Whereas it is necessary to make some temporary Provision for the Civil Government of the said Settlement until the said Undertaking shall be further matured and the Number of Colonists in the said Settlements increased; Be it therefore enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors by any Order or Orders to be by Him or them made with the Advice of His or their Privy Council to make ordain and (subject to such Conditions and Restrictions as to Him or them shall seem meet) to authorize and empower any Three or more Persons resident and being within the said Settlements to make ordain and establish all such Laws Institutions and Ordinances and to constitute such Courts and Officers as may be necessary for the Peace Order and good Government of His Majesty's Subjects and others within the said Settlements; provided that all such Orders in Council and all Laws and Ordinances so to lie made as aforesaid shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as conveniently may be after the making and Enactment thereof respectively: Provided also that no Part of the Colonies of New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land as at present established shall be comprized within the said New Colony or Settlements of Western Australia.  II. And be it further enacted That this Act shall continue in force until the Thirty-first Day of December One thousand eight hundred and thirty-four and thence forward until the End of the then next ensuing Session of Parliament and no longer.  By His Excellency James Stirling Esquire Captain in the Royal Navy and Lieutenant-Governor of His Majesty's Settlement in Western Australia:  Whereas His Majesty having been pleased to command that a settlement should forthwith be formed within the territory of 'Western Australia' and whereas with a view of effecting that object an expedition having been prepared and sent forth and in accordance with His Majesty's pleasure the direction of the expedition and the government of the proposed settlement having been confided to me and whereas in pursuance of the premises possession of the territory having been taken I do hereby make the same known to all persons whom it may concern willing and requesting them duly to regulate their conduct with reference to His Majesty's authority represented in me as good and loyal subjects ought to do and to obey all such legal commands and regulations as I may from time to time see fit to enact as they shall answer the contrary to their peril.  And whereas by the establishment of His Majesty's authority in the territory aforesaid the laws of the United Kingdom as far as they are applicable to the circumstances of the case do therein immediately prevail and become security for the rights privileges and immunities of all His Majesty's subjects found or residing in such territory I do hereby caution all to abstain from the commission of offences against the King's Peace or the laws of the realm upon pain of being arrested prosecuted convicted and punished in the same manner and to all intents and purposes as is usual in similar offences committed in any other part or parts of His Majesty's Dominions subject to British law. [257] And whereas for the aids of justice and the preservation of peace I may hereafter see occasion to nominate and appoint a properly qualified person to execute the office of Sheriff of the territory having under his direction responsible individuals filling the offices of High Constable constables bailiffs and surveyors of high ways. And whereas I may hereafter see occasion to issue a commission to certain discreet persons to proceed to the cognizance of offences against the laws; to hear and determine complaints of injury; to commit offenders for further trial to the custody of the Sheriff; and to conduct themselves in the execution of their office according to such mode of proceeding as Justices of the Peace may lawfully adopt; I here command and require that due obedience and respect be shewn to all such persons in their several places and jurisdictions.  And whereas the protection of law doth of right belong to all people whatsoever who may come or be found within the territory aforesaid I do hereby give notice that if any person or persons shall be convicted of behaving in a fraudulent cruel or felonious manner towards the aborigines of the country such person or persons will be liable to be prosecuted and tried for the offence as if the same had been committed against any other of His Majesty's subjects.  And whereas the safety of the territory from invasion and from the attack of hostile native tribes may require the establishment of a militia force which on emergency may be depended on to assist His Majesty's regular troops in the defence of the laws and property of the inhabitants of the territory and moreover the efficiency of such an armed body depending wholly on its organization discipline and preparation for service all male persons whatsoever between the ages of 15 and 50 are hereby required to enrol themselves in the muster roll of the militia of the county in which they may reside and to observe that the days for muster and exercise and the names of the officers whom I may see fit to appoint to command them will be duly notified and that on proof of their disobedience to such officers or of negligent performance of the duties required of them they will be subject in the absence of martial law to a pecuniary fine and to imprisonment until the same shall be liquidated.  And whereas His Majesty having been graciously pleased to confide to me the power to make all necessary locations and to grant unoccupied lands within the aforesaid territory under such restrictions as are or may be contained in the several instructions issued or to be issued to me by authority of His Majesty's Government I do hereby give notice that the conditions and existing regulations under which Crown Lands will be granted will be exhibited to public inspection at the offices of the Secretary to Government and of the surveyor of the territory subject to such alterations and amendments as may from time to time be ordered and all persons desirous of obtaining lands or of becoming settlers for any other purposes in this territory are as soon as may be practicable after their arrival in this settlement to appear at the office of the Secretary to Government and there to make application for permission to reside in the settlement and all persons found at large without having obtained such permission will render themselves liable to be committed to custody and all persons in like manner who may intend to quit the colony are to give a week's notice of their intentions to depart upon pain of being liable to be apprehended and detained and of rendering the master of the ship in which they may be about to depart subject to a fine as set forth by the Port Regulations. [258]   An Act to institute Courts of Requests.  Whereas by an Act of Parliament passed in the ninth year of the reign of His present Majesty intituled "An Act to provide for the administration of justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land and for the more effectual government thereof and for other purposes relating thereto" provision is made for the institution of Courts of Civil Jurisdiction to be called Courts of Requests within this colony by laws or ordinances to be from time to time for that purpose made and enacted and for giving and granting to such courts such power and authority as in the said recited Act is specified.  Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency Colonel George Arthur Lieutenant Governor of the island of Van Diemen's Land and dependencies with the advice of the Legislative Council that Courts of Civil Jurisdiction to be called Courts of Requests shall be holden within this island and its dependencies in and for the several and respective Police Districts of Hobart-town Launceston New Norfolk Oatlands Campbell-town Richmond and Norfolk Plains the extent and limits of which districts shall be defined and made public by a proclamation to be issued for that purpose by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor and that such courts shall be holden at such places within the said respective districts as the commissioner or commissioners of the said respective courts shall from time to time direct and appoint - Provided always that every such court shall be holden for despatch of business on some day in the first week in every calendar month - Provided also that the commissioner of every such court may adjourn the sittings of such court from time to time to such other day or days in the same month as to him may appear necessary or expedient. [127]  2. And be it enacted that each of the said courts respectively shall be holden by a commissioner and shall have such ministerial or other officers as shall be necessary for the administration of justice in the said courts respectively and for the execution of the judgments orders and process thereof and the said ministerial or other officers shall from time to time be appointed to and removed from their respective offices in such manner as the Lieutenant Governor or person for the time being administering the government of this colony shall direct.  3. And be it enacted that the said courts respectively shall have full power and authority to hear and determine in a summary way all actions plaints and suits for the payment or recovery of any debt damages or matter not exceeding ten pounds sterling and to award costs therein.  4. And be it enacted that if any person shall commence and prosecute any action plaint or suit in any such court where the cause of such action plaint or suit shall exceed in amount the sum of ten pounds the said court may proceed therein but in such case the judgment of the said court shall be a full and complete bar to the whole of such demand or cause of action and be a bar to any action plaint or suit which may be brought thereon in the same or any other court whatsoever - Provided that in no case shall the sum awarded exclusive of costs exceed the sum of ten pounds.  5. Provided always and be it enacted that the said courts shall not have power and authority to hear and determine any such action plaint or suit where the matter in question shall relate to the title to any lands tenements or hereditaments or to the taking or demanding of any duty payable to His Majesty or to any fee of office annual rent or other such matter where rights in future may be bound or to any general right or duty any thing hereinbefore contained to the contrary notwithstanding.  6. And be it enacted that the determination and award of such Courts of Requests in all cases within their respective jurisdictions shall be final and conclusive and may be pleaded in bar to any and every subsequent action or suit for the same cause and such determination or award shall and may at the discretion of any such court be carried into execution either by attachment and sale of the goods and effects or by corporal arrest of the party or parties against whom such determination or award shall be made  - Provided always that it shall be lawful at the discretion of the commissioner of any such court to stay any such execution or arrest for any time and from time to time as he may think reasonable and just.  7. And be it enacted that if any action or suit for any debt or sum certain recoverable in any Court of Requests so instituted (not being the balance on any accounts or account originally exceeding fifty pounds) shall be commenced in the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land the plaintiff in such action or suit shall not have or be entitled to any costs whatsoever - And if the judge before whom the same action or suit shall have been tried or heard shall certify that such debt or sum ought to have been sued for in one of the said Courts of Requests then the defendant notwithstanding any verdict or judgment passed or given for the plaintiff shall have and be entitled to his costs and to execution for the same in like manner as if the verdict or judgment had been passed or given in favour of such defendant or if the verdict shall have been in favour of such defendant then he or she shall have and be entitled to double costs. [128]  8. And be it enacted that no order judgment or proceeding in any such Court of Requests shall be quashed or vacated for want of form only nor shall any action plaint or suit or any proceeding therein be removed into the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land by any writ or process whatsoever.  9. And be it enacted that all writs or process issued by any such Court of Requests shall be executed by the proper officer of such court in any part or place of this island or its dependencies and in the same way and manner in all respects as writs or process of a similar nature issuing out of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land are or may be executed by the Sheriff and every such officer shall for the purpose of enabling him to perform the duties of such his office have the same powers and authorities and also be subject to the same liabilities as a Sheriff in the exercise of the duties of his office.  10. And be it enacted that defendants shall in general be summoned only to the courts which shall be held for the districts where they or some of them reside excepting in cases where the cause of action has occurred in another district wherein the plaintiff resides in which last mentioned cases it shall be lawful for the plaintiff if he shall think proper so to do to commence and prosecute his suit in the court which shall be held for the district where he himself resides.  11. And be it enacted that the judgment of any of the said courts may and shall be carried into execution in any district or place whatsoever within the said colony or any of its dependencies where the defendant or any of his goods and chattels may be met with.  12. And be it enacted that each of the said courts shall have such like and the same powers of compelling the attendance of witnesses before such court and of requiring and compelling the production of books and writings as are now possessed by the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land and to order any prisoner who shall be a necessary and material witness in any matter pending in such court to be brought before such court and also that it shall be lawful for any of the said courts to punish in a summary way by fine or imprisonment any person or persons guilty of any contempt before any such court.  13. And be it enacted that in all cases where any defendant shall be charged in execution by any such Court of Requests it shall be lawful at any time and from time to time for the commissioner of such court on the application by or on behalf of such prisoner if it shall appear to be necessary for his or her support or if his or her imprisonment shall appear to be oppressive to order the creditor or creditors at whose suit he or she shall be so imprisoned to pay to such prisoner such weekly sum or sums of money at such times and in such manner and in such proportions as the said commissioner shall direct and on failure of payment thereof as directed the said commissioner shall order such prisoner to be forthwith discharged from custody at the suit of the creditor or creditors so failing to pay the same. [129]  14. And be it enacted that every sheriff gaoler keeper or other officer of any prison or any person whatsoever who shall do any thing in obedience to any legal order of any such court shall be and is and are hereby indemnified for whatsoever shall be done by them respectively in obedience thereto and that if any action of escape or any suit or action be brought against any commissioner sheriff gaoler keeper of any prison or any person for performing the duty of his office in pursuance of this Act such commissioner sheriff gaoler keeper of prison and other person may plead the general issue and give this Act and the special matter in evidence and if the plaintiff be non-suited or discontinue his or her action or a verdict shall pass against him or her or judgment shall be had for the defendant upon demurrer the defendant shall have treble costs.  GEORGE ARTHUR.  Passed the Legislative Council this twentieth day of January one thousand eight hundred and thirty.  W. T. Parramore Clerk of the Council.  Moreton Bay 6 November 1830.  Sir - it is with feelings of unfeigned sorrow that the duty devolves upon me of reporting to you for the information of His Excellency the Governor the melancholy death of Captain Logan late Commandant of this settlement.  The particulars relative to this unfortunate event are nearly as follows:  On the 9th ultimo Captain Logan accompanied by his servant and five prisoners proceeded from Brisbane Town to the neighbourhood of Mount Irwin and the Brisbane Mountain with a view of completing his chart of this part of the colony. It appears that when near the Pine Range the party were attacked by a large assemblage of natives who however on a shot being fired ceased to annoy them. The party then proceeded on their journey and Captain Logan after traversing part of the country was on his return home on the 17th ultimo; when not far from the foot of Mount Irwin he left the party desiring them to proceed to a place he pointed out and where he said he would join them in the evening. From some unfortunate misunderstanding however he was unable to do so and on the 18th the party believing he would proceed immediately to the Limestone station took their departure also to that place where they arrived the following evening. [148]  Finding that Captain Logan was not there as they expected and having seen many natives on the day previous their fears were naturally excited and three of them immediately returned to the place where Captain Logan had left them while the others came here to announce the distressing intelligence.  As we naturally concluded he had fallen into the hands of the natives and hoped he might be a prisoner and alive parties were sent out in every direction to endeavour to meet them: while in the meantime his servant and party found his saddle with the stirrups cut off as if by a native's hatchet about ten miles from the place where Captain Logan had left them in the direction of the Limestone station. Near to this place also were the marks of his horse having been tied to a tree; of his having himself slept upon some grass in a bark hut and having apparently been roasting chestnuts when he had made some rapid strides towards his horse as if surprised by the natives. No further traces however could be discovered and though the anxiety of his family and friends were most distressing hopes were still entertained of his being alive till the 28th ultimo when Mr Cowper whose exertions on this occasion were very great and for which I feel much indebted discovered the dead horse sticking in a creek and not far from it at the top of the bank the body of Captain Logan buried about a foot under ground. Near this also were found papers torn in pieces his boots and a part of his waistcoat stained with blood.  From all these circumstances it appears probable that while at the place where he had stopped for the night Captain Logan was suddenly surprised by the natives; that he mounted his horse without saddle or bridle and being unable to manage him the horse pursued by the natives got into the creek where Captain Logan endeavouring to extricate him was overtaken and murdered.  Mrs Logan having a decided objection to the remains being interred here has requested they may be forwarded to Sydney by the Isabella while she and her family proceed by the Governor Phillip and it being the opinion of both the medical officers here that in tier delicate state of health proceeding without a medical attendant would be attended with much danger I have been induced to sanction Assistant-Surgeon Murray accompanying Mrs Logan as in the present healthy state of the settlement the services of one medical officer can be dispensed with for a short time.  I have etc  J.O. CLUNIE  Captain 17th Regiment.  The Honourable the Colonial Secretary.  Sydney.  Lieutenant-Governor Stirling to Sir George Murray  Perth Western Australia 20 January 1830.  On September 9 I had the honour to announce to you my arrival here and the commencement of this Settlement; I now beg leave to lay before you the following Information relative to its progress since that period its present condition and future prospects.  As soon as the difficulty attendant on landing and housing the establishment was surmounted I caused an exploration of the country immediately in the neighbourhood of the port to be made and two towns to be laid out: one named Freemantle [sic] at the entrance of Swan River: the other Perth about nine miles higher up on its right or northern bank. Allotments in these towns were speedily occupied by the first settlers who arrived in August. and the more diligent among them commenced the erection of temporary buildings. On October I found it necessary to open a district of country for location. In the first instance I selected for that purpose on the banks of the Swan River; and being urged by further applications for hand on November 2 I threw open the country extending between the sea and the mountains fifty miles southward from Perth including the district originally reserved for Mr. Thomas Peel. In these districts the first comers found suitable locations and acting under the impulse of novelty there were many who at once established themselves on their lands regardless of danger from the natives and of the difficulty they encountered in removing their goods from the coast. This adventurous and laudable spirit. which it was politic to encourage I am happy in saying met with no cheek: and single individuals have traversed the country freely at great distances from the towns hitherto without interruption or injury.  In the course of October November and December some ships and many settlers came in. Their arrival before the country could be properly surveyed occasioned great inconvenience. Viewing no evil so great to the settler as delay in assigning to him his hand. I was accordingly forced to grant locations on unsurveyed lands and to determine on the sites of towns without experience of their merits. An evil still greater than these arose from the number of early arrivals on the coast hitherto unsurveyed; its consequence one merchant ship. the Marquis of Anglesa by anchoring in an exposed situation got on shore; and latterly His Majesty's ship Success in coming in without a pilot struck on she rocks and has received damage not irreparable I believe but serious.  The survey of Cockburn Sound is now however complete: and having made arrangements for buoying the channel and establishing proper pilots I hope we shall have no more accidents of that description.  Among the settlers who arrived there were many indentured servants who had been recommended to their employers by parish officers and whose habits were of the loosest description. To control these and to protect their masters in their just rights as well as to secure the safety of persons and property I was obliged before the conclusion of the year to appoint a magistracy and a body of constables; the first from among the most wealthy and prudent of the settlers; the latter including the steady and most respectable part of the working class. [154] To render the decisions of the magistrates more formal I selected a gentleman bred to the law and of moderate temper to act as their chairman and as adviser to the government in matters of law. Since these appointments I am happy in saying there have been fewer irregularities; and as the population of the Settlement is now generally diffused over a large surface and as part have commenced agricultural labour drunkenness and similar evils will be less frequent than when the people congregated in one or two towns with little to do.  The erection of a decent place of worship the regular performance of divine service and the administration of the sacrament on Christmas-day were the last events of the year deserving of notice. To the zeal and energy of the venerable Archdeacon Scott who is still here on his passage to England I owe the furtherance of these great objects.  The explorations which have been effected at the instance of government and by private individuals have put us in possession of knowledge relative to the coast to the extent of seventy miles northward from Rottenest [sic] and ninety miles to the southward of it. In that extent the only discoveries of note are six rivers of no great magnitude and one bar harbour capable only of receiving boats. The land seen on the coast to the northward is represented as indifferent while that to the south is reported to be good. With the country between the sea coast and the hills ten leagues to the north and south of Perth we are well acquainted; and three or four parties having severally penetrated the hilly district beyond the first range to the extent of twenty miles we possess some information relative to its soil and products.  Governor Darling to Sir George Murray  Government House 5 October 1830.  SIR  I am sorry to have occasion to report that the Colony has been a good deal disturbed of late by 'Bushrangers' who have put on a more formidable appearance than heretofore. In the earlier part of the year they infested the Roads about Parramatta and Committed Several Acts of Outrage even in the Neighbourhood of Sydney. The Leaders of two Parties MacNamara and Donahoe who had been long at large were Shot in an encounter with the Police and several Men have been executed.  A Party of from 12 to 15 in Number lately assembled at Hunter's River plundered the Settlers of Horses Arms etc and with difficulty were driven from that part of the Country it having been impossible to come up with them after the first Skirmish in which three Men were Killed from the Circumstance of their being all well Mounted. They directed their Course across the Country towards Bathurst and I am sorry to add that the Men belonging to one of the Establishments in that District about 13 in Number have recently risen and proceeding to the neighbouring Farms plundered them of what was necessary for their Equipment. They are now well Armed and provided with Horses. Parties of Troops and of the Mounted Police were immediately sent in pursuit and the latter having come up with them I regret to say were beaten off and obliged to retire with the loss of two Men and five Horses after a very smart engagement which I am informed continued a quarter of an hour. It is the more to be regretted as an incident of this Nature cannot fail to encourage such of the Convicts as may be disposed to join them in the same degree as it depresses the Settlers. Many of the latter in the first Moments of Alarm quitted their Farms and the Consternation was pretty general. I lost no time in sending reinforcements of Troops to the different Stations and of placing Detachment so as to furnish Guards over the Iron Gangs and Road Parties as should these people rise who are 1500 in number the Consequences might prove of the most serious nature. [229] Our deficiency however at this moment is in a Mounted Force an the Infantry have no chance of coming up with the Bushrangers who seize on fresh Horses whenever they require them. I have therefore made arrangements for immediately augmenting the Mounted Police which at present consists of about 68 Troopers to 100 in the first instance so as to encrease their numbers at the three principal Stations the North West and South to such an extent as will enable them to Act with effect at once in checking any disposition to revolt which may appear on the part of the Convicts.  I am sorry to observe that the Natives have also Manifested a disposition of late to be troublesome. They have Killed Cattle at Several Stations which has hitherto been unusual and have menaced the Settlers on the borders of Argyle and St. Vincent. The almost boundless extent of this Country will render a large Mounted Force necessary should the Natives proceed to the same lengths as at Van Diemen's Land The Accounts which I have received from Lieut. Governor Arthur the particulars of which have no doubt been communicated to you have induced me to place a much larger Force at his disposal than can be conveniently spared from this: but I have made the exertion previous to forwarding the 57th Regiment to India being aware of the importance of the Atrocious proceedings of the Natives being promptly and effectually checked.  I shall do myself the honor to report by the next opportunity the completion of the arrangements which are now making for the Augmentation of the Mounted Police and shall be glad if enabled to inform you that the country has been Cleared of Bushrangers and the Natives have ceased their hostility.  I have &c  RA. DARLING.  His Excellency the Governor directs it to be notified that all Crown Lands will in future be disposed of only according to the Regulations published in the Government Notice of the 1st of last month; and that the following course of proceeding will be observed in carrying the same into effect.  SALE  1. As soon as the necessary arrangements have been completed with respect to the survey of a parish notice will be published in the Gazette that a chart thereof will be exhibited in the Surveyor-General's Office for public information shewing its boundaries the public reserves the lands already appropriated and those remaining for sale; the latter being divided by lines into sections of one square mile or six hundred and forty acres as nearly as practicable and such section distinguished by a numerical mark; together with a schedule pointing out and describing the natural and artificial marks corresponding with the division lines of every such section.  2. Notice will at the same time be given in the Gazette that such lands after the expiration of three months will become disposable. [229]  3. All offers and transactions of every kind relative to such disposable lands must be effected with reference to the before-mentioned public charts and schedules.  4. If any person shall be desirous of purchasing lands so notified as disposable it will be necessary to make application through the Surveyor-General in a printed form copies of which may be obtained on application at his Office on payment of a fee of 2s. 6d. for each.  5. If the spot applied for should contain less than six hundred and forty acres the reasons for the applicant's wishing to obtain it must be fully explained; as it is not intended to dispose of land in smaller quantities unless upon special grounds.  6. All lands for the purchase of which application shall be made will be advertised for one month and will then be sold by public auction to the highest bidder in lots of one section or six hundred and forty acres as nearly as practicable provided that the price offered shall at least amount to the sum of five shillings per acre.  7. But before the bidding is accepted the party will be required to pay down a deposit of 10 per cent on the amount of the purchase money and to sign an engagement to pay the balance within one calendar month under penalty of forfeiting the deposit.  8. If payment be not made within the prescribed period the deposit will be forfeited accordingly and the land will again be open to the selection of the public.  13. The Crown will reserve to itself the right of making and constructing such roads and bridges as may be necessary for public purposes in all lands purchased as above; and also to such indigenous timber stone or other materials the produce of the land as may be required for making and keeping the said roads and bridges in repair and for any other public purposes. The Crown will further reserve to itself all mines of coals and of precious metals.  15. All free persons will be eligible as purchasers of land without any limitation as to quantity.  RETIRED OFFICERS  16. The same advantages will be extended to Officers of His Majesty's Navy and Marines retiring from the service or going on half pay as are held out to Military Officers by the regulations for the disposal of land published in the Government Notice of the 1st of July last viz.: -   17. All Officers desirous of becoming settlers shall like other individuals procure land only by purchase at the public sales; but they will he entitled to a remission of the purchase money according to the respective periods of their service as follows: - Those who have served Twenty years and upwards £300; Fifteen years and upwards £250; Ten years and upwards £200; Seven years and upwards £150. [230]  18. Officers who have not served seven years will have no claim to any advantages under this Regulation; nor will any Officer be entitled thereto unless if Military he shall produce the written permission of the General Commander-in-Chief or the Commander of the Forces in India to go on half pay or to retire from the service for the purpose of settling in the Colony; or if of the Navy or Marines a similar permission from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.  19. All Officers desirous of availing themselves of these Regulations must enter into a bond for £500 that either they or their families will reside in this Colony for seven years.  DISCHARGED SOLDIERS  23. Non-commissioned Officers and Privates discharged from the service for the purpose of settling in the Colony will be allowed Free Grants to the following extent viz. : - Serjeants 200 acres; Corporals and Private Soldiers 100 ditto.  LEASES  24. All Crown Lands within the prescribed limits will if applied for be let by Auction in lots of one square mile or six hundred and forty acres each as nearly as practicable.  25. Persons desirous of renting such lands will address themselves to the Surveyor General taking care to describe accurately the situation of each section applied for.  26. The lands so applied for will be advertised for one month and the lease of each lot for one year will then be put up to Public Auction.  27. No lot consisting of less than one square mile or six hundred and forty acres will be let except in special cases which may render expedient a departure from this rule.  28. Each lot will be put up at a rent of twenty shillings a year and the highest bidding (not less than that sum) will be accepted.  29. It is to be distinctly understood that the lands so let will be open for purchase; and in the event of their being sold must be surrendered by the lessee upon one month's notice.  30. At the expiration of the year the lease of each lot will be again put to Auction for the year ensuing.  By Command of His Excellency the Governor  ALEXANDER MCLEAY.  His Majesty's Government having resolved that the Sums produced by the Sale of Land in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land should be appropriated to the encouragement of the Emigration of Females in those Colonies the Commissioners for Emigration have been directed to publish the following account of the Regulations under which this money will be applied: - 1st. The Commissioners will contribute £8 (which it is supposed will be about one half of the total expense) towards the passage of unmarried Female Emigrants.  2ndly. When Emigrants of the above description and between the Ages of 15 and 30 are Members of Families which are about to proceed to New South Wales or Van Dieman's [sic] Land they will on applying to the Commissioners for Emigration be furnished with Orders payable in the Colony for the above mentioned Sum of £8. This Money will be paid at the option of the Emigrants either to the Heads of their Families or to the Captains of the Ships in which they are conveyed. [41]  3rdly. Females desirous to Emigrate to New South Wales or Van Dieman's Land and not forming part of any family proceeding to those Colonies are required to send in an account of (certain particulars).  If they be between the Ages of 18 and 30 and possess the Funds which would be necessary in addition to the Sum allowed by the Commissioners to complete the price of their Passage they will be admitted as candidates for the Bounty of Government: as soon as a sufficient number of such Persons shall have signified their wish to Emigrate they will be called upon to pay into the Hands of an Officer appointed for that purpose their share of the charge of the Passage and the Commissioners will then take up a Vessel (into which no other Passengers will be admitted) for the conveyance of these Emigrants to their destination.  4thly. . . - preference will be given first to Females Emigrating as described in Par. 2 in company with their Families; and next to those who are qualified to make themselves useful as Servants in a Farmer's Family. Females who may offer to pay a larger proportion than others of the cost of their Passage will also be considered entitled to a preference.  We upon full consideration . . . and of Our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion have in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament of the ninth year of the reign of His said late Majesty thought fit to grant direct ordain and appoint and by these presents do accordingly for Us Our Heirs and Successors grant direct ordain and appoint that there shall be within Our colony of Van Diemen's Land a court which shall be called the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land and We do hereby create direct and constitute the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land to be a court of record.  JUDGES OF THE COURT  The said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall consist of and be holden by and before two judges - of whom one shall be and be called "The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land" and the other shall be and be called "The Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land" - And such judges shall respectively be barristers in England or Ireland of not less than five years standing to be named and appointed from time to time by Us . . . by Letters Patent under Our Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland - And such judges shall hold their offices during the pleasure of Us Our Heirs and Successors and not otherwise.  SEAL OF THE COURT  The said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall have and use as occasion may require a seal bearing a device and impression of Our royal arms within an exergue or label surrounding the same with this inscription "The Seal of the Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land." And the said seal shall be delivered to and kept in the custody of the said Chief Justice.  JUDGES TO HOLD NO OTHER OFFICE  No Judge of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall be capable of accepting taking or performing any other office or place of profit or emolument on pain that the acceptance of any such office or place as aforesaid shall be and be deemed in law de facto an avoidance of his office of judge and the salary thereof shall cease and be deemed to have ceased accordingly from the time of such acceptance of any such other office or place.  JUDGES APPOINTED  We do hereby constitute and appoint Our trusty and well-beloved John Lewes Pedder Esquire to be the first Chief Justice and Our trusty and well-beloved Alexander McDuff Baxter Esquire to be the first Puisne Judge of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land. The said John Lewes Pedder and Alexander McDuff Baxter being respectively barristers in England of five years standing and upwards.  OFFICERS OF THE COURT  There shall be and belong to the said Court the following officers - (that is to say) a Registrar - and another officer to be called the Master and Keeper of Records - and such and so many other officers as to the Chief Justice of the said court for the time being shall from time to time appear to be necessary for the administration of justice and the due execution of all the powers and authorities which are granted and committed to the said court by these Our Letters Patent - Provided nevertheless that no new office shall be created in the said court unless the Governor or acting Governor for the time being of Our said colony shall first signify his approbation thereof to Our said Chief Justice for the time being in writing under the hand of such Governor or acting Governor as aforesaid. [118]  APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS  All persons who shall and may be appointed to the several offices of Registrar or Master and Keeper of Records of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land (or to any offices in the said court whereof the duties shall correspond to those performed by the Master Registrar Prothonotary or Keeper of Records of any or either of Our Courts of Record at Westminster) shall be so appointed by Us Our Heirs and Successors by Warrant under Our or Their Royal Sign Manual - And that all persons who shall and may be appointed to any other office within the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land shall be so appointed by the Governor for the time being of the said colony - And We do further direct and appoint that the several officers of the said court so to be appointed as aforesaid by Us Our Heirs and Successors shall hold their respective offices during Our and Their pleasure And that the several officers of the said court so to be appointed as aforesaid by the said Governor shall be subject to be removed by the said court from their offices therein upon reasonable cause.  REGULATIONS CONCERNING APPEALS  Any person or persons may appeal to Us Our Heirs and Successors in Our or Their Privy Council from any judgment decree order or sentence of the said Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land in such manner within such time and under and subject to such rules regulations and limitations as are hereinafter mentioned (that is to say) - in case any such judgment decree order or sentence shall be given or pronounced for or in respect of any sum or matter at issue above the amount or value of one thousand pounds sterling or in case any such judgment decree order or sentence shall involve directly or indirectly any claim demand or question to or respecting property or any civil right amounting to or of the value of one thousand pounds sterling the person or persons feeling aggrieved by any such judgment decree order or sentence may within fourteen days next after the same shall have been pronounced made or given apply to the said court by petition for leave to appeal therefrom to Us Our Heirs and Successors in Our or Their Privy Council - And in case such leave to appeal shall be prayed by the party or parties who is or are directed to pay any such sum of money or perform any duty the said court shall and is hereby empowered either to direct that the judgment decree order or sentence appealed from shall be carried into execution or that the execution thereof shall be suspended pending the said appeal as to the said court may appear to be most consistent with real and substantial justice. [119]  SECURITY TO BE GIVEN  And (in case the said court shall direct such judgment decree order or sentence to be carried into execution) the person or persons in whose favour the same shall be given shall before the execution thereof enter into good and sufficient security to be approved by the said court for the due performance of such judgment or order as We Our Heirs or Successors shall think fit to make thereupon - or (in case the said court shall direct the execution of any such judgment decree order or sentence to be suspended pending the appeal) the person or persons against whom the same shall have been given shall in like manner and before any order for the suspension of any such execution is made enter into good and sufficient security to the said court for the due performance of such judgment or order as We Our Heirs or Successors shall think fit to make thereupon - And (in all cases) We will and require that security shall also be given by the party or parties appellant to the satisfaction of the said court for the prosecution of the appeal and for the payment of all such costs as may be awarded by Us Our Heirs and Successors to the party respondent - And if such last-mentioned security shall be entered into within three months from the date of such petition for leave to appeal then and not otherwise the said court shall allow the appeal and the party or parties appellant shall be at liberty to prefer and prosecute his her or their appeal to Us Our Heirs or Successors in Our or Their Privy Council in such manner and under such rules as are observed in appeals made to Us from Our plantations or colonies.  SPECIAL APPLICATIONS FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL  And We do hereby reserve to Ourself Our Heirs and Successors in Our or Their Privy Council full power and authority upon the humble petition at any time of any person or persons aggrieved by any judgment or determination of the said court to refuse or admit his her or their appeal therefrom upon such terms and upon such limitations restrictions and regulations as We or They shall think fit and to reverse correct or vary such judgment or determination as to Us or Them shall seem meet.  COPIES OF PROCEEDINGS TO BE TRANSMITTED  And it is Our further will and pleasure that in all cases of appeal allowed by the said court or by Us Our Heirs and Successors the said court shall certify and transmit to Us Our Heirs or Successors in Our or Their Privy Council a true and exact copy of all evidence proceedings judgments decrees and orders had or made in such cases appealed so far as the same have relation to the matters of appeal - such copies to be certified under the seal of the said court. [120]  COURT TO EXECUTE ORDERS MADE ON THE APPEAL  And We do further direct and ordain that the said court shall in all cases of appeal to Us . . . conform to and execute or cause to be executed such judgments and orders as We shall think fit to make in the premises in such manner as any original judgment decree or decretal order or other order or rule by the said Court of Van Diemen's Land should or might have been executed.  GOVERNORS &C TO BE AIDING  And We hereby strictly charge and command all Governors commanders magistrates ministers civil and military and all our liege subjects within and belonging to the said colony that in the execution of the several powers jurisdictions and authorities hereby granted made given or created they be aiding and assisting and obedient in all things as they will answer to the contrary at their peril.  GENERAL PROVISO  Provided always that nothing in these presents contained or any act which shall be done under the authority thereof shall extend or be construed to extend to prevent Us . . . to repeal these presents or any part thereof or to make such further or other provision by Letters Patent for the administration of justice civil and criminal within the said colony and the places now or at any time hereafter to be annexed thereto as to Us Our Heirs and Successors shall seem fit in as full and ample a manner as if these presents had not been made - these presents or anything herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.  Whereas there is at present no provision by law for the continuance in the said newly constituted court of any civil or criminal proceeding which was depending in the said Supreme Court so established by His late Majesty's said Letters Patent at the time of the issue of His present Majesty's said Letters Patent - And Whereas it is expedient that the said Supreme Court so established by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent should have power and authority to continue all and every such civil and criminal proceedings and it is expedient also to make further provision for the effectual administration of justice in the said Supreme Court in the manner hereinafter mentioned - Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency Colonel George Arthur Lieutenant-Governor of the Island of Van Diemen's Land and its dependencies with the advice of the Legislative (Council) that no sentence decree order rule or act of or by the said Supreme Court so established under His late Majesty's said Letters Patent or of or by the Chief Justice thereof shall be deemed by reason of the issue of His present Majesty's said Letters Patent to have been avoided but shall be deemed to have been and to remain in as full force and virtue as if the said last mentioned Letters Patent had not been issued nor shall any action suit cause or civil proceeding or any prosecution or criminal proceeding which was depending in the said Supreme Court so instituted by His late Majesty's said Letters Patent at the time of the issue of His present Majesty's said Letters Patent be deemed by such issue to have been abated discontinued or annulled but the same shall be and be deemed to be respectively subsisting and depending in the said Supreme Court so established by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent to all intents and purposes the same as if they had been respectively commenced brought presented prosecuted or recorded in the said last-mentioned court - And the said last-mentioned court shall proceed accordingly in all such actions suits causes prosecutions and proceedings civil and criminal to judgment or sentence and execution and to make such rules and orders respecting the same as the said Supreme Court so established under His late Majesty's said Letters Patent might have done had not the said Letters Patent of His present Majesty been in fact issued or as the said Supreme Court so established under His present Majesty's said Letters Patent is empowered to make in any cause suit or civil proceeding or any prosecution or criminal proceeding respectively commenced in or before the said last-mentioned Supreme Court and so that all actions process and records of the one court shall be continued in and enforced equally by the other court - And the respective judges thereof and all powers and authorities vested in the said court so established by His late Majesty or in the Chief Justice thereof shall be equally vested in and exercised by the said court so constituted by His present Majesty and the judges thereof respectively - And all Sheriffs Gaolers and other officers and persons whatsoever shall be and they are hereby indemnified for all acts done by them respectively under or in pursuance or by colour of any writ or process whatsoever civil or criminal of or from the said Supreme Court constituted by His said late Majesty or the Chief Justice thereof as fully as they respectively would have been in case the said Letters Patent of His present Majesty had never been issued. 2. And Whereas by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent it is provided that there shall be and belong to the said Supreme Court thereby established the following amongst other officers (that is to say) a Registrar and another officer to be called the Master and Keeper of Records - And it is thereby directed that the persons to be appointed to the said offices shall be so appointed by His Majesty His Heirs and Successors by Warrant under His or Their Royal Sign Manual - And Whereas it is by the said last-mentioned Letters Patent also provided that the Governor or Acting Governor shall yearly on the first Monday of the month of January in each year by Warrant under his Hand and Seal nominate and appoint some person to act as and be the Sheriff of Van Diemen's Land and its dependencies for the year ensuing - And Whereas no such Warrants under His Majesty's Royal Sign Manual for the appointment of a Registrar or Master and Keeper of Records have as yet arrived within this island - Be it Therefore (to prevent delays in the administration of justice in the meantime) Enacted that it shall be lawful for the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being from time to time by Warrant under his Hand and Seal to appoint any person or persons to be respectively the Registrar and Master and Keeper of Records of the said Supreme Court so established by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent - And the persons SO appointed shall respectively be the Registrar and Master and Keeper of Records respectively of the same Supreme Court until the publication within this colony of any such Warrant or Warrants under His Majesty's Royal Sign Manual reappointing them or appointing some other person or persons to the said offices - And all the records papers and documents of and belonging to or received under the authority of the said Supreme Court so instituted by His late Majesty's said Letters Patent shall from and after the passing of this Act remain and continue in the custody of the officers of the said Supreme Court so established under His present Majesty's said Letters Patent duly having the custody of the same respectively and the said records shall be deemed and taken to be equally the records of the said last-mentioned court - And it shall be lawful for the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being by Warrant under his Hand and Seal to appoint some person to be the Sheriff of this island and the person so appointed shall (until a new or other appointment in that behalf shall be made under His present Majesty's said Letters Patent) be and continue to be such Sheriff - And the several persons respectively appointed under His late Majesty'aid Letters Patent to be the Registrar and Master of the said Supreme Court so instituted by His late Majesty's said Letters Patent and the person nominated and appointed under His late Majesty's said Letters Patent and now acting as Sheriff of this island and his several Deputies and officers shall be and they are hereby indemnified for all acts done by them under or by colour of their offices since the issue of the said last-mentioned Letters Patent and before the publication of this Act in the Hobart Town Gazette as fully as they would have been if the said last-mentioned Letters Patent had not been issued. [121] [122]   3. And Whereas by the said Act passed in the ninth year of the reign of His said late Majesty it is provided that in case of the absence resignation or death of any or either of the Judges of the said Supreme Court so established by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent or in case of any such disease or infirmity as shall render any such judge incapable of discharging the duties of his office it shall be lawful for the Governor to appoint some fit and proper person to act in the place and stead of any judge so being absent resigning dying or becoming incapable until such judge shall return to the execution of his office or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty as the case may require - And Whereas Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire the person appointed by  His present Majesty's said Letters Patent to be the first puisne judge of the said newly constituted Supreme Court has not assumed the execution of his office nor has yet arrived within this island by reason whereof and of the non-arrival of such Warrants as aforesaid the said Supreme Court instituted by the said last-mentioned Letters Patent hath been hitherto since the arrival of the same Letters Patent in the colony unable to exercise the several jurisdictions given to and vested in it by the said Act of Parliament of the ninth year of the reign of His said late Majesty and by the said last-mentioned Letters Patent - And Whereas there is no reasonable expectation of the arrival of the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire within any certain short period of time and the most serious injury to His Majesty's government and subjects in this colony is to be apprehended from any further delay in the exercise by the said last-mentioned Supreme Court of its said several jurisdictions - Be it Therefore Enacted that it shall be lawful for the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being to appoint some fit and proper person to act in the place and stead of the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire so being absent until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall assume the execution of his office or in case the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall not at any time come to this island to assume the execution of his said office until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty as the case may require and in the meantime until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall so assume the execution of his office or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty and shall actually enter on the discharge of his office in the said court as the case may be the person to be so appointed by the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being shall to all intents and purposes be and be deemed and taken to be the puisne judge of the said Supreme Court - Provided that in case of the absence resignation or death of any judge so appointed by the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being or in case of any such disease or infirmity as shall render any such judge incapable of discharging the duties of his office it shall be lawful for the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being to appoint some fit and proper person to act in the place and stead of any such judge so being absent resigning dying or becoming incapable until such judge shall return to the execution of his office or until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall assume the execution of his office or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty as the case may be and in the meantime until such judge shall actually return to the execution of his office or the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall so assume the execution of his office or a successor shall be appointed and shall actually enter on the discharge of his office the judge so to be appointed by such Governor or Lieutenant-Governor for the time being shall to all intents and purposes be and be deemed and taken to be a Judge of the said Supreme Court. [123]  4. And Whereas it is necessary that the powers and authorities of the court and the two judges thereof until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall assume the execution of his office or until the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor shall under the authority of this Act or of the said last-mentioned Act of Parliament appoint some person in the place and stead of the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire or of any judge absent resigning dying or becoming incapable or until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter shall assume the execution of his office or until any such judge shall return to the execution of his office as the case may be or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty His Heirs or Successors as the case may require should be vested in and exercised by the single remaining judge - Be it Therefore Enacted that until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall enter upon the execution of his office or until any such judge so appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor as aforesaid under the authority of this Act shall assume the execution of his office or in case of the death or absence of any judge so to be appointed under the authority of this Act or of the said last-mentioned Act of Parliament or any such disease or infirmity as shall render any such judge incapable of discharging the duties of his office and until the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor shall appoint some person in the place of the judge so dying resigning absent or incapable or until the judge so absent or incapable shall actually return to the execution of his office or until the said Alexander MacDuff Baxter Esquire shall assume the execution of his office (as the case may he) or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty (as the case may require) the powers and authority of the court and the two judges thereof shall be vested in and exercised by the single remaining judge and it shall be lawful for such judge to sit and act alone and do every act and thing in as full and ample a manner as both the said judges if assembled and sitting at and in the same court could or lawfully might do. [124]  5. And Whereas by the said Act passed in the ninth year of the reign of His late Majesty it is provided that all issues of fact to be tried on any information or in any action at law in the Supreme Court shall be tried by one or more of the judges in the manner by the said Act particularly provided - And Whereas in order to facilitate the dispatch of business in the said court so constituted by His present Majesty's said Letters Patent it is expedient to provide that both judges may try all such issues separately notwithstanding the engagement of the other judge on other judicial duties at the same time - Be it Therefore Enacted that it shall be lawful for either of the said judges to sit and act upon the trial of all or any such issues of fact notwithstanding that the other judge shall be at the same time sitting and acting upon the trial of other issues of fact elsewhere so as that there may be distinct sittings by and before each judge in civil as well as in criminal cases either at the same place or at different places within this island or its dependencies at one and the same time.  GEORGE ARTHUR.  Passed the Legislative Council this fifth day of September one thousand eight hundred and thirty-one  John Montagu Clerk of the Council  I will dispose of an argument raised under the provisions of the 9th Geo. IV c. 83 which is supposed to give the Supreme Court of this colony a discretion to adopt only so much of the English law as it can apply. Before the passing of this Statute it was laid down in all the authorities and confirmed by the ruling of the King in Council that wherever a new colony is settled by British subjects the laws of the parent country become the laws of the place so far as they are or may be made applicable to its circumstances and condition. The New South Wales Act does not introduce a new principle. It is recognised in the old common law of the colonies and is laid down in Blackstone vol. I p. 107 that "if an uninhabited country be discovered and planted by English subjects all the English laws then in being which are the birthright of every subject are immediately there in force" with the restrictions therein set forth. The laws of England are declared by the Act for settling the succession to the throne to be the birthright of the subject. Let an Englishman go where he will and settle a new country he carries with him all the laws which are applicable to his condition. What laws do or do not apply must necessarily be left to the local authorities to determine always subject to an appeal to the King in Council. Now this principle is affirmed in the Act referred to and is carried no farther. There is a wide distinction between not applying a particular rule of law and creating a new and a different rule - between legislating and expounding. I apprehend therefore that the Act of the 9th Geo. iv is merely declaratory of what the law was before which directs that so much of the statute and common law shall be as can be applied. With respect to the statute law an important point has thus been gained. It is laid down by Blackstone that when a colony is settled the statute law that is Acts of Parliament passed subsequently are no longer applicable unless it be specially named therein; and many cases have been determined upon a decision of the King in Council on this point so far back as 1761. But the 9th Geo. IV c. 83 enacts that the courts here shall apply all the statutes of England and also the common law as the law of the colony up to the passing of the Act; and then goes on to direct that whenever any doubt shall arise as to the applicability to the colony of any law the Judges of the Supreme Court shall declare what laws do or do not apply. Now it is contended that under this statute there is a positive recognition of the power of this court to apply the law only so far as circumstances will admit; and that it may therefore dispense with so much of the law of England as relates to the exclusion of witnesses propter delictum. That however is not the way in which I construe the Act. Where we can apply the law we are to apply it: the Act is as I apprehend merely declaratory; it only places the court on the same footing in which it stood previous to that enactment namely of admitting or rejecting - of declaring what laws do or do not apply - between which and creating a new law I draw a broad line of distinction.  I would first briefly bring to your recollection the fact that there are two Parties into which the Community of New South Wales is more or less divided; these Parties are usually designated Emigrants and Emancipists although the respective Bodies are not confined to that Exact description of Persons for in connexion with the latter are to be found a great number of free Emigrants and generally those who advocate liberal principles. [327] I could not perhaps better convey a right impression of these two Parties than by mentioning the strong interest which is felt in the Colony in all the great events which take place in England and that the Sentiments of the liberal party here are with His Majesty's Government in all those measures of public improvement which they are happily accomplishing. The existance of this general division of Parties in the Colony has been frequently recognised in Parliament and would seem to have formed one of the strongest grounds for departing so widely from the Laws of England in the creation of the Legislative Council composed of fifteen Persons wholly appointed by the Crown and in the Institution of a Jury consisting of seven Military officers By the appointment of the latter His Majesty's Government contemplated and affected the erection of an impartial though not a popular tribunal for the trial of offenders and by reserving the nomination of the Members of the Council it was doubtless proposed to obviate the ill effects which were apprehended from a preponderance of the Emancipist Party if the choice were left to popular Election. It has happened however that the Selection of the Unofficial Members of the Council has been made almost entirely from the opposite side and the official Members being for the most part inclined the same way the evil of legislating for the whole community by means of a Council composed of one Party exists at this moment in full force and is only checked by the power possessed by the Head of the Government to prevent the introduction of any Bills but such as he approves. This power is sometimes ineffectual and it being open to the Members to propose Amendments occasion is offered for party feelings to operate and the consequence of this state of things is that in every question at all partaking of a popular character the unofficial Members with but one exception are usually opposed to it. [...]  The experience I have had during the last Session and the disposition manifested by the Council in certain cases have tended strongly to increase a Mistrust which I had previously formed of the expediency of confiding so much irresponsible power to so small a number of Persons who by combination may at least defeat the objects of Government if they cannot secure their own. [...]  The mistrust of the Legislative Body which is entertained by a large portion of the people including in the number Persons of integrity wealth and industry appears in the numerous publications which issue from the Colonial Press. [...]  I would propose as a partial remedy for the evil complained of to open the doors of the Council Chamber to as many strangers as might he conveniently admitted If I might venture to propose that remedy which under all the circumstances of the case appears to me to be the most free from objection and calculated to afford the greatest relief I would suggest the enlarging by Act of Parliament the present Council to about 24 Members two thirds of which should be elected by the Colonists for the most populous Districts in a given proportion according to the number of the Inhabitants whilst the remaining third and the President should be named by the Crown. At the expiration of four years there should be a new Election and nomination. Professing that a Council so constituted is an approximation only to a representative form of assembly and that it is intended to be temporary in its duration I would confine the eligibility of Members to Persons who had arrived free or were born within the Colony but extend the right of election to all Persons qualified to serve as Jurors. [328]  I do not think that limiting by Act of Parliament the Eligibility of the Candidate in the same way that it is limited in Canada and Newfoundland namely to Persons who had never been convicted of Felony or any transportable Offence would be received with an ill-grace by the generality of the Colonists nor even by the better thinking part of the Emancipists few of whom stand in that relative position to the Electors as to be likely to be returned even if eligible to become Members of the Legislative Council.  An Act to amend an Act of the Fourth and Fifth Years of His late Majesty empowering His Majesty to erect South Australia into a British Province or Provinces. [352] 1 and 2 Vict. c.60. 31st July 1838.  And whereas Doubts have arisen as to the Extent of the Powers vested in the said Colonization Commissioners for South Australia by the said Act and it is expedient that such Powers should be more clearly defined and that the Provisions of the said Act should be amended in manner herein-after mentioned: And whereas it is in and by the said Act provided that it should be lawful for His Majesty His Heirs and Successors with the Advice of His or Their Privy Council to authorize and empower such Persons as therein mentioned to make ordain and establish Laws Institutions and Ordinances and to constitute Courts and to appoint Officers Chaplains and Clergymen and to levy Rates Duties and Taxes as therein mentioned: Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That the aforesaid Powers and Authorities shall be and the same are hereby repealed; and in lieu thereof it shall and may be lawful for Her Majesty Her Heirs and Successors by any Order or Orders to be by Her or Them made with the Advice of Her or Their Privy Council to make ordain and by Warrants under Her or Their Sign Manual (subject to such Conditions and Restrictions as to Her or Them shall seem meet) to authorize and empower any Three or more Persons resident and being within the said Province to make ordain and establish all such Laws Institutions or Ordinances and to constitute such Courts and to impose and levy such Rates Duties and Taxes as may be necessary for the Peace Order and good Government of Her Majesty's Subjects and others within the said province; provided that all such Orders and all Laws and Ordinances so to be made as aforesaid shall be laid before the Queen in Council as soon as conveniently may be after the making and enacting thereof respectively and that the same shall not in anywise be contrary or repugnant to any of the Provisions of the said recited Act or of this Act.  An Act for removing Doubts respecting the application to New South Wales of the Laws and Statutes of England relating to Usury; and to limit and define the rate of Interest which may be recovered in cases where it hath not been previously agreed between the Parties. 5 Will. IV No. 10. [390]  WHEREAS it is expedient to remove all doubts respecting the application to New South Wales of the Laws and Statutes of England relating to Usury and to limit and define the rate of interest for the forbearance pf money which may be recovered in any Court of Law or Equity in cases wherein the rate of interest has not been fixed by the parties before the Court: Be it therefore enacted and declared by His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales with the advice of the Legislative Council thereof That the Laws and Statutes of England relating to Usury shall be deemed taken and adjudged not to extend to the said Colony or its dependencies or to be in force within the same.  II. And be it further enacted That in all cases where interest for the loan of money or upon any other contract may be lawfully recovered or allowed in any action or suit in any Court of Law or Equity but where the rate of such interest hath not been previously agreed upon by or between the parties it shall not be lawful for the party entitled to interest to recover or be allowed in any such action or suit above the rate of eight pounds for the interest or forbearance of one hundred pounds for a year and so after that rate for a greater or lesser sum or for a longer or shorter time.  RICHARD BOURKE GOVERNOR.  1. It being an object of great importance that certain fixed periods should be appointed for the more convenient despatch of public business that these periods should be so arranged as to interfere as little as possible with the interests of the various classes of individuals affected by them I have taken some pains to prepare a plan which should accomplish the purpose; and I now do myself the honor of submitting it to Your Honors very respectfully in the hope that it may meet with your support and adoption.  2. I propose that there shall be a Gaol Delivery at Hobarton on the 1st Tuesday in March in every year: and four other like Gaol Deliveries; to take place on the 1st Tuesday next after the end of each term.  3. There will be thus 5 Gaol Deliveries at Hobarton each year. And I should propose that this arrangement once made should not even occasionally be violated. For nothing would tend more effectually to produce confusion. But circumstances of a very strong and pressing nature might of course occur to render the holding of a Court of Gaol Delivery at some intervening period very desirable. In such cases the rule might then be departed from. I am however after much reflection quite satisfied that 5 Gaol Deliveries holden at the periods recommended will be quite sufficient for all purposes of public justice. Nor whilst we look anxiously to this great object let us forget that there are other considerations not entirely to be lost sight of. [125] A season for rest and relaxation to those engaged in their arduous judicial and professional duties for 10 months out of 12 is an object in my opinion of some moment not only to them but to the community. In the same season the harvest may be reaped and our wool be consigned to the merchant free from the vexations of the lawyer's writ or the intrusions of the constable's subpoena. But if the court is to continue month after month trying prisoners and as a necessary consequence discharging all for whom the Attorney-General is not prepared with his indictment. I can assure Your Honors that much of the other official duty of the individual holding that office must be wholly neglected or very ill and unsatisfactorily disposed of.  4. I further propose that there shall be two Gaol Deliveries at Launceston in each year: to be holden in March and October on the 3rd Monday in each of those months respectively.  5. There will be by this arrangement ample time allowed for disposal of the criminal cases at Hobarton before departure for Launceston and also before the commencement of the next ensuing term - where it is obviously requisite that both judges should be present in Hobarton.  6. It is not within my province to suggest any plan for disposal of the civil business; but I may probably be pardoned for remarking that should Your Honors so think fit civil sittings might be appointed on each of these proposed Launceston Circuits for the Friday succeeding the Monday. For by adhering to the plan of such two half yearly circuits four days for the criminal and two for the civil cases will be found to be amply sufficient. And even should another day or two be required for either class there will still remain a week yet open for them.  7. It would be highly desirable that Courts of Quarter Sessions at Hobarton and Launceston respectively should take place for the trial of convicts by summary jurisdiction on the same days as are thus proposed for the Court of Gaol Delivery: - or at Launceston where I believe there is only one court room on the Saturday previous. All the magistrates and constables would thus be able to act more systematically in prosecuting the cases; by being brought together for the same purpose at one and the same given period. On this subject I have conferred fully with Mr. Howe the Chairman for this side of the island and with the Clerk of the Peace Mr. Ross; to both of whom I am indebted for assistance in discussing and arranging the plan now submitted to Your Honors. And I am authorised to state that in such an arrangement Mr. Howe cordially concurs. By the existing law you are aware there are already appointed four other sittings of these courts; namely in January April July and October. There will thus be frequent trials of all minor cases - and yet no confusion is likely to ensue from so many sittings here; because the summary forms allowed require neither jury nor indictment nor counsel.  8. It is not my intention to propose to His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor that there should be any other than summary cases disposed of in the Court of Quarter Sessions. But in as much as there will be another long period i.e. between the March and October circuits where it might be convenient to dispose of all minor felonies at Launceston. I may probably take the liberty of suggesting hereafter the summoning of a jury there for the trial of such cases at the Quarter Sessions in July. But no such arrangement would of course interfere with the general plan now submitted; but it would on the contrary be in aid of it. [126]  9. I should add that my friend The Solicitor General has also taken a share in the deliberations on this important subject; and that in the main it meets his approbation. He thinks however that to every Hobarton Gaol Delivery sitting there should be appended one adjournment day; wherever practicable - upon which only he would propose to try prisoners - the first day being set apart for arraignments only. I fear that this will be found practicable only on one of the 5 Gaol Delivery days; but whenever it is so I should agree with the Solicitor General.  10. I propose however that at all and each of the Gaol Deliveries for Hobarton and if practicable Launceston - Your Honors will be pleased to permit one adjournment day in case the Attorney or Solicitor-General should apply for such adjournment; to enable him to conclude any cases which from unforeseen circumstances may require such further lime for trial. I see otherwise great reason to apprehend that there will occasionally - quite unavoidably - be cases in which grievous offenders may be discharged untried and escape the just punishment due to their crimes.  Proclamation  By His Excellency Major-General Sir Richard Bourke K.C.B Commanding His Majesty's Forces Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of the Territory of New South Wales and its Dependencies and Vice-Admiral of the same &c. &c. &c.  Whereas it has been represented to me that divers of His Majesty's subjects have taken possession of vacant Lands of the Crown within the limits of this Colony under the pretence of a treaty bargain or contract for the purchase thereof with the Aboriginal Natives; Now therefore I the Governor in virtue and in exercise of the power and authority in me vested do hereby proclaim and notify to all His Majesty's subjects and others whom it may concern that every such treaty bargain and contract with the Aboriginal Natives as aforesaid for the possession title or claim to any Lands lying and being within the limits of the Government of the Colony of New South Wales as the same are laid down and defined by His Majesty's Commission; that is to say extending from the Northern Cape or extremity of the coast called Cape York in the latitude of ten degrees thirty-seven minutes south to the southern extremity of the said Territory of New South Wales or Wilson's Promontory in the latitude of thirty-nine degrees twelve minutes south and embracing all the country inland to the westward as far as the one hundred and twenty-ninth degree of east longitude reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich including all the Islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude aforesaid and including also Norfolk Island is void and of no effect against the rights of the Crown; and that all Persons who shall be found in possession of' any such Lands as aforesaid without the license or authority of His Majesty's Government for such purpose first had and obtained will he considered as trespassers and liable to be dealt with in like manner as other intruders upon the vacant lands of the Crown within the said Colony. [93]  GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL AT GOVERNMENT HOUSE SYDNEY THIS TWENTY-SIXTH DAY OF AUGUST ONE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIVE.  RICHARD BOURKE.  BY HIS EXCELLENCY'S COMMAND  ALEXANDER McLEAY.  GOD SAVE THE KING!  I would propose also to offer to those Settlers who have the means and would prefer to engage by their own Agents Mechanics or Agricultural Laborers a bounty equal or nearly equal to the expence of the passage of such persons provided they are of the Ages and descriptions specified in a Governmt. notice to be issued for the purpose and shall be passed by a Board appointed to examine such Persons upon their arrival. This offer will embrace married couples under thirty years of age and their families and unmarried females between 15 and 30 years who shall come out under the protection of the married couples as forming part of the Family and destined to remain with it until otherwise provided for; and single men between 18 and 25 in the same numbers as the unmarried Females last ment'd. [186] I consider an arrangement of this sort presents the cheapest and most desirable mode of encouraging the Immigration of useful persons. It is clear that the Settlers will import none but those of whose services they are in want and thus all apprehension of a glut in any particular line of business is removed. The expence of Agency in selecting and the maintenance of the Immigrants from their first landing until they obtain Employment is saved to the Public whilst the character of those obtained by private Agency is not likely to be inferior to the character of those brought out by the Agents of Government. It is however improbable that the majority of Settlers requiring labor can afford to incur the expence of Agency or have funds to advance for the passage of Tradesmen or Servants though they would be able to hire them on yearly wages when brought out at the public charge. The arrangement therefore can only be regarded as providing one of the means for supplying the present deficiency of labor in New South Wales; but if in conjunction with it the agency of the Surgeons Superintendents be employed a sufficient supply may be annually obtained.  Colonial Secretary's Office Sydney  28th October 1835.  As a part of the arrangements intended to be adopted with a view to facilitate the introduction into the colony of useful and respectable emigrants from any part of Europe his Excellency the Governor directs it to be notified that a pecuniary aid to the amount and under the conditions hereinafter specified will be granted to those settlers who shall be at the charge of bringing emigrants to Sydney.  1. The sum of £30 will be granted as a bounty towards defraying the expense of the passage of every married man whether mechanic or farm servant and his wife neither of whose ages shall exceed on embarkation 30 years; and the sum of £5 for each of their children whose age shall exceed 12 months. A sum of £15 will also be allowed for every unmarried female whose age shall not be below 15 nor above 30 years who shall come out with the consent of the settler or his agent under the protection of the married couple as forming part of the family and destined to remain with it until such female be otherwise provided for. [186] A bounty of £10 will also be allowed for every unmarried male mechanic or farm servant above the age of 18 and not exceeding 25 years brought out by a settler who at the same time brings out an equal number of females accompanying and attached to a family as hereinafter described.  2. Before any such payments are made the emigrant on whose account they are claimed will be required to present themselves before a board appointed by the Governor to inspect persons of this description to whom the adults are to exhibit testimonials of good character signed by clergymen and respectable inhabitants of note in the places of their former residence with which testimonials it is necessary that every family and single person for whom the bounty is claimed should be provided. If the board shall be satisfied with these testimonials and that the persons presenting themselves are within the ages set forth in the foregoing paragraph to be established by the production of copies or extracts of the registry of their baptism duly certified by the parish minister or other proper officer of good bodily health and strength and in all other respects likely to be useful members of their class in society a certificate to such effect will he granted by the board which being presented at the Colonial Secretary's Office in Sydney a warrant will be immediately issued for payment to the settler of the sum to which he shall become entitled under this notice. In the case of foreigners brought to the colony for the cultivation of the vine or olive or for the manufacture of wine or oil certificates of ages but not of character will be dispensed with.  3. Settlers desiring to avail themselves of any of these bounties are required to transmit to the Colonial Secretary at Sydney on or before the last day of November next a list specifying as nearly as circumstances will permit the number condition and calling of the persons they propose to bring out.  4. It is to be understood that bounties will not be allowed for any persons brought out by settlers unless the claimant shall have transmitted to the Colonial Secretary within the time specified the list required by the foregoing paragraph and that he shall have received in reply an intimation of its being the intention of this Government to grant a bounty on the introduction of the persons described therein. If hereafter it shall be found expedient to renew the arrangement now promulgated due notice will be given from the Colonial Secretary's Office.  5. It is also to be understood that no expence whatever attendant upon the introduction of these emigrants will be defrayed by Government excepting the bounties hereinbefore mentioned; and that the wives and families of soldiers in regiments in this colony or Van Diemen's Land and of persons serving under sentence of transportation in either colony are excepted from the present regulation. [188]  By his Excellency's command  Alexander M'Leay.  Port Phillip.  His Majesty's Government having authorised the location of Settlers on the vacant Crown Lands adjacent to the shores of Port Phillip under the same Regulations as are now in force for the alienation of Crown Lands in other parts of New South Wales and several persons having already passed over there from Van Diemen's Land His Excellency the Governor has been pleased to appoint Captain WILLIAM LONSDALE of the 4th or King's Own Regiment to be Police Magistrate for that district of which all persons concerned are hereby required to take notice.  Arrangements are in progress for effecting the Survey and Measurement of such parts of the Land near Port Phillip as it may be expedient to dispose of in time first instance; but until the same have been completed of which due notice will he given no applications for purchase can he entertained. In the mean time it is distinctly to be understood by those persons who may be desirous of resorting to Port Phillip from other parts of New South Wales or from Van Diemen's Land that no advantage will be obtained by the occupation of any land at that place previously to its conveyance of a legal instrument from the Government of New South Wales as without such title the land (unless required for public purposes) will be subject to be put up for competition at a Public Sale and sold to the best bidder.  By H is Excellency's Command  ALEXANDER McLEAY.  The Petition of the undersigned Members of Council Magistrates Clergy Landholders Merchants and other Free Inhabitants of New South Wales.  To the King's most Excellent Majesty.  Most humbly Sheweth  That your Petitioners being deeply concerned in whatever effects the welfare of this remote portion of your Majesty's Dominions feel it to be their duty on the occasion of the expiration of the existing Act of Parliament and the enactment of a new law for the government of New South Wales with all humility to bring under Your Majesty's consideration some of the chief evils and difficulties they are at present exposed to and which unless averted by the timely interposition of your Royal authority and the wisdom of the National Councils your Petitioners are apprehensive will seriously retard the advancement of the Colony and endanger its best interests. [331]  Your Petitioners beg most humbly to submit to Your Majesty that notwithstanding the Colony exhibits the marks of Agricultural Commercial and Financial prosperity to an extraordinary and unexampled degree this flourishing condition of its affairs is unhappily counterbalanced by a lamentable depravity of manners and by the fearful prevalence of crime arising amongst other causes from the increased and increasing difficulty as the towns become more populous and the community extends over a wider surface of keeping up an effective system of Police for the prevention or punishment of crime and the consequent relaxation of discipline amongst the convict population; from the inadequacy of the means of religious and moral instruction; and more than all from the continual influx of transported criminals without a sufficient number of free emigrants of virtuous and industrious habits to check the contaminating influence and infuse a better tone into society. [...]   That the Legislative Council as at present constituted is in a great measure inoperative from a majority of its members being Government officers from its debates not being open to the public from the members not having power to originate laws and from the presence of the Governor as President which your Petitioners would humbly submit tends to obstruct the free expression of opinion.  That by the provisions of the Colonial Jury Law individuals having undergone sentence of transportation for their crimes and other ignominious punishments as well as persons of bad repute and low standing in society have been placed as Jurors upon the same footing with Magistrates and men of unblemished reputation a measure which your Petitioners are informed was attempted merely as an experiment and the failure of which they have reason to believe is now universally admitted. If they could contemplate the possibility of such a law being not only continued; but extended upon the same principles and rendered imperative in the formation of all Juries both Civil and Criminal as well as in the exercise of the other important functions of a Representative Government their minds would be harassed and borne down by the most gloomy forbodings.  Fully appreciating as they ever must those institutions and privileges which are the soul and essence of the Government of England your Petitioners cannot forget that in England they are based upon the sure foundation of religion and morality. [332] To attempt to carry them into operation by means at variance with these principles appears to your Petitioners to be anomalous and contradictory and must they apprehend be productive of the most dangerous and lamentable consequences. Greatly therefore as they desire to be placed upon the same footing as their fellow-subjects they would humbly submit that it is still questionable whether the Colony is prepared to enjoy the free institutions of Great Britain; many experienced persons being of opinion that that much-wished-for period has not yet arrived whilst those who hold an opposite opinion have proposed no satisfactory basis for the Elective and Representative franchise.  Your Petitioners are sensible that upon the measures that may be now adopted for the Government of the Colony depend their own best interests as well as those of their children. Property life reputation moral and political well-being whatever in short should be dear to men who have been taught to distinguish a rational and well-founded freedom from the disorganizing doctrines which under the name of liberty would subvert the land-marks of social order and confounding all just distinctions sap the foundations of society; all these are at stake.  The Petition of the Free Inhabitants of New South Wales at a Public Meeting duly convened at Sydney in the said Colony on Tuesday the 12th day of April 1836 to take into consideration a Printed Petition to His Majesty and another to your Honorable House now in circulation for signature and to adopt such measures for approval or disapproval of the subject matter of those Petitions as the public interests and safety may require.  To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in Parliament assembled.  Humbly sheweth That your Petitioners also fully admit the truth of the allegation in the Petition to the House of Commons "That the Legislative Council as at present constituted is inadequate to the exigencies of the Colony and has no hold upon the public confidence." [333] But your Petitioners are of opinion that the Legislative Council which is therein proposed as a substitute for the present Legislative Council would from its obvious defects and mischievous tendencies prove still more inadequate unpopular and odious inasmuch as the right of the Governor alone to originate laws on his high and single responsibility his presence and that of the Chief Justice to aid with his eminent knowledge and talents in the deliberations of the Council and the infusion into it of a number of public officers are the only safeguards which the Colonists possess (constituted as the Council now is and as these Petitions still propose it to be wholly of non-elective Members) against a factious oligarchy who already hold it in equipoise and trusting to their secret influence in the Mother Country hope to increase the number and thus to acquire an undisputed preponderance which would have the effect of placing virtually at their disposal the whole power and revenue of the Colony.  That your Petitioners feel strongly on this point that they would infinitely prefer a recurrence to the old despotic form of Government under which the Governor for the time being combined the Legislative as well as Executive authority in his own person either to the present Legislative Council or to the still more numerous and irresponsible Non-elective Council which is thus sought to be introduced in its stead.  That the only safe and effectual remedy for the admitted defects of the present- Legislative Council consists in the establishment of a Representative Legislature upon a wide and liberal basis; and that the wishes and wants of a vast majority of the Free Colonists on this point as well as on other matters affecting their chief interests are fully set forth in their last Petition to your Honorable House presented by Henry Lytton Bulwer Esquire. [...]  That your Petitioners however consider that no necessity has been or can be shewn to justify the exclusion from the rights and privileges of Citizenship of the Freed Colonists upon any other grounds than those of conviction of crime committed in this Colony and bad repute; grounds of exclusion which the Local Legislature has already adopted in the construction of Juries and will doubtless adopt from analogous reasons in the regulation of the elective and representative franchises whenever they shall be extended to the Colony That in the opinion of your Petitioners the aforesaid Printed Petitions have beers got up by a small illiberal party who have long displayed their unbending hostility to the best interests of the Colony for the purpose of inducing His Majesty's Ministers and Your Honorable House still further to delay the granting of those Free Institutions from which we have already been too long debarred under the hope that something may in the meanwhile occur to further their views. [334]  Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honorable House on the expiration of the present Act providing for the Government of this Colony will be pleased to address His Majesty to grant your Petitioners a Representative Assembly upon a wide and liberal basis; or that your Honorable House will be pleased to introduce instead of the present Legislative Council a Legislative Council arid Assembly consisting of not fewer than fifty Members three-fourths of whom to be elected by your Petitioners arid the remaining fourth to be the nominees of His Majesty. And your Petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray.  JOHN JAMISON Chairman.  SYDNEY  28th December 1837  Mr Lord  I had the honour of addressing a letter to your Lordship on the 2nd of September 1835 on the subject of my position as a Judge of this Colony which letter I forwarded on the same day in duplicate to His Excellency Sir R. Bourke for transmission in compliance with the regulations of the Colonial Department. I was afterwards informed by His Excellency that he did forward my letter to Your Lordship one part by the "Spence" which sailed from hence on the 27th October and the other by the "Florentia" which sailed on the 15th November.  Both these vessels arrived in England in due course and therefore I might presume that my letters have reached Your Lordship were it not that I have not been honoured with any notice of it and I am led to an apprehension which I do not entertain without peculiar disappointment and pain based as I have been by the command of his late Majesty at so great a distance from the seat of Government and addressing the head of my Department of a subject of vast importance to myself that my letter was not brought under Your Lordship's notice.  Under this apprehension I have instructed my brother Edmund Singer Burton Esquire of Daventory to lay my case before Your Lordship and to implore in my name for such a relief as may be in your power to recommend Her Majesty to grant me.  It is only necessary therefore for me now to state to Your Lordship that my brother is fully authorised by me to act for me in my absence and that I shall be satisfied with any arrangement he shall assent to on my behalf.  I have the honour to be Your Lordship's obedient servant  W.H. BURTON  Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales.  The further extension of tillage is impeded by the want of labourers; and the very high wages demanded compel those who principally depend on hired workmen in rural occupations to seek the means of employing their capital in pursuits less dependent on the whims and caprices of the labouring class. In consequence of this the raising of wheat will be confined to those families the members of which are sufficient for the work of the farm on which they live; and the higher class of settlers will endeavour to invest their means in the rearing of live stock. The adaptation of this country to the purposes of wheat growing may be however considered as proved beyond all doubt; but this article cannot be profitably cultivated for exportation until there is a greater command of labour. The culture of the vine fig peach and melon tribe has been carried thus early to a considerable extent; and if ever it should be desirable for the mother country to possess a wine-growing colony the soils and seasons of this country afford reasonable ground for anticipating a successful issue to such speculation. [85]  The return of profit on sheep-keeping may be estimated in the gross at 75 per cent. per annum. The rate is undoubtedly higher here where the price of meat is high and the value of land low than it can be in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land. After deducting the expenses of shepherding and allowing a reasonable rent for the land on which the flock is maintained a net profit remains to the owner of about 50 per cent per annum. Such a profit as this combined with the means of extending indefinitely the number of sheep farms must attract to this branch of investment in the course of a few years a large amount of capital. At present the absence of funds within the colony applicable to such purposes and the prejudices which unjustly exist in respect of its capabilities together with the mishaps attendant on the importation of sheep from other places impose obstacles on its extension apart from natural increase.  Horses and cattle may be expected to multiply rapidly from this time forward. In addition to the numbers of the latter stated in the preceding return there are known to exist four or five wild herds in different parts of the colony which have maintained themselves without protection against the natives for several years and are rapidly increasing their numbers.  Looking to the small number of colonists and to the few years they have been established in this country the extent of land in cultivation and the quantity of useful animals in their possession are highly satisfactory. The settlement is now enabled to feel that in less than eight years from its foundation it has arrived at the point of producing its own subsistence and is entirely independent of other places for the support of its inhabitants.  The arts connected with building and agricultural implement making employ a considerable portion of the workmen of the settlement; and it is in consequence better provided with the products of the first-named of those arts than is usual in countries so recently occupied. Many convenient and substantial houses have been erected in the towns and by the employment thereby given to artificers a large number have been induced to remain who would otherwise have quitted the settlement; carpenters masons plasterers blacksmiths painters and other artisans have hitherto received high wages; but some of them are beginning to turn their thoughts to rural occupations in consequence of an anticipated diminution of employment in their proper pursuits. Being usually superior in education and in steadiness of conduct to labourers in general the class to which they belong is one of the most valuable in colonies and therefore it is not to be regretted that a very large sum has been invested in buildings by the outlay of which they have been induced to settle in this country. [86]  Since the earliest discovery of this coast it has been known to abound in various description of fish. The Malays have carried on for at least 200 years an extensive and profitable tripang and tortoiseshell fishery on the north-west coast. Dampier Daudin and King at different periods have reported the existence of astonishing numbers of whales in the adjacent seas; and our own experience since the establishment of the colony and still more recently since whale fishing commenced in its bays about 12 months ago confirms the reports of the earlier navigators. This abundance of fish is probably connected with the existence of a bank which adjoins the shore from the northern to the southern extremity of the colony. On this shoal which extends for 30 or 40 miles from the land and which is composed for the most part of calcareous or coraline substances there exist several varieties of edible fish which admit of being cured for exportation.  The various descriptions of fishery which may be carried on under such circumstances must eventually employ a large amount of capital and a great number of seamen; markets for their produce are open in China as well as in Europe.  At present there are only four whaling establishments or associations; these are not as yet upon an efficient footing but their success has been great enough to ensure their future improvement and extension. The catching of fish for the purposes of food gives profitable employment to a few boatmen; and the convenience afforded in the estuaries for learning in smooth water the art of managing boats seems likely to attract to maritime pursuits a large number of young men.  Boat-building is carried on with much success by two establishments and some of the native woods are found to be well suited to those purposes.  The operations of the miller baker and brewer tanner shoemaker and clothier are in course of improvement and extension; and the community although limited to a very small number of persons suffers no serious inconvenience from the absence of any of the arts and trades which administer to the primary wants of man.  The number of persons exclusively engaged in the civil judicial clerical and military branches of the public service amounts to 160.  In other public offices independent of the government such as printers inn-keepers &c. there are employed about 34; as this description of persons however necessary their labours may be to the general welfare do not contribute directly to the produce of commodities their number together with that of their families must be deducted from the gross population in comparing the productive classes with the products of labour.  The internal consumption of commodities having been of late in a great measure united to the products of the land and the importation of foreign articles having decreased in proportion the mercantile part of the community has had much reason to complain of the want of business in general. [87] The traffic in tea sugar spirits clothing harness earthenware glass and ammunition has been carried on at very high prices and with great profit. Traders being a class of persons whose capital is always available for any speculation which may offer and colonial farmers being always in need of advances the mercantile men in this community possessed of means have frequent opportunities of laying them out to advantage either by monopolizing particular commodities or by giving credits at high interest; they have therefore had their full share of the general prosperity even in the absence of any considerable demand for merchandise. They are at this time looking forward to an increase in the exports of the colony as the probable cause of an extension of business; in the meantime money in proportion to the reasonable demand for it is abundant. A joint-stock bank has been recently established and facilitates the transaction of business. The principles on which it is founded are such as to render it an institution of a most beneficial character while the names of the subscribers as well as the cautious system of management adopted ensure to the public the most judicious and equitable employment of its means. Its discounts on bills are done at the rate of 12.5 per cent per annum and it allows depositors under the usual regulations of savings' banks an interest at the rate of five per cent.  The bills of the Commissariat upon the Treasury have been hitherto negotiated at the rate of 1.5 per cent premium but the demand for them is gradually decreasing and will cease entirely when the value of colonial exports is equal to the value of goods imported unless an increase of population from without extend the demand for imported commodities. Private bills on England are usually subjected to a discount of five per cent and this appears to be a reasonable charge where there are no considerable remittances to be effected.  [...] even those who have the smallest share in the aggregate wealth or indeed no share at all may attain to comparative affluence by their own labour at the present rate of wages &c and it is undoubtedly in the power of the poorest individual who is free from bodily infirmity and from vicious propensities to procure for himself in this country by industry not only the necessaries of life but future  independence of labour.  That the climate is congenial to health as well as to enjoyment there is as yet no reason to doubt; what its effects may be on the constitution and form of the European there has not been sufficient time to ascertain. [88] The children born in the colony appear to be of very rapid growth and possibly may attain to a more slender frame of body than their progenitors; they are in the meantime exempt from many of those diseases which afflict and destroy in childhood so many persons in more rigorous climates. The education of youth for very obvious reasons has not as yet been brought under any systematic arrangement. Elementary schools have been established in the two principal towns to which all are admissable without payment. [...]   The state of morality with exception of a tendency to the excessive use of spirituous liquors amongst certain individuals is very satisfactory. Even of the small number of offences committed against the laws the greater proportion has originated amongst those who have come to this colony from the neighbouring penal settlements. [...]   Civil actions have decreased in number to one half of their former amount within the past year notwithstanding that the redress of injuries has been rendered less expensive in minor cases by the reduction of fees. [...]  Divine service according to the Established Church is attended at Perth by about 200 persons; and in that town as well as in Guildford and Albany there are Independant chapels. [...]  It is deserving of record in this place that since the foundation of the settlement in 1829 to the present date the law has not found occasion to impose sentence of death upon any individual. [...]  At the outset of the colony various circumstances concurred to create an interest in the undertaking and to cause a considerable influx of people; but the actual progress made in its formation for the first three or four years was by no means equal to its apparent growth and the increase in numbers. The face of the country near the sea was uninviting; the losses consequent upon exposure to the weather the want of experience in such adventures and in many cases the want of means gave rise in their several ways to doubt and despondency; very few engaged with spirit in their proper avocations and many left or talked of leaving a place in which there was evidently much to be done and borne before success could be attained. In the meanwhile there were no returns coming in from the land nor money to pay for imported articles; the necessaries of life were at enormous prices and the funds of the settlers were generally exhausted in their own support instead of being applied to the advancement of their farms and business. The disappointments experienced within the colony affected its reputation in other places and a stop was put for a time to further immigration. [89] To complete the catalogue of difficulties conflicts with the natives were continually occurring and too often ended in the loss of property and life.  I have had occasion to mention incidentally in Despatches addressed to Yr. Lordship that I had thought it necessary to go from hence to Port Phillip in the month of March last for the arrangement of various matters connected with the successful occupation of that remote part of this Government. I delayed making any specific report of what I observed during my visit or directed to be done in consequence of it until I could forward a Map of the Country over which I travelled. By the kind assistance of Captain King of the Royal Navy who accomnpanied me on the tour I am now enabled to transmit a sketch of the ground adjacent of the waters of Port Phillip extending inland in a northerly direction to Mt. Macedon the nearest point of Major Mitchell's late survey with which it is thus connected. [95] To the Country thus described which when more accurately defined hereafter will probably form a County of a large size I have at the desire of the Residents permitted my name to be attached on the Manuscript awaiting His Majesty's gracious allowance before publication takes place. If Your Lordship thinks well of having this Sketch added to the Map of the Colony which I presume Major Mitchell is about to publish in London I have to request he may be informed on the subject.  I have now to acquaint Your Lordship that I found on my arrival on the spot selected for a settlement by Mr. Batman on the banks of the Yarra River at the head of the Inland Sea called Port Phillip an assembled Population consisting of from sixty to seventy families. The situation appearing to be well chosen I directed a Town to be immediately laid out which Your Lordship will perceive by the Map has received the name of Melbourne. Conceiving it to be an object of some importance to enable the families I have mentioned to place themselves with as little delay as possible on property of their own I directed 100 allotments to be measured and offered for sale at Melbourne on the first of this month. I also directed a few allotments to be put up in Williams Town on the shore of Hobson's Bay where stores and Commissariat Establishments are likely to be soon formed. I have not yet received an account of the sales but I have no doubt the allotments are readily purchased at advanced prices.  I found at the beginning of March last that the population in the whole district exceeded 500 souls and before I left Melbourne at the end of that month the flocks which had been sent from V.D.'s Land numbered more than 100000 sheep. The Country which I traversed by the routes marked blue on the sketch is of a varied description but generally the pasture may be described as superior in quality to the average of the Districts of New S. Wales which have been earlier settled. It is not for the most part well watered but the general character of the Country is such as to render it a very desirable position for Settlers whether Graziers or Agriculturists and there is I think little doubt of its soon becoming the resort of Emigrants from Europe as it is now one of those Inhabitants of Van Diemen's Land who find it difficult to extend their possessions or to establish their families to their liking on the Land remaining for selection in the Colony. [...]  As there is thus but little doubt that this Settlement will increase rapidly in numbers and wealth it becomes of some importance to consider in what way its Government can be best administered and the Inhabitants obtain the benefit of the essential Institutions of Civil Society. [96]  With respect to Government I apprehend that the great distance between Sydney and Melbourne whether the communication be by land or water will render it extremely difficult for some time at least to keep up those frequent references upon ordinary as well as important subjects which are required to be made to the seat of Government. The distance by land exceeds 550 miles and the route passing for nearly 400 miles through a country as yet but little traversed or known the time required to accomplish it on Horseback can hardly be taken at less than ten days. A passage by water may be effected in steam vessels in about four days; but the Steamers to encounter in winter the sea on the Eastern and Southern Coast of New South Wales must be of considerable size and power and the Establishment of such will not I imagine be attractive to private speculation until the new settlement has made so considerable a progress as to create a commercial intercourse of some importance between the two places. But it may be further observed that the vicinity of Launceston in V.D.'s Land to Port Phillip seems to point out the former as the mart to which the Inhabitants of the latter will for some time resort. To keep up therefore a regular intercourse between the Districts of Port Phillip and Sydney it would be necessary for the present to Establish Govt. Steam vessels. The expence of these would be very heavy and it is for consideration whether to diminish the necessity for frequent intercourse by the appointment of a Military Officer as Lieut. Governor or Commandant with Civil as well as Military Authority will not be a preferable expedient. To a Functionary of this character all the officers of Government at Port Phillip and in the Sothern [sic] Districts might be required to report and receive his orders and the authority for their proceedings whilst periodical Reports should be made on his part to the Government at Sydney.  With respect to legislation I do not consider that the appointment of a Lieut-Governor would render necessary a separate Council or assembly for the Southern Districts of New South Wales. There would be no great inconvenience in requiring the attendance at Sydney for the Session of those who might be appointed or elected Members of the Colonial Legislature.  With respect to the administration of the Law Your Lordship will perceive by my the annexed Letter of the Attorney General that he proposes an addition of a fourth Judge to the Bench of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in order that one of the four may be available for holding assizes twice a year at Port Phillip and discharging the other duties both there and in Sydney which he describes. The arrangement proposed by Mr. Plunkett would probably be sufficient for some time without the institution at Port Phillip of Quarter Sessions or a Court of Requests. But to provide with regularity a passage between Sydney and Melbourne for the Judge and attendants on the Court it would be necessary to establish the Government Vessel to which I have alluded in a former paragraph of this Despatch and on which subject I have the honor to address Your Lordship a separate Despatch by this opportunity under another cover. [97]  The Expense which it may be necessary to incur under the proposed arrangement is detailed in an annexed Schedule and submitted for consideration. I imagine the whole charge for Port Phillip may for some time be defrayed by the Sale of Land within the districts and the receipt of duties of Customs. The latter for the Quarter ending the 5 January last amounted to £329.  In my Despatch of the 15 Septr. last No. 101 I informed your Lordship of the measures I had adopted for opening to location the district in question and of the appointments I had made from hence for the purpose. I found when at Port Phillip that the Police Magistrate Captn. Wm. Lonsdale late of the 4th Foot had conducted the varied duties of his station with great ability and zeal and that through his activity and discretion the comfort of the settlers and the preservation of good order in the district had been fully provided for. I found also that great kindness and attention had been paid to the Aboriginal Natives both by him and the Missionary Langhorne. I have given to them both every assistance in my power and I indulge a hope notwithstanding some unfortunate occurrences that the intercourse between these natives and the white Population of Port Phillip will be carried on with greater benefit to the former than has hitherto been experienced in other parts of the Colony.  I have not had occasion to make any material addition to the Establishments of Port Phillip reported in my Despatch of 15 Septr. last. Additions both to the fixed and contingent charges will however be unavoidable as the Settlement encreases in numbers. The expenditure on account of the Settlement from the occupation by this Government in October last to the close of the year amounts to about £3000 and has been defrayed from the Revenue of Crown Lands to which Revenue it is probable the Sale of Crown Lands situated within the District will hereafter make a considerable addition I propose to put such lands up to Sale as soon as the necessary surveys are completed.  TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED; [101]  THE humble PETITION of the undersigned Members of Council Magistrates Clergy Landholders Merchants and other Free Inhabitants of New South Wales  RESPECTFULLY SHEWETH;  THAT although the Colony of New South Wales as regards its Agriculture Commerce and Revenue presents an aspect of extraordinary and unexampled prosperity yet apprehending the best interests of this community to be threatened with serious danger which a timely enquiry may avert your Petitioners feel it to be their duty on the occasion of the expiration of the existing Act of Parliament and the enactment of a new Law for the Government of the Colony humbly to submit for the consideration of your Honourable House a statement of the principal evils they are at present exposed to and the grounds of their apprehensions for the future.  Your Petitioners would in the first place entreat the attention of your Honorable House to the fearful increase of crime that has of late years taken place in this Colony....  Your Petitioners would in the next place beg to advert to the existing Colonial Law for the regulation of Juries in the Supreme Court and in the Courts of Quarter Sessions; by the provisions of which law individuals who have undergone sentence of transportation and other ignominious punishments as well as persons of bad repute and low standing in society have been placed upon a footing with Magistrates and Colonists of the highest respectability.  That if persons who have undergone punishment for their crimes and of bad repute be entitled to sit as Jurors the same reasoning carried a step farther would render them eligible as Judges - a proposition revolting to every right feeling and too monstrous to be for a moment entertained.  That the law in its present shape was passed through the Legislative Council in opposition to the votes and conscientious opinions of the most experienced and independent members; and as your Petitioners are informed was intended merely as an experiment the failure of which they have reason to believe is now fully admitted by the supporters of the measure.  That one of the obvious and natural effects of this law is to encourage crime by the facility it affords to the guilty to devise plans for ensuring acquittal; whilst its operation on the other hand as regards innocent persons might be such as your Petitioners tremble even to think of were its pernicious tendency not restrained by the right which is still left in criminal cases to the party upon trial to demand a Jury of military officers. And your Petitioners would humbly submit that if the law be continued upon the same principle as at present and extended to all cases both criminal and civil it will necessarily have the effect of deterring men of character from investing capital or becoming settlers in the Colony and prove a manifest injustice to the emigrant and the native-born inhabitants and to all persons of respectability of whatever class; who will thus be virtually deprived of the right of trial by their peers in cases involving property reputation liberty and life; and that too in a community in which perjury is of every-day occurrence. [102]  Your Petitioners would entreat your Honourable House to bear in mind that from the facility of acquiring wealth in New South Wales by dishonest and disreputable practices the possession of property affords but slight proof of good character; a state of things which your Petitioners are of opinion must necessarily prevail so long as transportation is continued unless an entire change in the management and discipline of the convicts can be effected which under the present circumstances of the Colony they conceive to be hopeless and almost impracticable.  Your Petitioners would therefore humbly submit that if it be proposed to confer free institutions upon this Community property ought not to form the sole standard for the regulations of the elective and representative franchises.  [signed by:]  6 Members of the Legislative Council.  57 Justices of the Peace.  4 Clergymen including the principal Chaplain of the Colony.  5 Solicitors of the Supreme Court.  355 Landholders Merchants and other Colonists.  427 Total.  1. . . . All issues of fact whether in civil or criminal proceedings shall be tried and all damages recoverable in any actions at law after judgment by default or upon demurrer (other than damages usually assessed or computed by the court or some officer thereof) shall be assessed before the Judge of the Supreme Court by a jury to consist of twelve persons who shall be subject to such and the like rules and manner of proceeding as are observed upon the trial of any issue of fact joined in Her Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster so far as the same may not be specially provided for in this Act.  2. Every man (except as hereinafter excepted) between the ages of twenty-one years and sixty years residing within the Province and who shall have within the Province in his own name or in trust for him real estate of the value of fifty pounds clear of all incumbrances or a clear personal estate of the value of at least one hundred pounds sterling shall be qualified and liable to serve on juries for the trial of any such issues joined in the said court as aforesaid.  3. The clerk to the magistrates or (during a vacancy in that office and not otherwise) some other person or persons to be appointed for that purpose by the Governor for the time being to act during such vacancy shall immediately after the passing of this Act and on or before the twentieth day of November in this present year and on or before the first day of January in every succeeding year prepare or cause to be prepared lists of all men liable to serve on the juries setting forth their Christian and surnames residences titles additions and qualifications according to the form annexed to this Act and the said clerks to the magistrates or other person or persons to be appointed during and on account of such vacancy as aforesaid shall subscribe the said list with a declaration that each such list contains to the best of his knowledge and belief the names of all persons liable to serve on juries and qualified according to the provisions of this Act.  4. The jury lists so to be prepared as aforesaid shall within three days after the same shall be prepared be affixed to such conspicuous places in the Province as the Sheriff for the time being shall for that purpose from time to time appoint together with a notice signed by the clerk of the magistrates or (during such vacancy as aforesaid) by such other person or persons so to be appointed as aforesaid stating that the Justices of the Peace of the Province will hear at a special sessions directed to be held for that purpose as hereinafter mentioned all objections to the said lists: [165]  Provided always that the said clerk of the magistrates or (during such vacancy as aforesaid) such other person or persons so to be appointed as aforesaid shall keep the original lists and copies of the same to which the inhabitants of the said Province shall have access at any reasonable time within fourteen days after the days of such notice without fee in order that due notice may be given of names improperly omitted or inserted.  5. A special sessions shall be held on the twelfth day of December in this present year and in the third week in the month of January in every succeeding year at which the said clerk to the magistrates shall attend and produce the lists so prepared and verified as aforesaid and thereupon the justices so assembled shall examine such lists seriatim and shall strike out of such lists the names of all persons not liable to serve or disqualified from serving as jurors as also of such as are disqualified by deafness blindness or mental infirmity and shall insert all names improperly omitted and correct all errors and mistakes in such lists and finally settle the same and the said lists when so settled shall be final and shall continue in force for the current year: Provided always that if any question should arise respecting the striking out or adding of a name the same shall be decided by ballot. .  8. As soon as the said lists shall be settled as aforesaid the same shall be immediately transmitted by the said justices to the Sheriff and the Sheriff upon receiving such lists shall within three days after the receipt thereof in each and every year cause to be transcribed fairly in a book to be kept in his office for such purpose and to be styled the "Jurors' Book" the names of all persons contained in such lists respectively with the addition of their respective residences titles and qualifications in alphabetical order beginning under each letter of the alphabet with the surname of each person and such jurors' book shall thereupon be and continue in force for the current year and until the jury lists for the year next ensuing shall be transcribed by the Sheriff into the jurors' book.  9. And to the end that all persons liable to serve on any such juries as aforesaid may bear an equal share of the public duty imposed on them: - Be it further enacted that as often as a writ of venire facias shall be delivered to the Sheriff requiring him to summon jurors for the trial of any such issues as aforesaid the Sheriff shall and he is hereby required to summon all persons not being on the special jury list as hereinafter provided whose names shall be transcribed in such jurors' book according to the order in which such names shall successively be placed until every such person shall have been summoned in his turn: And in case any such person shall make default every such defaulter shall be summoned a second time or oftener until he shall have served for such default or defaults and such order shall be observed every succeeding year the Sheriff beginning with the names of the persons in the last book who were last summoned to attend to such juries as aforesaid. . .  II. If any person duly summoned as a juror as aforesaid shall make default or fail to attend the said court (upon proof on oath of such person being duly summoned as aforesaid) every such person shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty pounds at the discretion of any Judge or Judges of the said Court to be levied and appropriated in like manner as all other fines and forfeitures under this Act unless some just cause for such defaulter's absence shall be made to appear by oath or affidavit to the satisfaction of the said court. [166]  12. At the sitting of the said court for the trial of any such issue as aforesaid the name addition [scil condition] and place of abode of each juror summoned as aforesaid shall be written on a separate piece of paper or card and put into a box and when such issue is called on to be tried the chief clerk or other ministerial officer of the court shall in open court draw therefrom until twelve men appear who are not objected to or challenged and after the trial such names shall be returned to the box to be kept with the other undrawn names and toties quoties as long as any issue shall remain to be tried.  13. When a cause appointed to be tried by a common jury shall be called on and a sufficient number of jurors summoned to attend such court shall not be in attendance it shall be competent to either party to the cause to pray a tales and the court or judge may then command the Sheriff or his deputy forthwith to summon as many good and lawful men of the bystanders (being qualified and liable as jurors as aforesaid) as shall be sufficient to make up a full jury for the trial of such cause as aforesaid.  14. Every juror who shall attend the said court to try civil issues in pursuance of such summons as aforesaid shall be entitled to receive for every day during his attendance upon the said court a compensation for his expenses at and after the following rates (that is to say) for every jury upon which such juror shall actually be called and set the sum of one shilling.  17. In every case wherein a jury shall have been granted as aforesaid for the trial of any issue or issues if either of the parties plaintiff or defendant shall make application to the court stating his desire to have the said issue or issues tried by a special jury constituted as is hereinafter more particularly described for the trial of such issue or issues between the said plaintiff and defendant [sic].  18. Every man described in the said juror's book as an esquire or person of higher degree or as a Justice of the Peace or as a merchant (such merchant not keeping a general retail shop) or as a bank director or possessing real estate of the value of five hundred pounds or personal estate of the value of one thousand pounds shall be qualified to serve on special juries for the trial of issues in the Supreme Court as aforesaid. .  Be it enacted by His Excellency John Hindmarsh Knight of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order Captain in the Royal Navy Governor and Commander-in-Chief of His Majesty's Province of South Australia and its Dependencies by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof that there shall be and His Excellency the Governor by and with the like advice doth erect create constitute and establish a Court of Judicature to be called the Supreme Court of the Province of South Australia.  2. That such court shall be holden before a judge of the said court to be called the Judge of the Supreme Court of the Province of South Australia (Sir John William Jeffcott Knight being appointed by His Majesty the Judge of the said Province for the purpose of holding and presiding in the said court) and that from time to time hereafter upon death vacancy or resignation the Judge of the said Supreme Court shall be appointed by His Majesty His Heirs and Successors save as hereinafter mentioned and that such court shall also have all such ministerial and other officers as shall be necessary for the administration of justice in the said court and for the due execution of the judgments decrees orders and processes thereof. [168]  3. That the numbers names and duties of such ministerial and other officers shall from time to time be fixed and defined by the Judge of the Supreme Court with the consent of His Excellency the Governor of the Province for the time being by and with the advice of the Council thereof and that the appointment and removal of such officers in case of misconduct shall be vested in the Judge for the time being of the Supreme Court.  4. That the Judge of the Supreme Court shall receive such reasonable salary as the Lords of His Majesty's Treasury for the time being shall from time to time order and direct and that the salaries of the ministerial and other officers aforesaid shall from time to time be fixed by the Judge of the Supreme Court with the consent of the Governor for the time being and the Council of the Province and that such salaries shall be in lieu of all fees or other emoluments whatsoever it being the intent of this Act that the Judge of the Supreme Court and the ministerial and other officers appointed by virtue of the same shall derive no emolument from any fees which may be made payable under the authority of this Act but that such fees shall and they are hereby directed to be accounted for and paid by the person receiving the same to the Treasurer of this Province for the general purposes thereof on or before the 31st day of March the 30th day of June the 30th day of September and the 31st day of December in every year.  5. That the Judge of the Supreme Court shall from time to time as occasion may require be removed by His Majesty His Heirs and Successors and by no other authority and that His Majesty His Heirs and Successors shall in that case appoint another fit and proper person in the place and stead of the judge so removed Provided that in case of the absence resignation or death of such judge or of such disease or infirmity as shall render any such judge incapable of discharging the duties of his office it shall be lawful for the Governor for the time being of the said Province by and with the advice of the Council of the said Province to appoint some fit and proper person to act in the stead of such judge so being absent resigning dying or becoming incapable until such judge shall return to the execution of his office or until a successor shall be appointed by His Majesty as the case may require and in the meantime the person so appointed as last aforesaid shall be deemed and taken to be and shall be acting Judge of the said Supreme Court.  6. That the said Supreme Court shall have and use a seal bearing a device or impression of the Royal Arms within an exergue or label surrounding the same and with the following inscription: "Supreme Court South Australia" and that the said seal shall be kept in the custody of the Judge of the Supreme Court for the time being.  7. That the said court shall be a Court of Record and shall have cognizance of all pleas civil criminal and mixed and jurisdiction in all cases whatsoever as fully and amply in this Province and its dependencies as His Majesty's Courts of King's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer at Westminster or either of them lawfully have or hath in England: And the said court shall also be at all times a Court of Oyer and Terminer and Gaol Delivery in and for the said Province and its dependencies and the said judge so appointed or hereafter to be appointed as aforesaid shall have and exercise such and the like jurisdiction and authority in this Province and its dependencies as the Judges of the said Courts of Kings Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer or any of them lawfully have and exercise and as shall be necessary for carrying into effect the several jurisdictions powers and authorities committed to the said Supreme Court. [169]  8. That the said Supreme Court shall be a Court of Equity in this Province and its dependencies and shall have power and authority to administer justice and to do exercise and perform all such acts matters and things necessary for the due execution of such equitable jurisdiction as the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain can or lawfully may within the realm of England and all such acts matters and things as lawfully can or may be done by the said Lord High Chancellor within the realm of England in the exercise of the jurisdiction to him belonging.  9. That the said Supreme Court shall be a Court of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction with full power to grant probates under the seal of the said court of the last wills and testaments of all or any of the inhabitants of this Province and its dependencies and of all other persons who shall die and leave personal effects within this Province or its dependencies and to commit letters of administration under the seal of the said court of the goods chattels credits and all other effects whatsoever of the persons aforesaid who shall die intestate or who shall not have named an executor resident within the said Province or its dependencies.  16. That the Governor for the time being and the Council of the said Province (with the exception of the Advocate General and Crown Solicitor) shall constitute a court to be called the Court of Appeals of the Province of South Australia which court shall have power and authority to receive and hear appeals from the judgments decrees orders and sentences of the said Supreme Court in whole or in part in all cases where the sum or matter in issue shall amount to one hundred pounds and shall or may affirm alter or reverse the said judgments decrees orders or sentences in whole or in part or dismiss the said appeal with costs as may be just Provided also that upon every appeal to be brought before the said Court of Appeals from any judgment of the Supreme Court founded upon the verdict of a jury of twelve men the said Court of Appeals shall not reverse alter or enquire into the said judgments except only for error of law apparent upon the record.  The public mind seems most fixed at the present moment on the subjects of Assignment Transportation and Immigration or in other words on the means of obtaining labor. That the sudden withdrawal of Assigned servants would be fatal to the prosperity of the Colony seems to be the impression of nearly everyone; and I must confess that I cannot help in great measure partaking in this opinion although there is not as I believe your Lordship is aware any bias in my mind in favor of forced labor. [174]  So long as the demand for labor created by the influx of Capitalists continues at the present rate the supply afforded by means of Immigration alone must I think be found deficient.  There are men who looking rather to their own immediate wants than to the ultimate good of the Country are desirous either to confine within very narrow limits the number of women and children to be brought out in Emigrant ships or to seek for a supply from India or from China; and a meeting on this subject is I believe to be held in Sydney on the 25th instant. I am very happy that I have received your Lordships instructions on the subject of Immigration from India as this means of supplying labor would if carried to any extent be fraught in my opinion with evils of the highest magnitude.  I am of opinion that the general jurisdiction of the Supreme Court should remain untouched but that its strength should be increased by the addition of a fourth judge who should have and exercise the like powers as are conferred by the 9th Geo. IV Cap. 83 upon the other judges of the court. This addition appears to have been recommended by the late Governor Sir Richard Bourke and sanctioned by Her Majesty's Government. [75] Had it been intended not to institute Circuit Courts and not to provide for the due administration of justice at Port Phillip as a dependency of New South Wales I should have thought such an addition to the strength of the Supreme Court unnecessary; but in the events contemplated of instituting Circuit Courts and making provisions for that new settlement I am decidedly of opinion that such addition is necessary. By means thereof the Supreme Court would be enabled to hold more frequently than at present criminal sessions to be holden in Sydney for the trial of offences committed within the County of Cumberland the most populous and thickly settled part of the colony. These sessions might be holden six times a year or oftener if necessary to keep the gaols of the county clear. For this duty the judges by arrangement amongst themselves might take their turn in like manner as is now adopted in practice in the ordinary criminal sessions of the Supreme Court; or the duty might be assigned chiefly to one as exigencies or experience might from time to time point out. I would propose that the proper residence of all the four judges should be in Sydney except when absent on judicial duty in the provinces or dependencies. I object on principle to the fixed residence of the judge in any of the provinces or dependencies on two main grounds first the tendency of local attachments and prejudices to fetter the judge in the discharge of his duties a vital incident of which is unshackled independence of mind and freedom from external influence; and secondly the tendency to be feared of a want of uniformity with the decisions in different tribunals upon similar questions; these disadvantages would be guarded against by a course of rotation of duty amongst the four judges who in their turn might act in the provinces with freshness of mind and be possessed of the knowledge of business and the combined experience of the college (if I may so express myself) of which he is a constituent member. By the adoption of this measure I am now of opinion that there would be no necessity for the institution as in my former letter I had suggested of a Recorder's Court for Sydney and the County of Cumberland; a court which upon reflection I think would not be so satisfactory to the public mind as a court held by one of the Judges of the Supreme Court who would have the advantage of ready access to and conference with his brother judges in cases of doubt and difficulty arising in the course of judicial duty. By reason of the frequent sittings of the criminal session of the Supreme Court thus proposed the Court of Quarter Sessions might be greatly relieved of the heavy cases often brought within its cognizance by a partial transfer of them occasionally to the superior tribunal.  With respect to the form and manner of proceeding in the Supreme Court I am of opinion that the institution of the Grand and Petty Jury system in the administration of criminal law should be adopted constituting such gentlemen as are now eligible as special jurors to be qualified to act as grand jurymen both in Sydney and on circuits.  I would also recommend that the trial in the Supreme Court of civil issues of fact should in all cases in Sydney and in the Circuit Courts be determined by a jury of twelve inhabitants instead of by a judge and two assessors as now in practice.  I do not recommend any alteration in the judicial establishment for the administration of the Equitable Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court inasmuch as it would involve considerable additional expence in the creation of new ministerial officers and would not be satisfactory to the public. [76] I would still leave to all the Judges of the Supreme Court the Equitable Jurisdiction now inherent in the court the duty of presiding in the Equity Court to devolve upon any one judge as at present by arrangement amongst themselves giving to the suitors the power as now exercised of appealing to the Full Court from the decision of the single judge. If the office of Equity Judge were instituted without any right of appeal and he were called upon to confine himself exclusively to this branch of jurisdiction the public might sustain injury in the event of illness absence incapacity or other causes of the judge devoting himself exclusively to equity business by which whilst on the one hand he could not relieve his brethren nor on the other be relieved by them. The advantage of an appeal by this arrangement will then be greater to the suitors than at present for there will then be a right of reference to three new minds instead of two under the present constitution. An appeal of this kind will not only prevent dissatisfaction to the suitors but probably prevent appeals to England.  In order to relieve the present able and intelligent Chief Clerk from much of the labour now devolved upon him as Acting Master both in Equity and at Common Law I would recommend that the judge's clerks should be called upon to discharge for each of the judges when sitting alone in Sydney or on circuits respectively the duties of Clerk of Arraigns Associate and Marshal and that for such purposes they should be deemed Clerks of the Supreme Court and be subordinate to the Chief Clerk. To these officers I would give an addition to their present salaries of £100 per annum in consideration of the additional duties which would he thus cast upon them. By this arrangement the new appointment of a Master in Chancery would become unnecessary for it would relieve the Chief Clerk of all court duty and enable him to pay more attention to the higher functions of his office.  The Act of the Legislative Council by which the proposed alteration in the constitution of the Supreme Court should be effected ought to contain a power enabling the judges to introduce into the practice of the court all the various improvements now in force in the courts at Westminster by Act of Parliament relating to pleadings both at Law and in Equity.  This Act should confer upon His Excellency the Governor the power of nominating the fourth judge until the pleasure of the Crown should be made known.  Courts exercising summary jurisdiction not contemplated by the Imperial Parliament have by several successive local enactments grown up and have been at length established by the local Act 3 Will. IV No. 3; to which a summary jurisdiction has been granted and a power to inflict different degrees of punishment; which however beneficial under proper restraint in its operation and necessary in a colony constituted as New South Wales yet as the authority for instituting them may be questionable it is proper to point attention to the subject in order that if necessary legal sanction and confirmation may be obtained. [...] [101]  From (section 19 of 4 Geo. IV c. 96) it would appear to be the clear intention of the Imperial Parliament to confine the summary punishment of convicts to Courts of Quarter Sessions. However an Act was passed by the local Legislature 6 Geo. IV No. 5 on the 8th of February 1825 giving to the several and respective Justices of the Peace power and authority in a summary way to take cognizance of all and every complaint made against any male offender for misbehaviour or disorderly conduct during his term of transportation &c. and to sentence to a public treadmill not exceeding 10 days by whipping not exceeding 50 lashes solitary confinement on bread and water not exceeding 7 days or confinement and hard labour not exceeding three months.  On the 25th of June 1828 was passed the statute 9 Geo. IV c. 83 which came into effect in the colony on the 1st of March 1829.  This latter statute in so far differed from that which preceded it as that it did not in its provisions confer the summary jurisdiction on the Courts of Quarter Sessions but authorized the Governor to do so by Ordinances to be made with the advice of the Legislative Council. But no authority was given to confer the summary jurisdiction on any other persons.  On the 19th of February 1829 an Act was however passed by the local legislature (10 Geo. IV No. I.) reciting the statute and that it would take effect on the 1st of March 1829 and making provision for the exercise of the summary jurisdiction of the Courts of Quarter Sessions then existing to the full extent of the terms of the 19th Section of the expired Act and then proceeded to provide (sec. 2.) "That in cases where any Court of General or Quarter Sessions should not be appointed to be holden within one week after complaint should be preferred against any such offender as aforesaid at any place not more than 20 miles distant from the place at which the offence should be charged to have been committed then in every such case all and every the powers authorities and jurisdiction in the said Courts of General or Quarter Sessions should be and were thereby vested in any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace."  Another local Act the 11th Geo. IV No. 13 was also passed 20th May 1830 which enacted that any two or more Justices of the Peace assembled and sitting in open court within any part or place of the colony and in certain cases one Justice should have and exercise the like summary jurisdiction power and authority over felons and offenders as Courts of General and Quarter Sessions.  And finally By the local Act 3 Will. IV No. 3 passed 24th August 1832 a Court of Petty Sessions was established to be holden before any two or more justices and authority given to such justices and in some cases to one Justice to take cognizance in a summary way of such offences and defining the punishments to be inflicted.  Courts of Quarter Sessions have been established having the summary jurisdiction thus authorized and also the general jurisdiction exercised by Courts of Quarter Sessions in England in criminal cases and holding their sessions at eight places within the colony viz. Sydney Parramatta Campbell Town Windsor Liverpool Penrith Maitland and Bathurst.  In the exercise of their summary jurisdiction the courts try without the intervention of a jury and sentence to corporal punishment and to various terms of imprisonment with or without hard labour and transportation extending to life to penal settlements for all offences not punishable by death. That the courts should have cognizance of all such offences I do not dispute; but I would suggest the propriety of restricting the measure of punishment to be inflicted by them on a summary proceeding; which should not exceed three years - imprisonment with hard labour in an ironed gang or seven years transportation; which would leave offences of such a character as to demand a higher measure of punishment to be tried by a jury.   25. The Acts of Council tenth George the Fourth number seven third Victoria number ten and sixteenth Victoria number thirty-six so far as they relate to the election nomination and appointment of a Chairman of Quarter Sessions shall be repealed and it shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council by commission to appoint the Judge of any District Court to be the Chairman of any Court of General or of Quarter Sessions to be holden within the limits of the District for which he shall have been appointed and every such Chairman shall be the sole judge at the trial of all criminal issues in such courts and in all matters relating to any information filed therein for any felony or misdemeanor and all such Courts of General and Quarter Sessions shall possess jurisdiction in respect of all crimes and misdemeanors not punishable with death anything in any law or statute to the contrary notwithstanding. [108]  Although he is equally termed a chairman in the District Courts Act sect. 25 the judge's functions and authority differ considerably from those of a Quarter Sessions chairman; for the latter is only the presiding justice among two or more justices - whereas the former in criminal cases at least is the sole judge; constituting therefore in effect the court itself. At the trial of any criminal issue consequently the justices have literally no jurisdiction. So that as to such cases the effect of holding the 4th section of the 16th Vic. to be still in force would be virtually to change the constitution of the court for the particular occasion to re-vest in the justices their ousted authority by the mere act of their choosing a chairman for themselves in the judge's absence; and thus although temporarily only to set up again a tribunal for the trial of prisoners which the legislature unquestionably intended for that purpose practically to abolish. [...]  The circumstances of the colony are now such that either separate Commissioners must be appointed to several Courts of Requests in different parts of the colony or else some other provision must be made for the determination in a summary way of the subject matters of the jurisdiction of these courts.  At present one Commissioner who is a barrister of considerable standing performs the whole duty of the several Courts of Requests throughout the colony performing circuits for that purpose. He complains however and with reason of the increased and laborious duties of his office and represents correctly "that notwithstanding the considerable increase in the number of places in which courts are now to be holden that increase by no means satisfies the present exigencies of the colony". He recommends "to satisfy the public exigencies of the community that the duties of the court in which he presides be restricted to Sydney and the County of Cumberland and that Courts of Requests be established in every district without the County of Cumberland in which a Police Magistrate is stationed".  In his views to this extent the judges [have] expressed their concurrence. But as to the mode in which the Commissioner proposed to meet the exigency they did not concur; nor is it possible for me to express my individual concurrence. He proposes in short to attach a Court of Requests jurisdiction to the several Police Magistrates throughout the territory: a measure which I feel assured the Commissioner could only have recommended from an opinion that its recovery in a pecuniary point of view might lead to its adoption whilst a system causing any considerable addition of expense would not be entertained. [109]  The legal acquirements of the present Commissioner are such as to have caused the performance of his very laborious and useful duties to be most satisfactory to the judges and to the public: and I cannot recommend that the administration of justice even in the Courts of Requests should be committed to persons less skilled in the law. Although the hearing and determination of cases in the Courts of Requests is summary yet for the determination of questions which daily arise legal knowledge is as necessary as in the higher courts; the same law is to be administered in both; and the same questions may arise although in the one case to be determined summarily and without appeal; from which if any argument can be raised it would appear to me to be more in favour of the Commissioner being a person possessing competent legal knowledge than the other way.  Respecting the several Police Magistrates throughout the territory I would express myself of them with all proper respect; but I must at the same time unequivocally deny their competency to act as Commissioners of Courts of Requests.  I admit however that the mere jurisdiction of a petty civil debt court would not give occupation to the Commissioner in any place; and I so far agree with the Commissioner's principle as to be of opinion that it is only by uniting a criminal and civil jurisdiction in one person that the provision for both can be effectively or economically provided for. But if an arrangement could be made in which these should be united then ample employment could be found for an effective magistrate in several districts of the colony in which it is now necessary to hold both Courts of Quarter Sessions and Courts of Requests.  Neither the Courts of Quarter Sessions nor Courts of Requests as at present constituted being ambulatory possess the same advantages in the administration of justice as a stationary District Court would possess having a criminal and civil jurisdiction united. The union of the Chairmanship of the Quarter Sessions with the Commissionership of the Court of Requests would be a considerable improvement upon the present system; and the most economical which could be devised; since it would afford full employment for a gentleman of adequate legal knowledge; and would afford an adequate remuneration being attached to the office: it must be wanting however in the advantages of a stationary court. And I think that a court constituted similarly to the Courts of Resident Magistrates at the Cape of Good Hope in which a criminal and civil jurisdiction are united would be found more beneficial.  I proceed now to the consideration of the establishments necessary for the administration of justice in Port Phillip.  For the trial of capital offences and the determination of important civil causes I conceive that for some considerable time it will be quite sufficient that a circuit court should be holden at Melbourne for this dependency thrice in two years or once in eight months by one of the Judges of the Supreme Court. In order to provide for the other wants of the community in that important settlement I would confer upon the Court of Quarter Sessions already established there jurisdiction for the trial of all crimes and misdemeanors not capital although of a nature not ordinarily cognizable at Quarter Sessions such as forgery and perjury.  The system of grand and petit juries should be established and the Sessions should have the power of stating special cases for the opinion of the Supreme Court at Sydney wherein questions of peculiar importance and difficulty might arise. The court should have the power of making rules of practice for the conduct and dispatch of business subject to disallowance by the Supreme Court. The Chairman of the Quarter Sessions should unite in his person the office of Commissioner of the Court of Requests having cognizance of all causes where the amount of the debt or damages sought to be recovered does not exceed £50. Excepting cases where the title to land should actually and bona fide come in question. In the administration of this office he should be assisted by two assessors and in case of difference of opinion the voices of the majority should determine the verdict which should be entered as the verdict of the whole court. The court should be holden so often as occasion might require and power given to the Commissioner to establish a scale of fees subject to the approval of the Governor. The Commissioner should have power to grant new trials in cases where the damages recovered exceed the amount of £10 and in such last mentioned cases he should have the power of reserving any question of law at the instance of any dissatisfied suitor by stating a special case setting forth the facts in a compendious manner for the decision of the court and transmitting the same for the determination of the Supreme Court the party praying such case to be stated to undertake to pay the costs of the reference if the point or points raised should be determined against him or her by the Supreme Court. The Commissioner should have the power of making rules and regulations for the conduct and dispatch of business in his court subject to disallowance by the Supreme Court.  By reason of the distance of the settlement at Port Phillip from Sydney which would practically shut the inhabitants out of the benefits of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in certain cases I would authorize the judges to appoint the Commissioner of the Court of Requests or such other person as they might deem fit from time to time as occasion might require to exercise the power of issuing process in the Supreme Court for arresting a defendant under the Imprisonment for Debt Act and subject to the provisions thereof; the power of hearing and determining insolvencies and doing all other acts which might be done by a judge under any Insolvent Act the power of taking depositions and examinations in all causes at common law or equity or in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction depending in the Supreme Court the power of issuing injunctions to stay waste the power of issuing the write ne exeat colonia and the power of granting administration. [134]  Sir George Gipps to Lord Glenelg  Government House  19 Decr. 1838.  MY LORD  In my Despatch of July 21 last No. 115 I brought under your Lordship's notice a long list of atrocities committed both by and on the Aborigines of this Country; and I then stated that I had despatched a party of Mounted Police in search of some white men who were supposed to have put to death in cold blood not less than twenty-two helpless and unoffending Blacks; it is now my painful duty to inform your Lordship that seven of the perpetrators of this atrocious deed having been convicted on the clearest evidence suffered yesterday morning the extreme penalty which the law awards for the crime of murder.  The Act for which these men have paid the forfeit of their lives took place on the evening of Sunday June 10 last at or near a Cattle station belonging to a person of the name of Henry Dangar distant perhaps 350 miles from Sydney in a direction due North on the banks of the Myall Creek. This Creek is a branch of the Big River which is supposed to fall into the sea at Shoal Bay in about Lat. 29 d. S.; but your Lordship is aware that this part of the Country is so little known that it is impossible to fix the spot with any degree of precision. On the banks of the Big River there are several Cattle stations besides that of Mr Dangar; and it appeared on the trial that for some weeks previous to June 10 not less than fifty Blacks of all ages and sexes had been living at these different stations (but mostly at Mr Dangar's) in perfect tranquillity neither molesting the Whites nor being themselves molested by them. In consequence of some old quarrels however or possibly from accounts having reached the place of occurrences in other quarters a determination seems to have been formed by the white men to put the whole of the Blacks to death. On the afternoon of Sunday June 10 a number of them suddenly surrounded the place where more than thirty of the Blacks were assembled; they tied them all to a rope in the way the Convicts are sometimes tied in order to be taken from place to place in the Colony marched them to a convenient spot about a quarter mile off and put them all with the exception of one woman and four or five children deliberately to death. The following day Monday June 11 the same white men scoured the Country on horseback endeavouring to find ten or twelve of the Blacks who having left Dangar's station on the morning of the 10th. had escaped the massacre. These ten or twelve persons have never been seen or heard of since and it is doubtful to this day whether they were not overtaken and murdered also.  The first account of these deeds of blood reached Sydney about the end of the month of June. I despatched with as little delay as possible a Stipendiary Magistrate (Mr Day) on whose activity and discretion I could rely and a party of Mounted Police in search of the Murderers; and Mr Day after an absence of 53 days reported to me in person that having come unexpectedly to the Cattle station of Mr Dangar he had succeeded in capturing no less than eleven out of the twelve persons who were known to have taken part in the massacre. [61] When Mr Day arrived as the spot some few scattered human bones only were visible great pains having been taken to destroy the whole remains of the slaughtered Blacks by fire; but undeniable evidence was procured of more than twenty human heads having been counted on the spot within a few days after the day of the massacre; and the best accounts lead me to suppose that the number of persons murdered of all ages and both sexes was not less than 28.  The eleven persons apprehended by Mr Day all arrived in this Country as Convicts though of some of them the sentences have expired. The twelfth man or the one who has escaped is a free man a native of the Colony named John Fleming.  The eleven men were all brought to trial on November 15 on an information lodged against them by the Attorney General containing nine Counts. The first four County charged them in various ways with the murder of an Aboriginal Black named Daddy the only adult male who could be identified as one of the murdered party; the five other Counts charged them (also in various ways) with the murder of an Aboriginal male Black name unknown. The Jury on this occasion acquitted the whole of the Prisoners.  The Attorney General immediately applied to have them detained on the further charge of murdering the women and children none of whom had been comprehended in the first Indictment; and this being done seven of these men on the 27th of the same month (November) were again brought before the Supreme Court on the charge of murdering a child. [62] On this occasion the first five Counts charged them simply with the murder of an Aboriginal Black Child; other Counts described the Aboriginal Child by the name of Charley. The Attorney General laid this information only against seven of the Prisoners instead of the whole eleven in order that they might have the opportunity of calling the other four if they chose to do so as witnesses in their favor but which they did not do. [...] The seven men were on Novr. 29. put on their trial for the murder of the child and found Guilty on the first five Counts which described the Child merely as a Black Aboriginal; but were acquitted upon the Counts which charged them with the murder of a Child named Charley sufficient proof of the name of the child not being adduced.  The Report of the Judge (Mr Justice Burton) who presided at she trial was received by myself and the Executive Council on Friday the 7th instt when no mitigating circumstances appearing in favor of any of them and nothing to shew that any one of them was less guilty than the rest the Council unanimously advised that the sentence of the law should take effect on them; they were accordingly ordered by me for Execution and suffered yesterday morning at 9 o'clock.  It will be satisfactory to your Lordship to hear that the smallest doubt does not exist of the guilt of the men who have been executed or of their all having been actively engaged in the massacre. The whole eleven would indeed I have reason to believe have pleaded guilty at the first trial if not otherwise advised by their Counsel. After condemnation none of the seven attempted to deny their crime though they all stated that they thought it extremely hard that white men should be put to death for killing Blacks. Until after their first trial they never I believe thought that their lives were even in jeopardy.  Colonial Secretary's Office  Sydney 10th September 1839.  Port Phillip.  Her Majesty the Queen having been pleased to command that Charles Joseph La Trobe Esquire shall be appointed Superintendent of the Settlement and District of Port Phillip His Excellency the Governor directs it to be notified that a Commission containing such Appointment has been issued accordingly under the Great Seal of the Territory and the prescribed Oaths have been this day administered to his Honour in the presence of the Governor and the Executive Council.  The District of Port Phillip will comprise that portion of the Territory of New South Wales which lies to the south of the thirty-sixth degree of south latitude and betwen the one hundred and forty-first and one hundred and forty-sixth degree of east longitude; within those limits his Honor the Superintendent will exercise the powers of a Lieutenant Governor and all Officers of the Government and others are hereby required to render him obedience and respect accordingly.  His Excellency cannot allow Captain Lonsdale to be relieved from the duties with which he has been hitherto charged as the chief organ of the Government at Port Phillip without availing himself of the opportunity to express publicly the sense he entertains of the ability zeal and success with which that Officer has performed those duties and labored to develope the resources of that important Settlement under the peculiar difficulties attending its first formation and very rapid progress. [101]  The services of Captain Lonsdale however will still be retained to the Government and the Public in his capacity of Police Magistrate for the Town and District of Melbourne.  By His Excellency's Command  E. DEAS THOMSON.  In a Colony like Demerara where land is used for scarcely any purpose but cultivation and cultivation too of the most expensive sort the theory might perhaps be practically applied; but to a pastoral country like Australia it is evidently altogether inapplicable. It may be essential however here to observe that wherever land is of a quality or in a locality which renders it fit for cultivation as in districts of superior fertility or in the neighbourhood of Towns it is usually divided into much smaller lots than Sections of Square miles; such smaller divisions are called "Cultivation allotments" the word Section being made use of only for grazing land and they are made to vary from 20 to 320 acres. [228]  When in the neighbourhood of large Towns as Melbourne they are called "Suburban allotments".  But if the theory by which it is sought to make persons cultivate lands in Australia in the natural order of their advantages be altogether incapable of good that which would seek to prevent the dispersion of the People is only incapable of mischief because it is utterly impossible to reduce it to practice. As well might it be attempted to confine the Arabs of the Desert within a circle traced upon their sands as to confine the Graziers or Woolgrowers of New South Wales within any bounds that can possibly be assigned to them; and as certainly as the Arabs would be starved so also would the flocks and herds of New South Wales if they were so confined and the prosperity of the Country be at an end.  The time will come if the Colony continue to prosper when it may be more desirable (that is to say profitable) for a proprietor to improve the land he holds so as to make its produce suffice for his increasing flocks than to seek (as is the present practice) for new lands in distant regions; but it may perhaps be wiser to let this time arrive naturally as it will than to attempt to accelerate it by any contrivances.  An Act to provide for the better Government of South Australia. 5 & 6 Vict. c.6£ (30th July 1842.)  WHEREAS an Act was passed in the Fifth Year of the Reign of His late Majesty intituled An Act to Empower His Majesty to erect South Australia into a British Province or Provinces and to provide for the Colonization and Government thereof: And whereas an Act was passed in the Second Year of the Reign of Her present Majesty intituled An Act to amend an Act of the Fourth and Fifth rears of his late Majesty empowering His Majesty to erect South Australia into a British Province or Provinces: And whereas it is expedient that the said Acts should be repealed and that Provision should be made for the better Government of the said Colony; be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That the said Acts shall be repealed.  IV. [355] And be it enacted That no Person or Persons convicted in any Court of Justice in Great Britain or Ireland or elsewhere shall at any Time or under any Circumstances be transported as a Convict to any Place within the said Province.  V. And be it enacted That it shall be lawful for Her Majesty by any Commission or Commissions to be by Her Majesty from Time to Time issued under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom or by any Instructions under Her Majesty's Signet and Sign Manual to be from Time to Time issued with the Advice of Her Majesty's Privy Council to constitute within the said Colony a Legislative Council consisting of the Governor and of Seven other Persons at the least which Legislative Council shall be authorized to make Laws for the Peace Order and good Government of the said Colony; and it shall be lawful for Her Majesty by any such Commission or Commissions or Instructions as aforesaid either to appoint such Councillors by Name or otherwise to provide for the Selection and Appointment of them as to Her Majesty shall seem meet; and it shall also be lawful for Her Majesty in manner aforesaid to prescribe all such Rules and Orders as to Her Majesty shall seem meet respecting the Tenure of the Offices of such Councillors and respecting the Course and Manner of Proceeding to be by the said Legislative Council observed in the Enactment of Laws and respecting the Transmission of such Laws for the Confirmation or Disallowance of Her Majesty or the Reservation of them for the Signification of Her Majesty's Pleasure and respecting the Effect of any such Disallowance or Reservation all which Rules and Orders shall within the said Colony have the Force and Effect of Law until the same shall have been revoked or altered by Her Majesty in manner aforesaid.  VI. And be it enacted That it shall be lawful for Her Majesty by any such Commission or Commissions or Instructions as aforesaid to convene a General Assembly to be elected by the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the said Colony in such and the same Manner as if this Act and the said recited Acts had not been passed and to authorize the Governor for the Time being of the said Colony with the Advice and Consent of the said General Assembly and of a Legislative Council to be by Her Majesty for that Purpose appointed to make Laws for the Peace Order and good Government of the said Colony or it shall be lawful for Her Majesty in manner aforesaid to constitute a General Assembly for the Purposes aforesaid consisting of a single House of General Assembly alone which one House of General Assembly shall be composed in such Proportions as to Her Majesty may seem meet of Members to be nominated by Her Majesty and of other Members to be elected by such Freeholders or other Inhabitants; and it shall be lawful for Her Majesty by any such Commission or Commissions or Instructions as aforesaid to establish such Rules and Orders as to Her Majesty shall seem meet for the Nomination or Election of the Members of the said General Assembly as the Case may be and to determine how and where such Election shall be holden and for that Purpose to divide or to provide for the Division of the said Colony into Electoral Districts and to determine what shall be the Qualification of the Persons so to be elected and of the Voters at any such Elections and to regulate all other Things for which it may be expedient to provide in order to the Meeting of any such General Assembly; and it shall also be lawful for Her Majesty by any such Commission or Instructions as aforesaid to reserve to the Governor of the said Colony the exclusive Right of initiating all Votes of public Money in such General Assembly and to establish all such Rules and Orders in reference to any Laws to be made by the said General Assembly as are herein-before mentioned in reference to any Laws to be made by the said Legislative Council. [356]  XI. And be it enacted That in the event of any such General Assembly being so convened as aforesaid it shall be lawful for Her Majesty by any such Commission or Commissions or Instructions as aforesaid to reserve and set apart from Her Majesty's Revenue arising within the said Colony such an annual Sum of Money by way of Civil List as may be necessary for the Maintenance and Support of the Civil Government and the Administration of Justice within the said Colony provided that the same shall in no Case exceed the annual Sum or Sums that shall have been previously assigned for the said Purposes by the Legislative Council aforesaid by and with the Approbation and Consent of Her Majesty and likewise such further annual Sum or Sums of Money as shall be required for Payment of the Interest or Annuities herein provided for or any Portion thereof or the Interest on any such Debenture or Debentures as aforesaid that may be issued under the Provisions of this Act and which said several Sums shall be reserved issued and applied at such Time or Times and in such Order and Manner as Her Majesty shall by such Commission or Instructions authorise and direct.  XII. And be it enacted That this Act shall come into force and take effect within the said Colony from a Day to be for that Purpose appointed by the Governor of the said Colony by a Proclamation to be by him for that Purpose issued which Time shall not be more than One Calendar Month after the Receipt by such Governor of a Copy of this Act. [357]  XIII. And be it enacted That within the Meaning of this present Act any Person lawfully administering the Government of the said Colony shall be taken to be the Governor thereof.  XIV. And be it enacted That this Act may be amended or repealed by any Act to be passed in this Session of Parliament.  I next desire to draw your Lordship's attention to the Social and Moral evils which such a state of things if left unameliorated must of necessity lead to.  We here see a British Population spread over an immense territory beyond the influence of civilization and almost beyond the restraints of Law. Within this wide extent a Minister of Religion is very rarely to be found. There is not a place of Worship nor even a School. So utter indeed is the destitution of all means of instruction that it may perhaps be considered fortunate that the population has hitherto been one almost exclusively male. But Women are beginning to follow into the Bush; and a race of Englishmen must speedily be springing up in a state approaching to that of untutored barbarism.  The occupiers of this vast wilderness not having a property of any sort in the soil they occupy have no inducement to make permanent improvements on it. Some Land indeed has been brought into cultivation in order to diminish the very heavy expense of obtaining supplies from the settled parts of the Colony; and here and there a Building has been erected which may deserve the name of a Cottage; but the Squatters in general live in Huts made of the Bark of Trees; and a Garden at least anything worthy of the name is a mark of civilization rarely to be seen.  On the other hand it is well worthy of remark that there are amongst the Squatters and living the life which I have described great numbers of young men every way entitled to be called gentlemen young men of Education and many of good family and connexions in Europe. The presence of young men of this description beyond the Boundaries has been highly advantageous; first in lessening the rudeness of Society in what is called the "Bush" and secondly as affording the materials for a local Magistracy. On a former occasion I remarked how unjust it would be to confound the Squatters of Australia with those who bear the same name in America (Memorandum on Land selling which accompanied my Despatch No. 192 of the 19th December 1840). [245]  As good too is ever springing out of evil I may remark that the disasters which have recently overtaken great numbers of our Settlers have had the effect of driving many estimable persons into the Bush with their Wives and families where their influence can hardly fail to be advantageously felt.  Independent therefore of any considerations of Revenue the time seems to me to be arrived when some alteration is required in the Administration of the Lands of the Crown beyond the Boundaries of Location in order to relieve the Government from the reproach not simply of permitting the continuance of such a state of things but actually of prohibiting amendment; and to do this not only should a portion of the Lands now occupied by License be opened to Location in the usual way but facilities should also be afforded to Squatters in general of securing to themselves permanent interest in some parts of the Lands they occupy.  Depasturing Licenses  Colonial Secretary's Office  Sydney 2nd April 1844.  (1.) With reference to the regulations of the 21st May 1839 and 14th September 1840 relative to the occupation of the Crown Lands beyond the boundaries of location His Excellency the Governor in consequence of the practice which has grown up of parties occupying several distinct Stations under one License has been pleased with the advice of the Executive Council to direct that parties occupying Stations in separate districts notwithstanding that the same may be contiguous shall be required in future to take out a separate License for each such district and to pay the established fee of Ten Pounds for the same; and that no person shall in future be allowed to take up a new Station either in the same district in which his stock may be depastured or in any other without having first obtained a separate License for the same under the recommendation of the Commissioner and paid the fee of Ten Pounds thereon. [247]  (2.) His Excellency with the advice of the Executive Council has further directed that from and after the first day of July 1845 a separate License must be taken out and the fee of Ten Pounds paid thereon for each separate Station or Run occupied even though situated in the same district.  (3.) No one Station within the meaning of these regulations is after the first July 1845 to consist of more than twenty square miles of area unless it be certified by the Commissioner that more is required for the quantity of sheep or cattle mentioned in the next paragraph.  (4.) If the party desire to occupy more and the Commissioner consider him entitled to such occupation with reference to the quantity of Stock possessed by him or its probable increase in the ensuing three years as well as the accommodation required by other parties and the general interests of the public an additional license must be taken out and paid for.  (5.) Every Station at a greater distance than seven miles from any other occupied by the same party will be deemed a separate Station within the meaning of these Regulations even though the area occupied may not altogether exceed twenty square miles; and no one License will cover a Station capable of depasturing more than 4000 sheep or 500 head of cattle or a mixed herd of sheep and cattle equal to either 500 head of cattle or 4000 sheep.  (6.) No Station or part of a Station previously occupied under a separate License will be incorporated with or added to the Station of any Licensed person unless he pay for it the price of another License.  (7.) In other respects the Regulations referred to will remain in force.  By His Excellency's Command  B. Deas Thomson.  It will scarcely escape Your Lordship's observation that neither in the Resolutions nor in the Speeches of the gentlemen who moved and seconded them is an allusion once made to the first and most important object of the Notice. These gentlemen though they declaimed loudly against what they called the despotism of the measure never once hazarded the proposition that it was unjust or despotic to make persons pay for the use of Crown Lands in proportion to the advantages they derived from them; nor were they even bold enough to assert that £10 per annum for the use of 12800 acres of Land or for the depasturing of 4000 Sheep is an excessive charge.  The mover of the first Resolution purposely confounded the taking of a price for a License (which is in fact a payment in the nature of agistment) with the imposition of a tax; and maintained in opposition to all Constitutional Law and the positive enactment of Parliament that the power to dispose of the Lands of the Crown resides as a matter of right in the Local Legislature. The Mover of the second Resolution declared that so long as he continued to pay the price for his License £10 per annum he had a freehold in the Lands he occupied and that from it the Government could not eject him.  I now proceed to offer to Your Lordship some few observations on the matter at issue.  According to the Returns of the Commissioners of Crown Lands I find that of the gentlemen who called the meeting the three largest occupiers of Crown Lands hold collectively 305920 acres the three smallest occupiers 13440; consequently the large occupiers hold two and twenty times as much land for the same money as the small ones. The small occupiers get only 22 acres for one shilling per annum the large occupiers get 510 acres for a shilling; and though they may require for their own use only a small portion of what they hold they prevent the occupation of any portion of it by others. Various ways of sub-letting are also growing into use in addition to the common practice of what is called "taking in Sheep and Cattle on thirds" the meaning of which is that the person to whom the Cattle or Sheep belong shall give the holder of the Run one third of their entire produce including Calves Lambs and Wool. The right to the occupation of a Station has also become an article of common sale; and sums varying from £100 to £500 are commonly given for them; I have heard indeed of £1000 being demanded; and Stations may be said to have lately become articles of common traffic in the markets. [251]  From the same Returns of the Crown Commissioners I find that reckoning one Horse Ox or Cow to be equal to eight Sheep the quantity of Stock depastured by the three largest of the Squatters who called the meeting was equal to 78360 Sheep and the quantity of Stock depastured by the three smallest Holders was equal to 14168; the small holders of Stock therefore pay very nearly one shilling per annum for twenty two Sheep depastured by them on Crown Lands; whilst the large occupiers pay the same sum of 1s. per annum for depasturing one hundred and thirty one Sheep in each case exclusive of unweaned Lambs.  These calculations are made from the returns of land and stock held by the Requisitionists only; were they taken from the whole body of Squatters far greater inequalities would be exposed. In papers now before me respecting a disputed Run in the District called "New England" it is stated by most respectable parties (one of them a Member of the Legislative Council) that a single squatter (Mr. Hall) holds one thousand square miles of Land or 640000 acres; and by the Commissioners' Returns I find that he holds in one District (New England) and under a single License Runs which are estimated by the Commissioner at 820 square miles or 524800 acres. He has also another Station in the District of Liverpool Plains but for it he pays a separate License.  It is alleged by the Squatters that they cannot as a body pay more than they now do; but even if this be admitted it will not thence follow that they should pay as unequally as they now do.  The only part of the notice of the 2d inst which is to have any immediate effect is that which relates to persons who occupy two stations in contiguous Districts under a single License; and no individual has I believe been hardy enough to deny that it is right and proper that persons who occupy two Stations in separate Districts should take out separate Licenses even though the Districts be contiguous. The other parts of the Notice will have no effect until the month of July 1845; and I postponed the operation of them as well in consideration of the depressed state of the Colony as to allow time for Your Lordship's approval of the measures to arrive in the Colony before they are carried into effect.  If the sum of £10 be deemed too much for the price of a License and it can be shewn that the profits of Sheep farming will not admit of so high a charge I shall on a fair shewing that such is the case not object to the reduction of it; but I do not at present think the charge too high for a solvent person to pay though I do not doubt that a person encumbered with debts and paying 10 or 12 per cent per annum for borrowed money may find £10 more than he can afford; and so even would he if it were reduced to 10s.  I do not admit the proposition advanced at the Meeting that the fee on the License is only an acknowledgment that the Land is held from the Crown and that therefore it only ought to be of a nominal amount and the same for all. I consider the price of a license to be analogous to Rent and that it ought to be proportional to the profits made from unimproved lands the property of individuals. [252]  Estimating the value of a Fleece in the Sydney Market at the low price of 2s. 6d the value of the Wool alone from 4000 Sheep would be £500 per annum; and the charge of £10 for a License would be 2 per cent upon the Wool alone without reckoning anything for the value of the Carcass or the increase.  As the Government has almost entirely ceased to sell Land the necessity is so much the stronger for raising a revenue from the lands which are unsold. If this he not done it seems to me that Immigration into the Colony must altogether be given up; and there cannot be a real Friend to Australia who would desire that such should be the case. Who it may be asked in Australia will be foolish enough to buy Land at £1 or even 5s. per acre if according to the dictum of the Mover of the Second Resolution the Freehold of an extensive domain is to be procured for £10 a year.  The most obvious interests of the Colony require that a Fund should be annually raised for the support of Immigration; and l feel satisfied that a clear sum of £50000 per annum may be obtained for this purpose provided only proper protection be afforded to the unsold Lands of the Crown.  To the Right Honourable the Lord STANLEY  Her Majesty's Secretary of State for the Colonies &c. &c. &c. &c.  The humble memorial of the undersigned Land Owners Merchants and Inhabitants of the Colony of Western Australia respectfully sheweth -   That Her Majesty's Ministers for the time being having founded this Colony in 1829 upon certain principles which were considered advantageous to settlers thereby caused a considerable number of capitalists to emigrate hither upon the faith of those principles being adhered to by the Home Government.  That through mismanagement inexperience and ignorance of the seasons great numbers of the early settlers lost or expended the greater part of their capital before they were able so to invest it as to live upon the interest or produce thereof; but that from the year 1838 to the beginning of 1841 after struggling with unparelleled difficulties they began to surmount the evils which had encompassed them and entertained a reasonable hope that the then steadily increasing influx of emigrants would prove the means of imparting a sound marketable value to land stock and other property and thus ultimately: realise the hopes of. the original settlers.  That after the formation of the Colony and prior to the year 1841 Her Majesty's Government thought proper to raise the price of Crown Lands in this Colony first from 1s. 6d. an acre (their full value) to 5s. subsequently to 12s. and ultimately to £1 per acre; in consequence of which the sale of Crown Lands has entirely ceased and the fund which had been formerly produced from this source and was made applicable to the introduction of labour no longer existed. [162] The introduction of labour therefore ceased and as the principle upon which the colony was founded (of granting land to those who introduced capital and labour) was no longer acted upon the immigration of both capitalists and laborers ceased simultaneously.  That from the cessation of the influx of capital and labor the settlers of this colony whose full exertions for many years were necessarily confined to producing the means of their own support have been entirely disabled from extending those operations so as to produce a sufficient amount of Exports to counterbalance the drain which has been made upon the specie of the Colony by the introduction of necessary Imports.  That emigration has now commenced from this Colony to the other Australian Colonies and that there is great reason to apprehend this evil will shortly become of serious magnitude and importance.  That the scarcity of labor which is now to be apprehended will necessarily advance the rate of wages curtail the operations of the agriculturist and flock owner reduce the quantity of land which has been annually brought into cultivation arrest the increase of our flocks and herds and of all other sources of wealth and enhance the price of provisions and other necessaries to those whose means of procuring them are rapidly diminishing.  That the state of things to which your Memorialists have thus referred has for some time past had the effect of depriving land and other property of any marketable value; the want of money necessarily precluding the possibility of purchasing; and the want of confidence in the intrinsic value of property preventing all disposition to purchase.  That there appears under existing circumstances no probability of the future arrival in this Colony to any extent of the combined essentials to prosperity - capital and labor - unless sufficient inducement be again held forth to Emigrants. [163]  That Your Memorialists most respectfully entreat your Lordship and Her Majestys Ministers to consider the importance of this Colony to the British Empire from its geographical position and from its inexhaustible stores of ship timber as well as its other resources; that from its position in time of war it would be highly desirable both for the honour of the Crown as well as perhaps for the security of Her Majestys Eastern Possessions that this Colony should become a populous and powerful settlement; whereas at present a single frigate would be sufficient to wrest the Territory from the British Empire.  That your Memorialists and the early settlers of this Colony have been long averse from the necessity of making it a Penal Settlement for Convicts; and that if any other remedy for the evils under which they suffer might be obtained they would be strenuously opposed to such a measure; but that unless Her Majestys Government will reduce the price of land to its original standard and resume the principle upon which this Colony was founded (and act upon that principle judiciously and not lavishly - as was formerly the case) or will devise some other expedient as shall cause the reintroduction of capital and labor your Memorialists conceive that this colony must become absolutely useless to the British Crown an incumbrance upon the Empire and ruinous to those individuals who have been led to embark in it the whole of their fortunes under an erroneous belief that the British Government would abide by those principles of colonization which alone give confidence and hope to the Emigrant.  That if Her Majestys Government refuse to accede to these suggestions you Memorialists will be obliged to admit that the only probability which then remains of giving a marketable value to land and other property in this Colony - of attracting to it a fresh influx of settlers and even of inducing the majority of the present settlers to remain in the Territory - is to be found in the hope that Her Majestys Government may be induced to convert the Colony into a Penal Settlement on an extensive scale. [164]  That the distance of the pastoral districts from the coast and the sandy nature of the soil between the coast and the Darling Range of Hills render the formation of good roads most necessary and at the same time most expensive and perhaps only to be accomplished by convict labor; that it is also only by convict labor that the port and harbor may be improved - bridges wharfs jetties lighthouses and other public works be constructed - facilities for the advantageous establishment of a Timber trade secured - and an inland market guaranteed for agricultural and pastoral productions.  Your Memorialists therefore humbly pray that if Her Majestys Ministers shall refuse to re-adopt those measures which have been respectfully suggested or referred to in this Memorial and the value of which was just beginning to be felt at the time when the inducements to immigrants were withdrawn or to devise some other good and speedy measure of relief - they will be pleased to advise Her Majesty at as early a date as possible to make and declare this Colony A PENAL SETTLEMENT UPON AN EXTENSIVE SCALE. WESTERN AUSTRALIA FEBRUARY 1846.  Your Committee.. . are sufficiently cognizant of the state of public feeling among their fellow colonists at large to be satisfied that - if the proposed renewal of transportation were any longer practically and substantially an open question; if it rested with the colonists themselves to decide whether the deportation of convicts to this hemisphere should cease or continue - if it were thus placed at their option whether they would at once and for ever free themselves and their posterity from the further taint of the convict system doubtless a large majority especially of the operative classes would give the proposal for renewed transportation an unhesitating veto. [224] Nor do your Committee feel by any means certain that the decision of the majority of the upper and middle classes of society would not also be in accordance with the Report of the General Grievance Committee of 1844 that the moral and social influences of the convict system - the contamination and vice -  which are inseparable from it are evils for which no mere pecuniary benefits could serve as a counterpoise. And if your Committee have erred in putting this construction on the Secretary of States intentions as conveyed in this Dispatch and if that Right Honourable functionary be prepared to discontinue the transportation of the convicts .of the British Empire to any of the Australian Colonies and thus practically as well as nominally to free this continent from their presence your Committee beg unequivocally to state that such a course is that which they conceive would be most generally conducive to the interests and agreeable to the inclinations of those whom it will most directly and intimately concern.  Seeing however that in the view of your Committee transportation is no longer an open question - that the Despatch referred to your Committee assumes that transportation is still to go on to Van Diemens Land and the other penal establishments formed in these seas ; - seeing moreover that a new penal settlement is immediately to be formed on the very northern boundary of the Colony; that with this design a new division of territory has been made and a new government already appointed; - that thus this Colony already inundated on the south with the outpourings of the probation system in Van Diemens Land the most demoralizing that was ever invented is soon to have poured in upon it from the north the exiles from the penitentiaries of the Mother country as well as the expirees from that Colony; that New South Wales must submit to this double stream of felonry whether it will or not and that to augment its volume a system of conditional pardons confining the holders of them practically to the Australian Colonies has been resorted to with the effect if not with the view of relieving the British Treasury from the cost of maintaining this class - of offenders in reality though free men in name seeing all this your Committee consider that the question for their determination is substantially narrowed down to this; whether it is expedient that transportation should be renewed in a direct form on equitable conditions or whether it is desirable that it should virtually exist in the indirect and polluted shape which as far as this Colony is concerned it has already assumed ; - whether in short we are to have this double tide of moral contamination flowing in upon us without check or restraint and without any counteracting advantages or whether along with whatever compensations transportation can be surrounded we are to have the additional advantage of modifying and regulating its now inevitable introduction into this Colony by the knowledge which fifty years experience of its working has given us and which will at all events enable us to combine with the greatest possible good derivable from it the least possible admixture of evil. [225] This being in the view of your Committee the true state of the question raised for the decision of the Colonists and of your Honorable House by the Despatch now under consideration your Committee have been driven to the conclusion that the only safe alternative left to the Colony is to accede to the proposition that a modified and carefully regulated introduction of convict labourers into New South Wales or into some part of it may under the present circumstances be advisable.  In thus submitting to an open renewal of transportation your Committee concur in opinion with the majority of the witnesses examined that it ought only to be tolerated upon the express understanding that the probation system of gangs now in operation in Norfolk Island and Van Diemens Land or any conceivable modification of it by which convicts are to be aggregated in masses shall on no account be introduced into the Colony; as being not only the least efficient system of secondary punishment which can be resorted to but the most unreformatory which was ever devised. [226] It seems to your Committee that as in the physical world it is an invariable law that all agglomerations of animal or vegetable matter heat and putrify and decay; so in the moral world there can be no aggregations of human beings whether in Hulks or Gaols or Penitentiaries or Gangs without calling this putrescent agency into existence; and unquestionably as far as the experience of the Sister Colony of Van Diemens Land goes this destructive process of aggregation has been little if at all counteracted by the agency of the systematic and religious instruction which has been applied to these living masses of crime and which according to the theory of the doubtless philanthropic originators of this system it was hoped would form its chief ground of superiority over every mode of secondary punishment previously extant. On the utter failure of those anticipations and the revolting crimes with which this new experiment has been attended it is not necessary that your Committee should dwell. Some slight evidence on those topics has been taken but your Committee have not had time nor did they consider it necessary to go into elaborate proof of the vicious and detestable working of a system which has been over and over again denounced by the community which has been polluted by it - polluted by it to that degree that an intelligent gentleman lately arrived from that Colony asserted without hesitation at the public meeting lately convened to petition your Honourable House against the proposed resumption of transportation that the worst days of Sodom and Gomorrah were not so bad as the present days of Van Diemens Land; and that full proof of this statement might be had by referring to the fearful records of the Jericho station. That such indeed would be the necessary result of any large aggregations of vicious men debarred from access to female society might have been inferred a priori; and the wonder is not that such should be the fruits of this system but how it could have ever entered into the contemplation of its benevolent authors that large masses of human beings composed principally of the very dregs of society and for the most part debased by crime previous to their deportation could be thus aggregated and reformed. [227] Nor is it without regret that your Committee perceive in the Despatch under consideration that while the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the Colonies impliedly admits the failure of the probation system as hitherto practised in Van Diemens Land he still clings to the delusive hope that it may under really efficient discipline be yet made productive both of the punishment and reformation which its projectors had in view It is lamentable to perceive that an eight years trial of this disastrous experiment - an experiment which directly or indirectly has been attended with an outlay of many millions spent without producing your Committee believe any of the benefits contemplated whether in regard to the prevention of crime in the parent country or to the reformation of the convicts themselves has not yet sufficed to dissipate the delusive theories to which transportation as originally conducted was made to give ways It may be conceded that the old system efficient and reformatory as it undoubtedly was had its errors. It may be as was urged by its objectors that assignment which was the soul of the system did not in all cases work equally; that it was a greater or less punishment in proportion to the lenity or severity of the assignee; that it was not sufficiently discriminating in its selection of assignees; these and other defects may doubtless have existed under the old system. They were not however defects essentially inherent in it and might therefore have been remedied.   Your Committee therefore - inflexible in their opinion against the introduction of any system of aggregation which assuming that punishment is a necessary accompaniment of transportation shall aim at carrying out that punishment in gangs whether for the execution of public works generally or for the making and repair of roads as suggested in the despatch under consideration or for any other conceivable under colonial sentence and - only upon the express understanding as before stipulated that - with the above exception - all gangs are to be utterly discountenanced - in the dilemma in which they consider the Colony now placed - and as a mere choice of evils which whatever may be the general desire this community has not the power wholly to escape from - are willing to submit to a renewal of transportation upon the following conditions and upon no other: [228]   1st. - That no alteration shall be made in the Constitution Act 5 and 6 Victoria C. 76 except with a view to the extension of the elective principle.   2nd . - That the transportation of male convicts be accompanied - as a simultaneous measure - with the importation of an equal number of females to consist of female convicts as far as they exist and the balance to be made up of female immigrants.  3rd. - That as a further simultaneous measure such transportation be accompanied with an equal importation of free immigrants as nearly as possible in equal proportion as to sexes.  4th. - That the wives and families of all convicts receiving permanent or temporary indulgences should be brought out and count as part of this free immigration.  5th. - That no fewer than five thousand male convicts be annually deported to this Colony.  6th. - That the convict establishments properly so called such as Norfolk Island Cockatoo Island ironed or road gangs of criminals under Colonial sentence &c &c be maintained as heretofore at the cost of the British Treasury.  7th - That two-thirds of the expense of police gaols and the criminal administration of justice be paid by the Home Government but That on the relinquishment of the land fund and all other revenues or droits of the Crown to the appropriation of the Governor and Legislative Council the whole of this branch of convict expenditure be assumed by the Colony with a view to aid the British Government in defraying the cost of the free immigration stipulated for in the second and third conditions.   8th. - That in order to insure due permanency and efficiency in the regulations to be provided for the government and discipline of convicts the sole power of making such regulations be vested in the Governor and Legislative Council saving entire the Royal prerogative of mercy. [229]  The description of convicts in the opinion of your Committee the Colony should agree to receive from the Mother Country on the above conditions are:  1st. - Young delinquents who have committed first offences after little or no probation.  2nd. - Convicts who have committed graver offences after a probation considered adequate to the crime; the probation meant being probation under the separate system.   3rd. - Convicts at the commencement of their sentences who have committed various crimes.  4th. - If any convicts be received from Van Diemens Land convicts with tickets of leave.  It appears to your Committee that the first two classes of convicts having undergone certain probation might receive tickets of leave on their landing - limited as all tickets of leave should be to some particular district; and excluding the holders of them from all permanent dwelling in towns. In arriving at this conclusion your Committee have been particularly influenced by the uniform testimony given in favor of the decent and orderly conduct of the Pentonville Exiles landed some time since at Port Phillip. While they consider this testimony however decisive in favor of the reformatory tendency of the separate system as now practised in that and other penitentiaries at Home they by no means admit that its general effects are more satisfactory in this respect than the old system of assignment ; - whilst the latter system has undoubtedly these marked advantages peculiar to itself; that it entails comparatively but small expense on the public and instead of teaching trades which are for the most part useless except in towns where they might come unfairly and injuriously into competition with free labour it trains the convict to those rural occupations which are most in demand and by thus giving him an early taste for them - establishes ultimately that preference for a country life which afterwards preserves him from those temptations and vices of cities which occasioned probably his early downfall. [230]  The third class of convicts transported at the commencement of their sentences should in the opinion of your Committee undergo the punishment - with which according to the modern theory it is considered necessary that transportation should be accompanied in order to render it terrible and effective; and to prevent it from acting - as it is supposed to have acted formerly not as a check but as a bonus to crime - in a state of assignment on the principles heretofore practised; but with this essential difference - First that previous to any assignment a rigid enquiry should be instituted into the character of the assignees and their fitness for the discharge of the duties of that charge; secondly that assignment should not be permitted in cities or towns or in any districts within a stipulated distance of them; but should be limited in the first instance to those of the nineteen counties in which pastoral pursuits are most generally followed and to the squatting districts beyond the limits of location. In arriving at this conclusion your Committee concur in opinion with a great majority of the witnesses that dispersion - as wide and complete as possible and utter exclusion from cities and towns are the most effectual means of reformation that can be resorted to. It might indeed without any evidence have been inferred a priori that as aggregation has been the chief if not only cause of the failure of the probation system which has thus been acted upon by way of supplement to transportation - so dispersion would be the proper remedy; and that as the failure of this experiment has been the more signal and decided wherever the aggregation has been the most intense; so the more complete the dispersion the more curative and reformatory would be its agency. Nor do your Committee feel any apprehension that while the dispersion thus insisted upon will be most influential as a measure of reform it will be less efficacious as a mode of punishment. Mr. Miles from long acquaintance with the opinions and feelings of criminals states that no punishment is considered by them so intense and severe as solitary confinement; that it enlists no sympathies - is attended with no showing off and compels a man in the graphic language of one of its experimentors to look himself over. If this be as indeed the experience of our penitentiaries at Home proves the result of solitary confinement in cells your Committee see no reason to doubt that a similar result may be anticipated from the complete dispersion they recommend; for after all what is dispersion - amidst the lonely and boundless wilds of our vast interior but solitude in another form? [231] Contemplate the life of a shepherd or hutkeeper thus situated; placed two or three in number at most in a small hut composed of bark and slabs their nearest neighbours persons circumstanced like themselves seldom within three miles frequently not within ten; two out of the three of these men obliged in all weather to follow their flocks from sun-rise to sun-set; the third man the hut-keeper - left all day alone to guard the hut shift the folds cook for his companions the out-going shepherds and afterwards to watch their flocks by night in order to protect them from the native dogs; there is evidently among persons thus circumstanced (and in our boundless wilds thousands are and tens of thousands more may be so placed) but brief time for converse after the labour of the day and before retirement for the night to their pallets and briefer time still between their rising in the morning and departure with their flocks on their daily round. to the profligate who has been accustomed to the bustle and dissipations of cities what life can be more monotonous and irksome? In a new world at the distance of more than half the globe from the scenes of his early associations and the country of his birth and with but slight chance that he will ever behold those scenes and that country again what being can become thus lonely and individualized - and his heart  not sink within him at the dreary solitude of such a doom? Your Committee feel it difficult to believe that any imprisonment in ones native land can be so effectual by way of punishment as the solitude of these distant wilds; and still less can they believe that any such imprisonment can be equally effectual by way of reformation. For if anything can soften and humanise and restore a fallen being to his primitive condition it must be the constant opportunities for reflection which such a life presents - the remorse which it must at times awaken in the most obdurate natures - the gradual estrangement from former tastes and pursuits with which it is necessarily accompanied - and above all the constant contemplation of the power and beneficence of the Great Author of the Universe which all surrounding objects must force upon the mind. [232] If religion could be brought to the aid of these solitary wanderers then indeed might its voice be listened to with penitence and its lessons and admonitions sink deep into the heart; and since Britain abounds more than all the world besides with pious and zealous missionaries ready to brave death itself for the-conversion of the heathen who can doubt that the less hazardous field for missionary zeal which this scheme if acted upon would open out would soon be crowded with enthusiastic volunteers labouring for the salvation of the fallen children of their own country and creed. Nor do your Committee feel any doubt that the settlers themselves as well as the Local Legislature would readily make adequate provision for the support of religious instruction to be thus administered.  Your Committee in recommending the reception of ticket of leave men from Van Diemens Land are aware that this recommendation may at first sight appear somewhat incongruous with the strong animadversions - in which they have indulged on the probation system through which this class must necessarily have passed to qualify them for that indulgence. Without stopping however to dwell on the probability that this class of probationers are there as here the best men the system produces the object your Committee have in view is capable of easy and satisfactory explanation. Perceiving that it is the practice in Van Diemens Land to grant conditional pardons at much earlier periods than they were formerly obtainable here; that these pardons therefore are no longer the same test of good conduct they were formerly; that the object of this premature emancipation is to enable this class to emigrate freely to the neighbouring Colonies and thus to relieve Van Diemens Land from the overwhelming pressure of the convict inundation by which in the language of one of the witnesses the free population has been swamped - your Committee conceive that in thus consenting at once to the reception of ticket of leave men from the Sister Colony who as a matter of course like the same class here will be limited after their arrival to particular districts and subject to registry and muster and to the surveillance of the police - they are accomplishing the main - if not the sole object which the Home authorities have in view and are in fact providing for the transfer to this Colony of the surplus convict population which has become useless or mischievous there in a much safer and less objectionable manner - than by the indiscriminate system of conditional pardons now resorted to; and that in this matter too it does not rest with the Colony to decide - whether they will receive this class or not but simply whether they will receive them at this stage of their probationary career under the restraints of a ticket of leave or whether they will prefer having them at a later stage with conditional pardons without any restraint at all. [233] Your Committee have been the more readily induced to sanction the reception of this class in this earlier stage of their probation conceiving that the stimulus to good conduct which a ticket of leave perpetually holds out in connexion with the limitations and restraints which surround it will in most instances be sufficient in a new scene and with the dispersion with which in our extensive and thinly peopled districts the removal of this class would be immediately attended to counteract and eventually subdue the evil tendencies of their earlier career.  In stipulating for the importation of not fewer than five thousand male convicts annually accompanied with a free immigration of both sexes to double that extent your Committee have been actuated by the apprehension that the character of a penal Colony which would doubtless again attach to us from any renewal of transportation would interpose some considerable check upon voluntary immigration - even though no assignment or other distribution of the convicts should be permitted except beyond the boundaries of location. Conceiving that transportation would in this way act very injuriously on the future progress of the Colony unless a copious and sufficient supply of labour can be had from this source in connexion with the free immigration which is to accompany it your Committee cannot give it their sanction on any other terms; and would as a less evil assist the parishes and the Government of England to pay for immigration from the United Kingdom by means of a loan secured on the land fund in the shape of a terminable annuity as suggested in the evidence of Mr. Boyd or have recourse to the large supply of Asiatic labour which is to be found in India in China and in the adjacent islands of the Pacific Ocean rather than thus run the risk of damaging however undeservedly the character of the Colony as a field for immigration in the opinion of the working classes at Home. [234] Your Committee however in thus specifying the amount of convict and free labour conjointly upon which if sent out at the expense of the Home Government they would sanction the renewal of transportation by no means wish to imply that this is the maximum amount of labour which they are willing or able to receive. On the contrary they consider it the minimum amount with which Colonization can make any sensible progression; and with the abundant harvest of which there is now such fair promise; with the unbounded supply of meat derivable from our flocks and herds - a supply equal to more than twenty times the number of our present population; with the augmentation of capital which has gradually grown up among us for the last three years; and with the land fund of the Colony reserved for internal improvements and for furnishing employment at any time of unexpected depression; - your Committee concur in opinion with the same intelligent witness that any amount of free or convict labour that could be forwarded to us would find immediate and profitable employment. Nor do they conceive that any doubt on this point can exist in the mind of any one who duly adverts to the numerous unexplored channels of unbounded enterprize which the evidence of this gentleman shews that this Colony possesses in its forests its mines and its fisheries alone; two of which sources of wealth out of the three are utterly neglected from the want of the necessary labour to make them profitable; and the third of them - the inexhaustible fisheries at our very doors are only partially embarked in from the same cause although prosecuted successfully by foreigners who have half the globe to traverse before they can reach them. Your Committee indeed feel satisfied that under the conditions thus to be imposed on future transportation all the hulks prisons and penitentiaries of England might be at once emptied of their inmates and those inmates readily employed in the boundless fields of profitable occupation at present shut up from Colonial enterprise and destined to remain so until a sufficient supply of labour from some source or other shall arrive among us to open them out. [235]  In this way it appears to your Committee that the most expensive of the penal establishments of the parent country - the hulks and penitentiaries together with all the penal establishments in her Colonies except those in this Colony and Norfolk Island might soon be broken up and utterly got rid of. Nor are your Committee at all apprehensive that any moral evil of serious account would flow in upon the Colony from the large importation of criminals which would be consequent on so great a revolution in the administration of the penal discipline of England. The free population have now obtained so great a head and mastery over the convict population that if this preponderance be only maintained in any future scheme of transportation the absorbing and dispersive powers of the community will be so vast and will so rapidly augment that there will be no chance that transportation here whatever its amount will be able to swamp the free population of this Colony as it swamped it formerly and as it has latterly swamped the free population of Van Diemens Land. The secret to disarm transportation of its evil influences is so to increase the free population - that it may always maintain a decided ascendency and so to keep up the equality of the sexes that the abomination of a populus virorum such as polluted the earlier days of this Colony and such as now pollutes the Sister Colony of Van Diemens Land may never again be introduced. Let these conditions be fairly carried out and transportation as far as the Mother Country is concerned will become at once the cheapest the most efficient and the most reformatory punishment that was ever devised and as far as this Colony is concerned and with the unequalled means of dispersion which it possesses will be in the language of the Despatch under consideration a measure most favorable to the material fortunes of the colonists and unattended with injury to their higher interests. [236]  The stipulation contained in the seventh condition that two-thirds of the expenditure of police and gaols and the criminal administration of justice shall be paid by the British Treasury is merely an adoption of the principle which it is understood the British Government has concurred in - as a just apportionment of this expenditure in Van Diemens Land. This too is the principle of apportionment insisted upon in the General Grievance Report of the Session of 1844 and upon which - since the breach of the compact under which the Colony assumed this expenditure as an equivalent for the surrender to it of the land fund - a debt has accrued to the Colony amounting in that year in round numbers to seven hundred and ninety-three thousand and thirty-four pounds and since considerably augmented by the convict expenditure which we have unjustly been compelled to bear notwithstanding our repeated protestations against it. No question can exist that up to the present time two-thirds at least of this most onerous charge which has since the Report of that Committee accumulated in the whole to about nine hundred and fifty thousand pounds is occasioned by the convict and free population; and no proposition can be more reasonable or just than that this amount which is in fact a convict charge - solely - should be paid by the British Treasury until it cease to exist by the gradual disappearance from our population of the class that occasions it. In the event of the proposed renewal of transportation your Committee presume that the assumption of this charge would be a condition readily conceded even though it were not an article in this new compact ; - and they draw attention to its present amount which however will rapidly augment on the renewal of transportation to shew how much they are willing in this shape to contribute to the free immigration which is to be a simultaneous measure. With so large a contribution from the Colony and with such aid as the parishes at Home would in most instances gladly afford to get rid of their burdensome poor but a small supplement if any would be required from the consolidated fund and that may well be paid out of the million in round numbers which Britain owes us for past arrears. If due consideration indeed were given to the appalling fact - in the present financial condition of the Mother country that crime and poverty together cost her annually about ten millions of pounds sterling it would seem to be her soundest interest and wisest policy not only to aid the emigration thus recommended but to organise at her own expense some grand scheme of emigration to her colonies - by which this vast amount of crime and misery might be ejected from her bosom. [237]  In deeming it indispensable that so large a female immigration should be a sine qua non of renewed transportation your Committee have only to refer to the state of our population in March last when as appears from official returns: its entire amount was one hundred and eighty-eight thousand the males being one hundred and fourteen thousand and the females only seventy-four thousand leaving a balance of forty thousand females necessary to restore the equality of the sexes or in other words exhibiting a preponderance of males over females in round numbers of about three to two. Such a disparity it must be evident is highly detrimental to the morals of the Colony and if it do not demand immediate equalization at the hands of the Home Government it is at least so great an evil that no well-wisher to the community which is suffering under it can consent to its further aggravation. It appears to your Committee that - if the British Government would of its own mere motion restore the equality which by its vicious and unchristian scheme of secondary punishment it has thus destroyed it would be no more than an act of moral justice which its rulers are bound in conscience to perform by way of expiation for the enormous mischiefs with which this shocking disparity has been attended and that to pay in the shape of free immigration as suggested in the Report of the Grievance Committee of 1844 the debt which that Report proves is still due would be the easiest and most beneficial way of at once discharging this obligation and duty.  Your Committee in allusion to the general distrust and alarm which pervade the operative classes at the prospect of renewed transportation feel the utmost confidence that not only are the apprehensions thus excited entirely groundless but that whatever amount of convict labour may be imported and dispersed in our vast interior cannot but react beneficially on our artizans in towns on our agriculture and the other branches of internal industry in which our free population are for the most part employed; and that this reaction will be more or less beneficial to them in proportion to the cheapness of that labour and to the consequent accumulation of profit - that may arise from its employment. [238] Your Committee however are aware that the objection of this class of our population to the importation of labour is not limited to the importation of convict labour only; but extends to the introduction of any sort of labour which in their view may interfere with their supposed vested rights in the labour market of the Colony as it now is.  Your Committee at this late period of the Session and with the short interval necessarily assigned as the limitation of their labours have been forced to abstain altogether from the wide and important field of inquiry which they must have entered upon had they in the language of this Despatch attempted to supply any definite plan of the regulations and discipline for the coercion and government of Convicts which it would be proper to establish and enforce if the views of your Committee as embodied in the slight and general outlines of this Report should be ultimately acceded to. They consider this omission however in the present stage of the negotiation with the Home authorities of comparative unimportance seeing that it is deemed an indispensable condition for the reasons therein stated that all legislation connected with these important objects should be vested in the Governor and Legislative Council saving entire the Royal Prerogative of Mercy and that in the event of a recurrence to transportation on the terms proposed it will hereafter become the duty of your Honorable House to enter upon this subject with more minuteness and more definite views than are within the aim of your present Committee.  The additional expense connected with the deportation of five thousand male convicts on the terms now proposed would be as follows: [239] [...]  And making the additional cost of transportation at its outset under this new system amount to £10 3s. 4d per head. In this calculation the cost of transportation of the convicts is omitted because that is an item of expenditure which the Home Government must incur whether they adhere to the old system or adopt the new one now suggested. They will under our present proposal also have to provide as at present for the expense of the convict establishments properly so called which are necessary for the coercion and restraint of offenders convicted in the Colony. But here if they choose all further cost of transportation may end; and the expense of transportation as a secondary punishment be reduced at once from about £100 at which it is now computed in connexion with the probation system of gangs in Van Diemens Land to a sum certainly not exceeding £31 in the whole exclusive of the above annual charge for the coercion of Colonial offenders.  This amount of expenditure your Committee consider will well occur in this way: [240] [...]  Which makes the total cost per head to the Home Government attending our proposal the cost of transportation included something short of £3 per head; to which will have to be added as before mentioned an annual charge of about £20000 a year above the present annual Convict expenditure for the maintenance of ironed gangs and other penal establishments necessary for the coercion and punishment of criminals under Colonial sentence.  In conclusion your Committee beg to observe that although the proportion of immigrants which they thus insist upon as an indispensable adjunct. to renewed transportation will be attended probably with some additional cost to the Home Government at the outset and so long as the penal establishments at Norfolk Island and Van Diemens Land are kept up on their present scale the diminution of the expense of the system thus proposed as a substitute for the probation system of gangs which is now enforced in both those places will be immense - as soon as transportation is diverted from thence and directed here. It is not forming an exaggerated estimate of the expenditure now incurred one way or other in carrying out this worse than useless scheme of secondary punishment to fix it at half a million sterling. Now if to this great outlay be added the cost of the penitentiaries and other penal establishments of the Mother country which might be wholly got rid of provided transportation to this Colony were renewed on the scale recommended in this Report; - if the whole of these penal establishments were at once emptied not only of such of their inmates as have committed graver offences but also of those younger delinquents who are passing through them in a perpetual round - from the necessity which in most cases prompts them to the commission of crime in the first instance and the necessity and inclination combined which continue them afterwards in the same course; - if the penal establishments thus emptied were never allowed to become the permanent abodes of any such delinquents hereafter and the whole body of these juvenile and other offenders were forced on their first conviction to undergo either compulsory exile or transportation to our boundless interior which seems to have been created the vast solitude it is and to have been assigned by Providence to the British nation as the fittest scene for the reformation of her criminals and the city of refuge to which they should flee ; - if this comprehensive scheme of transportation and emigration were for the first time thus made to go hand in hand and to afford each other the mutual support and encouragement of which they are capable; - if the yet untrodden wilds lately discovered by that enterprising traveller Leichhardt and those opened out by previous explorers were made available to these great ends; - how many millions now spent for the support of the poor and the coercion of criminals might be saved; and withal how largely might the sum of human misery and crime be reduced; how many happy and smiling countenances - how many prosperous homes might soon brighten up this now lonely but beautiful wilderness; how many souls that may otherwise perish might be turned to salvation? [241] It has been shown by authentic Parliamentary returns that the assignment system as formerly practised saved Britain in less than fifty years the twenty millions of pounds which she nobly devoted to the extinction of slavery and this immense saving be it remembered accrued from assignment notwithstanding that far more than half that period immense gangs and other convict establishments supported entirely by the Home Government were kept up here chiefly from the inability of the then comparatively limited free population and capital of those earlier times to afford them employment. [242] If notwithstanding those obstacles which then existed to the dispersion and absorption of the convict population such a vast saving was the result how easy is the inference that - if transportation and assignment were reverted to in the altered circumstances of the Colony and with the greatly augmented capital and free population it now possesses - an amount of saving altogether unparalleled and unforeseen might in the course of a similar period be effected. It seems to your Committee that they are indulging in no improbable anticipations that an amount of saving might accrue from this source which would go far towards the extinction of the national debt or enable Britain to organise a grand system of national education and immigration that would ultimately reduce toa mere nominal amount the crime and pauperism which are now the plague-spots of her system and the main cause of the intestine turbulence and disorders with which she is troubled.  Such your Committee conceive would be the immense gains and mighty influences for good which would result at Home from the change here recommended in the administration of the penal discipline of our common country; whilst on the other hand the seeds of a great community would be sown on this continent which would shoot up with a vigour and rapidity unexampled in the history of our race; a community which from its very outset would re-act powerfully on the whole frame of her internal industry enlarging the field of her employment at Home extending the circle of her commerce abroad; until in the rapid progress and ultimate immensity of this beneficial interchange a mighty Colony would arise linked to her by the strong ties of common origin and mutual interest; a faithful subject and never failing customer that would be attached to her in peace - would not desert her in war; that would multiply her resources increase her numbers consolidate her strength and be the main stay not only of her supremacy and dominion in these seas but probably of her continued supremacy and dominion in the world.  W.C. WENTWORTH  Legislative Council Chamber Chairman.  Sydney 31st October 1846.  The Petition of the undersigned Bankers Merchants Agriculturists Stockholders and others Employers of labour in New South Wales  To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty  Humbly Sheweth  That your Majesty's Petitioners are now suffering great inconvenience and injury from the want of an adequate supply of labor owing to the suspension of Immigration and other causes beyond the Power of Petitioners to controul.  That the want of Labor which your Majesty's Petitioners thus complain becomes every day more urgent in consequence of the additional demand which the natural increase of Cattle and Sheep rapidly occasions.  That during the last two years the price of Labor has increased about fifty per cent a rate of increase incompatible with a fair profit upon Agricultural and Pastoral investments whilst on the other hand the price of Wool (the staple of the Colony) has fallen at least 45 per cent.  That under these circumstances many of Your Majesty's Petitioners are not only precluded from extending their operations but in some instances the Farmer has been obliged to suspend them altogether whilst the Owners of Flocks and Herds will soon have no alternative left but to boil them down for the mere tallow.  That such a state of things if not speedily remedied must be productive of results ruinous to the immediate interests of Your Majesty's Petitioners and disastrous to the future prosperity of the Colony.  That under the pressure of such circumstances your Majesty's Petitioners have read with much interest a Despatch addressed to the Governor of this Colony by the Right Honorable W. E. Gladstone dated 30th April 1846 on the subject of the renewal of transportation to this Colony. [161] They have also read with much satisfaction the Report of a Select Committee of the Legislative Council to whose consideration the important Despatch in question was referred.  That Your Majesty's Petitioners would earnestly solicit your Majesty's Gracious attention to the facts and recommendations set forth in the Report of the Select Committee alluded to and humbly trust that they may have sufficient influence on your Majesty's Councils to induce the resumption of transportation to this Colony upon the principles therein recommended or upon such modifications thereof as may be deemed expedient.  That in the opinion of your Majesty's Petitioners such a measure would be equally advantageous to this Colony and to the Parent Country by opening out a cheap and boundless field of reformation for her Criminals and support for her paupers and thus relieving her from the burthen of their maintenance in expensive establishments at home.  And your Majesty's Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray  etc Thos. Agars D. Larnach  J. B. Darvahl and 449 other persons.  May it please Your Excellency  We Her Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the members of the Legislative Council of New South Wales in Council assembled beg respectfully to request that your Excellency will be pleased to communicate to Her Majesty's Government that this Council is of opinion:  (1). That the erection of Port Phillip into a new province may be effected without any fundamental change in the constitution of this colony.  (2). That the principle that local affairs should be managed by local authorities though obviously true as between the colonies and the mother country and as regards the regulation of the affairs of large towns cannot safely be extended to the relation between the central Government of this colony and its rural districts.   (3). That it is from the utter inability of the rural districts to bear the expenses of District Councils and not from any desire on the part of the Legislative Council to monopolize all the powers of the colonial state that the one part of the constitution intended for the colony has been brought into operation while the other has remained in abeyance.  (4). That any scheme of District Councils involving powers of local assessment for local purposes would operate as a virtual confiscation of the lands already alienated; would create endless discord and confusion; and by simultaneously introducing a federal and local system of government render that government at once ruinously expensive and miserably inefficient.  (5). That grievous as this Council would esteem it to see any system of delegated election imposed upon the colony the disfranchisement of the present constituencies in order to confer the elective right upon these justly obnoxious corporations would render this invasion of public liberty still more intolerable.  (6). That this Council cannot acquiesce in any plan for an inter-colonial assembly in which the superior wealth and population of New South Wales as compared with the other colonies of the Australian group both individually and collectively shall not be fully recognized as the basis of representation.  (7). That this Council cannot forbear expressing its strong sense of the indignity with which the people of this colony are treated by the announcement that a measure so seriously influencing their destiny for good or for evil will be introduced into Parliament without affording them an opportunity of previously expressing their sentiments upon it.  It will be but just to the Members of the Executive Council and to myself that I should explain to your Lordship the grounds upon which we recommended the adoption of a form of government similar to that at present existing in New South Wales without attempting to give an opinion as to tile advantages or disadvantages contingent upon the adoption of that particular form.  Without therefore wishing or presuming to give an opinion on the general question of the best form of legislative body I may say that under the peculiar circumstances of these colonies I should most strenuously recommend the adoption of a Second or Upper Chamber.  When we consider the elements of which society is here composed - when we see the low estimate that is placed upon everything which can distinguish a man from his fellows with the sole exception of wealth - when we see that even wealth does not lead to distinction or open the road to any other ambition than that of excelling in habits of self-indulgence --- it can hardly be subject of surprise that so few are found who rise above the general level or that those few owe more to the possession of a certain oratorical facility than to their powers of mind or the justness of the opinions which they advocate.  The broad plain of equality as in America receives the whole of the community and though there are many who would gladly avail themselves of any opportunity of raising themselves above the general level yet here as in America any attempt to do so would be frustrated by the jealousy of the remainder of the community.  Your Lordship can hardly form an idea of the character of the population of these colonies.  It is usual to assume that colonies are off-shoots from the parent stock containing in themselves the germs of all the elements of which society in the mother country is composed.  This can only be said of any colony with many reservations but it cannot be said of these colonies with any appearance of justice or truth.  There is an essentially democratic spirit which actuates the large mass of the community; and it is with the view to check the development of this spirit of preventing its coming into operation that I would suggest the formation of an Upper Chamber.  The members of this call it senate or what you may will be raised in some measure above the general level of society - they will be rendered independent of popular blame or approbation but being also free from the suspicion of acting under the control of the Government they will conciliate popular feeling and hold a fair position between the Executive and the Legislature. [373]  I do not presume to enter into any detail of the mode in which such an assembly should be constituted further than to express an opinion that the Government should have as little as possible to do in the nomination or selection of the members.  There must of course be some ex-officio representatives of the Government in the House. The bishops of the Church of England and Rome might sit as representatives of the ecclesiastical bodies; but as the object with which I advocate the establishment of a second chamber is more that of operating morally upon the body of the community than of facilitating generally the operations of the Executive Government I should be loth to recommend the adoption of a plan which might in any way neutralize the beneficial action of such a body upon the mass of the people.  I also think that in order to render the members perfectly independent of either the Government or the people they should be appointed or elected for life.  Trusting that your Lordship will not be of opinion that in offering these suggestions I have in any way exceeded the limits imposed upon me by my position in this colony.  Regulations For Ticket of Leave Holders in Van Diemen's Land  1st Ticket-of-Leave Holders on arrival in a District must register their residence at the Police Office and also change of residence while they remain in that District.  2nd Ticket-of-Leave Holders are not to remove from one District to another without a pass from the Police Magistrate of the District in which they last registered their residence.  3rd Ticket-of-Leave Holders are not to be absent from their registered places of residence between the hours of ten o'clock at night and daybreak except in actual attendance on their employers or by a pass either from such employers or a Police Magistrate.  4th Ticket-of-Leave Holders in the Months of December and June respectively must personally report themselves at the Police Office of the District in which they are resident or forward to the Police Magistrate a Medical Certificate showing that they are prevented doing so by sickness: the indulgence of any Ticket-of-Leave Holder failing to comply to this Regulation will invariably be revoked and in no case restored in less than one year. [136]  5th Ticket-of-Leave Holders are prohibited from entering any Theatre or Billiard Room.  6th Destitute Ticket-of-Leave Holders unable to obtain their own livelihood will be received into any of the Hiring Depots and maintained at the expense of the Government until they can find employment.  7th Ticket-of-Leave Holders are allowed to acquire and hold personal property - to maintain any action or suit for the recovery of such property or for any damage sustained by them; and in all contracts or other civil matters over which Magistrates have jurisdiction will be treated under the Hired Servants' Act and other local laws applicable to free people.  8th Ticket-of-Leave Holders must bear in mind that their Indulgence is revocable and that good conduct is the condition upon which it is held.  J. S. Hampton Comptroller-General  Relative to the Alterations in the Constitutions of the Australian Colonies p. 9. P.P. 1851 XXXV 1303.  The Petition of the Colonists of the District of Port Phillip Colony of New South Wales in public meeting assembled.  That your Majesty's Petitioners represent a body as loyal and attached to British institutions as exists on the face of the entire globe but they cannot but feel that those feelings are the result of British sentiment and ancient prepossession; and have neither been formed nor encouraged by any kindness that this district has ever yet received; that unsupported and unassisted it has risen to its present condition; that the mother-country has made it a mere field of patronage and area of experiment; that she has received Port Phillip exports; but because she could not elsewhere supply herself with produce of a better character or cheaper rate; that she has sent to this province large quantities of various merchandise but because these shores furnished her the very best customers in the world; that she has sent emigrants but solely by aid of Port Phillip funds; that her protection in case of war is more likely to lead Port Phillip into annoyance than secure her efficient assistance in time of need and that it must never be forgotten that while the objects of thankfulness are so few as scarcely to have existence at all this district has but lately been exposed at the hands of the British people to an attempt at conversion into a penal settlement - an attack at once insulting to its dignity and common sense and utterly opposed to every interest and every principle; that while such has been the character of the Home Government of this province the colonial government has never been found by the colonists anything but another name for oppression and unjustifiable spoliation and they have no faith in the promises made of a better state of things in future should separation be any longer deferred; that the natural effect of a continuance of this treatment is such as your Majesty's Petitioners are most unwilling to contemplate for the inhabitants of this province having availed themselves of every legal and constitutional means in their power to rid themselves of a burden which has become altogether intolerable having petitioned and remonstrated year after year in every form and through every channel open to them and still finding their deliverance unnecessarily delayed and it may be seriously endangered are likely to be wound up to such extreme irritation as must be highly detrimental to the continuance of those feelings of loyalty to your Majesty's throne and attachment to the institutions of their native land which ought to distinguish a British colony. That your Majesty's Petitioners are therefore of the deliberate opinion that farther tantalising the inhabitants of Port Phillip with promises of deliverance which have hitherto been made only to be broken is altogether inexcusable; leaves the British government openly chargeable with having rashly tampered with time affections of a whole people and renders it responsible for any step of which the irritation of disappointed hopes and time continual failure of the customary means of securing redress may eventually induce the adoption. [364]  Your Majesty's Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Majesty will irrespective of the general Bill for the Government of the Australian Colonies cause to be laid before Parliament on its reassembling a Bill for the separation of this province from New South Wales and its immediate erection into a separate colony bearing your Majesty's Royal name of Victoria with legislative institutions corresponding with those now existing in the colony.  And Your Majesty's Petitioners will ever pray.  AUGUSTUS F. A. GREEVES  Mayor of Melbourne Chairman.  THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION - PUBLIC MEETING  At a public meeting of the colonists held at the Exchange King William-street Adelaide - Charles B. Newenham Esq sheriff in the chair the following resolutions were unanimously agreed to: - Proposed by J. H. Fisher Esq seconded by G. S. Kingston Esq. - 1st. That the Bill laid before Parliament entitled "A Bill for the better government of Her Majesty's Australian Colonies" so far as it relates to the colony of South Australia meets the wishes and wants of the colonists in most of its most essential provisions; and by recommending the concession of a Representative Government with such extensive powers deserves to be regarded as a wise. liberal and comprehensive measure; and that the thanks of the colonists are due to the Right Hon. Earl Grey Secretary for the Colonies and to Mr. Hawes Lord John Russell and Mr. Labouchere the members of the House of Commons who prepared and brought in the Bill. [376]  Proposed by Samuel Davenport Esq and seconded by George Elder Esq. - 2nd. That the formation of a General Assembly of the Australasian colonies however desirable on the majority of matters proposed to be left to the decision of such Assembly is in principle as in form a Federal Union; is in a British sense unconstitutional as morally opposed to the social institution of the colony and endangering our colonial independence.  Proposed by G. A. Anstey Esq and seconded by A. H. Davis Esq. - 3rd. That the resolutions recently passed by the Legislative Council recommending a second chamber do not represent the opinion nor convey the sentiment of the colonists particularly as the proposed Act confers all needful powers for amending the constitution and adapting it to future exigencies; and that any provision which should enforce upon the colonists a system of life nominees in such a Chamber this meeting deprecates as an intolerable evil which might neutralize all the good to be anticipated from the proposed measure.  Proposed by F. S. Dutton Esq and seconded by G. M. Waterhouse Esq. - 4th. The colonists being prepared as heretofore to bear the whole expenses of their civil government consider that they have a constitutional right to regulate by means of their representatives in Council the mode of raising and of appropriating the colonial revenue free from all direction and control by Her Majesty's Treasury or by the Commissioners of Customs; and they further consider that the Local Government should have the power of appointing all officers of government and that the salaries should be fixed by the Colonial Legislature.  Proposed by J. B. Montefiore Esq and seconded by Wm. Peacock Esq. - 5th. That this meeting considers the provisions in the Sydney Act fixing the qualifications of members of the proposed Representative Council and of the electors inapplicable to the circumstances of the colony; and that power should be therefore given to the Local Legislature to qualify such provisions as they may see fit. [377]  Proposed by Wm. Blyth Esq and seconded by Samuel Stocks Esq. - 6th. That a copy of the resolutions passed at this meeting and signed by the chairman be forwarded to Earl Grey; and that the following gentlemen be appointed a committee with power to add to their number to prepare petitions to both Houses of Parliament embodying these resolutions requesting His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to forward the same with the least possible delay.  [Signed] J. H. PISHER R. D. HANSON  E. STEPHENS GEO. ELDER  A. H. DAVIS O. A. ANSTEY  JOHN BROWN S. STOCKS junior.  G. S. KINGSTON JOHN BAKER.  S. DAVENPORT  A vote of thanks to the chairman was carried by acclamation.  C. B. NEWENHAM Chairman.  Within the last few days an Act of Council had come into operation which was of more importance as affecting the administration of justice than any other statute passed by the Colonial Legislature. His object he said in mentioning this Act and in alluding briefly to a few of its leading features was to direct to it the attention of the public and particularly of magistrates to whom a knowledge of its provisions was absolutely necessary. This Act the 14th Victoria No. 43 had been passed on the 2nd of October last and had come into operation on Monday last. By the Act itself and by three British statutes which were adopted by and embodied in it the duties of a Justice of the Peace both in and out of sessions were clearly defined; and while the magistrates were protected from all vexatious actions there were means provided by which all those who were affected by magisterial proceedings could protect themselves against error or injustice by resorting to a most simple and inexpensive proceeding of a summary nature by which the intervention of the Supreme Court would be obviated. The second clause of the Act of Council directed that as soon as possible after the termination of every case the depositions shall be transmitted by the committing magistrate to the office of the Attorney-General. This had been hitherto the usual although not the invariable practice but there had not until the present time been any legal enactment to enforce it. The third clause provided that all prisoners should be entitled to copies of the depositions when committed or held to bail by a justice or a coroner and to copies of examination or cross-examination upon paying a certain rate per folio. The ninth clause gave to the Supreme Court a power of correcting all errors in point of form or mistakes not affecting the substantial merits of the case and prohibited the discharge of a prisoner by Habeas Corpus for any cause of this nature. [106] As a counterbalance to this provision however the twelfth clause gave a summary and a simple means of relief in cases of erroneous orders or convictions. An inexpensive application to the Supreme Court or to a judge of that tribunal was the means provided for this purpose. The effect of these changes in the law in point of fact was to put an end to all opportunities of deriving advantage from mere technical objections and quibbles and to ensure the administration of justice according to the plain facts and merits of each case. The first point which was defined in the embodied Acts of Parliament was the power and duties of the magistrate as to the issue of a summons or a warrant and forms were given for all cases of this kind. The eighth clause defined the cases in which it was necessary the original information should be taken on oath or affirmation and in which mere parol and unsworn testimony or complaint without writing would be sufficient. It also provided that no objection as to want of form should be of any force in such cases. The whole course of proceedings in these cases was distinctly laid down so clearly as to render any error almost impossible. When there was any variance which in the opinions of the justices might have misled the party charged a power was given to them to remand the case until the defect could be remedied. Powers for compelling the attendance of witnesses and for summarily punishing any person who might refuse to be examined were also given. The seventeenth section of the same Act would change very materially the mode of taking depositions.   It had been the practice hitherto to have only what was considered the substance of a witness's evidence or a prisoner's statement reduced to writing; but this clause rendered it compulsory upon the Magistrate to have the whole of the evidence taken down and in the first person. It was not of course meant that all which was said on such occasions should be placed in writing but all that was pertinent to the case should be recorded upon the depositions and that in the very terms used. The judges had indeed entertained very considerable doubts whether the statements and admissions of a prisoner were even admissible at all as a matter of evidence unless they had been written down in the first person and in the very terms used no matter whether the latter were clear and intelligible or not. A power was given to the justices to sit with closed doors in cases where they were acting ministerially and where they conceived that the ends of justice would be furthered by this course; but whenever they acted judicially the place where they sat was to be deemed an open Court and defendants were to be allowed to avail themselves of the advocacy of a barrister or attorney if they thought fit. Power was given to a justice to remand upon warrant and to admit to bail even after committal.. Full directions were given as to proceedings under the powers of summary jurisdiction possessed by the justices and it was optional with them to adopt the forms of conviction given by this new Act in preference to those provided by other statutes by which they possessed these powers. Directions and forms of every nature indeed were contained in this Act so plain that it was almost impossible to err. The magistrate had beside a power of appealing to the Supreme Court for an expression of its opinion upon any point whereon he entertained a doubt. He might stay the progress of the case until he obtained this opinion and provided that he acted upon it he was not liable to any action. A gentleman of the legal profession thoroughly competent to the task was about he understood to prepare a synopsis of these enactments; [107] and he hoped when this was done that not only every member of the profession and every magistrate but every constable would procure a copy as it was important that the knowledge of their provisions should be widely diffused.  And whereas His Majesty by an Order in Council bearing date at Saint James's the first day of November one thousand eight hundred and thirty in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament was pleased to order that the Governor for the time being of the said settlement of Western Australia or the officer administering the government thereof the senior officer of His Majesty's Land Forces next in command the Colonial Secretary of the said territory for the time being the Surveyor General thereof for the time being and the Advocate General thereof for the time being so long as they shall respectively be resident in the said settlement or any three of them (of whom the Acting Governor to be one) shall have authority and power to make ordain and establish all such laws and ordinances and to constitute such courts and officers as may be necessary for the peace order and good government of His Majesty's subjects and others within the said settlements which power and authority shall nevertheless be so exercised subject to the following conditions and restrictions (that is to say) that all such laws and ordinances as aforesaid shall by the Governor or officer administering the government be with all convenient expedition transmitted to His Majesty for his approbation or disallowance through one of his principal Secretaries of State and that the same or any part thereof shall not be in force within the said settlements after His Majesty's disallowance thereof or of any of them or of any such part thereof or of any of them as aforesaid shall be made known therein and further that no such law or ordinance shall be made unless the same shall have first been proposed by the said Governor or officer administering the said government and further that in making all such laws and ordinances the said several persons shall and do conform to all such instructions as His Majesty shall from time to time be pleased to issue for that purpose. [211] And further that no court of justice be constituted by the several persons aforesaid within the said settlements except by a law or ordinance to be by them for that purpose made under and subject to the conditions and restrictions aforesaid:  Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia with the advice of the Legislative Council that there shall be within the said Colony of Western Australia a Court of Civil Judicature which shall be called the Civil Court of Western Australia.  2. And be it further enacted that the said Civil Court shall be a Court of Record.  3. And be it further enacted that the said Civil Court shall consist of and be holden by and before one judge who shall be styled "The Commissioner of the Civil Court of Western Australia" and shall be appointed by His Excellency the Governor by Warrant under the Public Seal of the said colony.  4. And be it further enacted that the said Commissioner shall hold his office during good behaviour and that it shall be lawful for His Excellency the Governor with the advice and consent of the Executive Council of the said colony upon proof of any misconduct of such Commissioner to discharge him from his said office by an order under the Public Seal of the said colony.  5. And be it further enacted that this said court shall have and use as occasion may require a seal bearing a device and impression of the Royal Arms within an exergue or label surrounding the same with this inscription "The Seal of the Civil Court of Western Australia" and that the said seal shall be kept in the custody of the said Commissioner. [212]  6. And be it further enacted that there shall be and belong to the said court the following officers (that is to say) a Registrar Clerk one messenger or bailiff to be constantly attendant on the court and two other messengers or bailiffs to be resident at convenient distances from the place where the court shall hold its sittings. And that such Registrar Clerk shall he appointed by the written order of His Excellency the Governor and shall be removed on proof of misconduct by the same authority and in like manner. And that all such messengers and bailiffs shall be appointed and discharged by and at the discretion of the said Commissioner. And that no new officer shall be appointed to the said court without the approval and written order of His Excellency.  7. And be it further enacted by the authority and with the advice aforesaid that the said Civil Court of Western Australia shall have cognizance of all pleas and jurisdictions in all cases as fully and amply in Western Australia as His Majesty's Courts of Kings Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer lawfully have in England. And that the said Civil Court shalt have authority to appoint guardians and committees over the persons and property of infants idiots and lunatics within the said colony; And to grant probates of wills and commit letters of administration of the chattels and effects of persons dying in the said colony in manner and form hereinafter more particularly set forth.  8. And be it further enacted that all suits or actions of whatever nature shall be commenced in the said Civil Court by summons or other process in the nature of a summons and not by arrest and that all process of execution issued out of the said court shall be directed against property only and not against the person.  9. Provided always and be it enacted and declared that if any person shall have a claim or ground of action of whatsoever nature against any other person who may be about to leave this colony and the party having such claim or ground of action as aforesaid shall produce to the Commissioner of the said court reasonable prima facie evidence of such his right of action and of the intention of such other party to leave the colony: in such case it shall be lawful for the said Commissioner to issue a warrant under his hand for the apprehension of the party so intending to leave the colony who shall thereupon give reasonable security at the discretion of the said Commissioner to abide the result of proceedings in the said court to be founded on such right of action or else shall be kept in custody until such proceeding shall have terminated; provided always that the party claiming such warrant shall prosecute his claim with all reasonable diligence otherwise it shall be lawful for the said Commissioners to discharge the party so kept in custody as aforesaid on his petition.  10. And be it further enacted that all pleadings in the said court shall be oral and made by the parties to the suit of action in person or by their respective lawful agents or deputies.  11. And be it further enacted that all suits or actions in the said Civil Court in which the debt or damages claimed or the value of the subject matter of such suit or action shall not exceed twenty pounds sterling shall be heard and determined without the intervention of a jury. And that in all other cases if either party shall be desirous of having the cause tried before a jury he or she shall be entitled to have the same so tried on application to the Registrar Clerk of the said court and on paying into the hands of such Registrar Clerk the costs of summoning and remunerating such jury. [213]  12. And be it further enacted . . . that the said Civil Court of Western Australia shall have full power to grant probates under the seal of the said court of the last wills and testaments of persons dying in the said colony or its dependencies and to commit letters of administration under the seal of the said court of the goods chattels credits and effects whatsoever of persons so dying as aforesaid who shall die intestate or who shall not have named an executor resident within the said colony or its dependencies or where the executor being duly cited shall not appear and sue forth such probate annexing the said will to the letters of administration when such person shall have left a will without naming any executor; and to sequester the goods chattels credits and effects whatsoever of such persons so dying in cases allowed by law as the same is and may be now used in the Diocese of London and to demand examine and allow or if occasion require disallow the accounts of them in such manner and form as may be used in the said diocese and to do all other things whatsoever necessary in that behalf: Provided always that in all cases where letters of administration shall be committed with the will annexed for want of an executor applying in due time to sue forth probate there shalt be reserved in such letters of administration full power and authority to revoke the same and to grant probate of the said will to such executor whenever he shall duly appear and sue forth the same.  13. And be it further enacted that such letters of administration shall be granted and committed by the said Civil Court to any one or more of the lawful next of kin of such person so dying as aforesaid and being then resident within the jurisdiction of the said court and being of the age of twenty-one years. And in case there shall be no such person or in case such person shall not appear when duly cited then such letters of administration shall be committed to the Registrar Clerk of the said court or to some creditor or creditors of the deceased as the court shall see fit.  14. And be it further enacted that every person to whom such letters of administration shall be committed shall before the granting thereof give sufficient security by bond to be entered into to the Registrar Clerk of the said court and his successors in office for payment of a competent sum of money with two able sureties respect being had (as to the sum therein to be contained and as to the abilities of the sureties) to the value of the estates credits and effects of the deceased; which bond shall be safely kept among the records of the said court and shall be conditioned for the making and exhibiting a true and just account and administration of the chattels credits and effects of the deceased to the satisfaction of the said court and according to the directions thereof. And in case it shall be found necessary to put the said bond in suit for obtaining the effect thereof for the benefit of such person or persons as shall appear to the said court to be interested therein (such person or persons from time to time giving satisfactory security for paying all such costs as may arise from the said suit) such person or persons shall by order of the said court be allowed to sue the same in the name of the Registrar Clerk of the said court for the time being.  15. And be it further enacted that the said court shall fix certain periods when all persons to whom probates of wills and letters of administration shall be granted by the said court shall from time to time until the effects of the deceased person shall be fully administered pass their accounts relating thereto before the said court and in case the effects of the deceased shall not be fully administered within the period for that purpose to be fixed by the said court then or at any earlier period at the discretion of the said court the person or persons so obtaining such probate or administration shall pay deposit or dispose of the balance of money belonging to the estate of the deceased then in his or their hands and also all other chattels and effects belonging to the estate of the deceased in such manner and unto such persons as the said court shall direct for safe custody. [214] And the said court shall from time to time make such order as shall be just for the due administration of such assets and for the payment or remittance thereof or of any part thereof as occasion shall require to or for the use of any person or persons whether resident or not resident in the said colony who may be entitled thereto or to any part thereof whether as creditors. legatees or next of kin or by any other right or title whatsoever. And it shall be lawful for the said court to allow to any executor or administrator of the effects of any deceased person such commission or percentage out of their assets as shall be just and reasonable for their pains and trouble therein.  16. Provided always and be it enacted that no allowance whatever shall be made for the pains and trouble of any executor or administrator who shall neglect to pass his accounts at such time or to dispose of any goods chattels or securities with which he shall be chargeable in such manner as in pursuance of any general or special rule or order of the said court shall he requisite. And moreover every such executor or administrator so guilty of any such neglect shall be charged with interest at the rate then current in the said colony for such sum or sums of money as from time to time shall have been in his hands whether he shall or shall not have made interest thereof.  17. And be it further enacted by the authority and with the advice aforesaid that it shall be lawful for the said court to appoint guardians and keepers of infants and their estates according to the order and course observed in England and also guardians and keepers of the persons and estates of natural fools and of such as are or shall be deprived of their reason by the act of God so as to be unable to govern themselves and their estates and to enquire hear and determine all questions of idiotcy or lunacy by a jury of twenty-four good and lawful men the opinion of the majority of whom shall be taken and received as the verdict of the said jury.  18. And be it further enacted that in all cases in which any final order judgment or sentence shall be made or pronounced by the said court for or in respect of any sum or matter of issue at the value or amount of one hundred pounds or in case such order judgment or sentence shall directly or indirectly involve any claim demand or question respecting property or any civil right amounting to or of the value of one hundred pounds any person feeling aggrieved thereby may within twenty-eight days after the same shall have been made or pronounced appeal therefrom to His Excellency the Governor and the Executive Council of the said Governor upon giving fourteen days notice of such appeal to the adverse party and upon giving reasonable security to the satisfaction of the said court for the due prosecution of the appeal the due performance of such order or judgment as the said Governor and Council shall think fit to make and for payments of the costs of the appeal. [215] And it is hereby declared that no evidence shall be received on such appeals which was not received on the original hearing.  19. And be it further enacted that in all cases of appeal as aforesaid the said court shall conform to and execute all such judgments and orders as his said Excellency and the said Executive Council shall think fit to make in the premises in such manner as any original order judgment. or sentence of the said court could or might have been executed.  20. And be it further enacted that it shall be lawful for His Excellency the Governor by and with the advice and consent of the Executive Council of the said colony to make and prescribe such rules and orders touching the times and places of session form of process pleadings and other business and proceedings of the said court and of the fees payable therein as to him and them shall seem fit and such rules and orders from time to time to alter amend or revoke as occasion may require.   (a) Court of Quarter Sessions Act 1832 (2 Will. IV No. 4)  Whereas a Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace has for some time past by virtue of a Commission of the Peace issued by His Excellency the Governor of this colony existed and acted within the same. And whereas it is necessary to extend the jurisdiction of the said court (being the only criminal court in the said colony) to certain offences of which by the custom of England such courts do not generally take cognizance and also to regulate the proceedings of the said court in certain cases hereinafter specified. [218]  1. Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia and its dependencies with the advice of the Legislative Council that from and after the passing of this Act the Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the said colony shall have power to hear and determine all felonies whatsoever whether capital or otherwise including forgery and perjury at common law and all misdemeanours whatsoever in whatever part of the said colony or its dependencies such felonies or misdemeanours shall have been committed and whether the same shall have been committed before or after the passing of this Act. Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to give the said court jurisdiction over any offence which by the laws of England is exclusively cognizable by Courts of Admiralty or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.  2. And be it further enacted that with the exception of alterations introduced by this Act the powers and authorities the mode of proceeding in the trial of all crimes and misdemeanours the forms rules and regulations and the ministerial officers of the said court shall be the same as in Courts of Quarter Sessions of the Peace in England so far as the circumstances and situation for the time being of the said colony shall admit.  3. And be it further enacted that the sessions of the said court shall be held at such times and places as the said Governor shall from time to time appoint by proclamation; and that in the mean time until any such proclamation to the contrary the same shall be held at the times and places at which the same have hitherto been held.  4. Provided always and be it further enacted that the said court shall not proceed to the trial of any person charged with an offence punishable with death unless three magistrates at least shall be present who shall also remain present during the whole time of such trial.  5. And be it further enacted that no sentence of death passed by the said court shall be carried into execution until the same shall have been first reported by the chairman of the said court to the said Governor and until the said Governor shall issue a warrant under his hand and the public seal of the said colony directing the Sheriff of the said colony to cause such sentence to be carried into execution.  6. And be it further enacted that no sentence of transportation beyond seas passed by the said court shall appoint the place to which the offender so sentenced shall be transported; but that such place shall be left to the appointment of the said Governor by proclamation or by warrant under his hand and the public seal of the said colony.  7. And be if further enacted that the Clerk of the Peace for the said colony shall keep a book . . . which shall be called "The criminal record book."  8. And be it further enacted that an abstract of the said criminal record book certified to be correct by the chairman of the said court shall be by him submitted to the Governor and Executive Council as soon as conveniently may be after each Quarter Sessions. [219]  9. And be it further enacted that it shall be lawful for the said Governor by warrant under his hand and the public seal of the said colony to appoint a fit and proper person to be Chairman of the said Court and some other fit and proper person to be Clerk of the Peace for the said colony. And as well the said chairman as the said Clerk of the Peace to remove and discharge by order in writing on account of any misfeasance or nonfeasance.  (b) Justices of the Peace Ordinance 1845 (9 Vic. No. 4)  Whereas it is expedient to constitute Local Courts for the trial of certain criminal offences at Albany and other remote districts of this colony so as to avoid the great expense and inconvenience either of bringing the prosecutors witnesses and prisoners from so great a distance to Perth for trial or sending the Chairman (who is also the Commissioner of the Civil Court) the Advocate-General and the officers of the Court of Quarter Sessions to so great a distance from Perth to the serious interruption of public business: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof: That Courts of General Sessions of the Peace for the various districts of this colony may be holden under and by virtue of the provisions of this Ordinance at such times and in such places as the Governor shall by proclamation from time to time appoint: Provided that such courts may be appointed to be held more or less frequently than four times a year as convenience may require and that each of such courts shall have power to adjourn its sittings from time to time if necessary.  2. And be it enacted that the said Courts of General Sessions of the Peace so appointed for such districts shall be Courts of Record and shall be held before any two or more Justices of the Peace of the said colony whereof the Chairman or Deputy-Chairman as hereinafter mentioned shall be one and shall have power to hear and determine all felonies whatsoever not punishable with death including forgery and perjury at common law and all other misdemeanours whatsoever committed in any part of the said colony and whether the same shall have been committed before or after the passing of this Ordinance and all such appeals and other matters and things as may be assigned to General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace by any Ordinance heretofore or hereinafter to be passed: Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to give the said courts jurisdiction over any offence which by the laws of England is exclusively cognizable by Courts of Admiralty.  3. And be it enacted that it shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to nominate and appoint during pleasure any Justice of the Peace to be Chairman of any such courts: Provided that in order to provide for the case of the illness temporary incapacity or absence from the colony of the Chairman of such court the Governor may appoint any other Justice to be Deputy-Chairman of such court who during such illness temporary incapacity or absence and no longer shall be deemed and taken to be the Chairman of such court for the time being to all intents and purposes:  Provided also that in case of sickness or unavoidable absence the acting Chairman shall be empowered under his hand and seal to appoint a Deputy-Chairman being a Justice of the Peace to act for him at the Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the district then next ensuing and no longer or otherwise.  4. And be it enacted that it shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to nominate and appoint clerks and all ministerial and other proper officers of the said courts and the same at any time to remove and appoint others and in case of the absence of any such officer from any sitting the Chairman for the time being may appoint some fit and proper person to act in his stead at such sitting.  5. And be it enacted that if in any case the required number of justices shall not be present at the time and place appointed for the holding of any such court any one justice (whether he be the Chairman or not) shall be a lawfully constituted court for the purpose of opening such court and of adjourning the same and respiting all recognizances until such further day as such justice shall then and there cause to be proclaimed.  6. And be it enacted that with the exception of alterations introduced by this or any subsequent Ordinance the powers and authorities the mode of proceeding in the trial of all crimes and misdemeanours the forms rules and regulations of any court established under this Ordinance in any particular district shall be the same as in the Court of General Sessions of the Peace for the said colony (usually held in Perth) as far as the circumstances and the situation for the time being of the district shall admit.  7. And be it enacted that no sentence of transportation beyond seas passed by such court shall appoint the place to which the offender so sentenced shall be transported but that such place shall be left to the appointment of the Governor.  8. Provided always and be it enacted that whensoever it shall appear that any crime or offence from its nature or magnitude ought to be tried by the Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the colony it shall be lawful for any court so appointed for any such district as aforesaid to remit such case for trial before the Court of General Quarter Sessions and to take proper recognizances for the appearance of all parties and witnesses thereat which recognizances shall be returned to the said Court of General Quarter Sessions aforesaid at the next sitting thereof. .  (c) Judicial Interpretation of the 1845 Act  Hensman J. This is a rule for a prohibition which has been applied for directed to J. A. Wright Esquire of Albany and one O'Donohue to prevent them from further proceeding with an order made by the Court of Quarter Sessions at Albany recently. It appears that the applicant Beasley was prosecuted before the Justices in Petty Sessions for an offence against some recent Act with the result that he was ordered to keep the peace for some time and to pay a certain sum for costs. Beasley appealed to the Court of Quarter Sessions  -  as he was entitled to do  -  and that court which was attended by solicitors or counsel on both sides was composed of Mr. Wright in the chair. No objection was taken at that time to that constitution of the court by either counsel and Mr. Wright confirmed the order which he had previously made and ordered Beasley to pay the costs of the appeal. A few days afterwards steps were taken to apply for a prohibition. Other grounds were mentioned to which it is not necessary to refer but the main ground upon which we are now about to give our decision was that the court was improperly constituted and that it was necessary in order to constitute a Court of Quarter Sessions that there should be a chairman and at least one other Justice of the Peace. [221] The case depends upon two statutes. The first is the 9 Victoria No. 4  -  an Act to make provision for the trial of criminal offences at Albany and other remote districts of the State. It in effect constitutes Courts of Quarter Sessions and it says that the courts so appointed shall be courts of record and shall be held before any two or more Justices of the Peace of the State whereof the chairman or deputy chairman as thereinafter mentioned shall be one and shall have power to hear appeals and other matters. Then it goes on to say that the Governor may nominate any Justice of the Peace to be chairman. Further it is enacted that in any case in which the required number of Justices is not present any one Justice whether he be chairman or not shall be constituted the court for the purpose of adjourning it. If that statute stood alone it must be obvious that there should be a chairman and one other Justice of the Peace at least in order to constitute a Court of Quarter Sessions. But reliance has been placed by counsel on a later Act  -  the 27 Victoria No. 17 intituled "An Ordinance to extend the jurisdiction of the Police and Resident Magistrates." That enacts that it shall be lawful for any Police or Resident Magistrate to do any act directed to be done by more than one Justice of the Peace. But then occurs a proviso that no such Police or Resident Magistrate shall be competent to act alone in anything required to be done by Courts of Petty Sessions or any general Sessions of Justices of the Peace. It appears to me quite clear that that Act when it gave a Resident or Police Magistrate power to do what otherwise should be done by two Justices of the Peace intended specially to except the Courts of Quarter Sessions. In point of fact the chairman of Quarter Sessions is not necessarily a Resident or Police Magistrate. It is open to the Governor to appoint any Justice of the Peace to be the chairman of the Quarter Sessions and probably it is the fact that Quarter Sessions are held at places where there are not Resident or Police Magistrates. However be that as it may I am clearly of opinion that the Court of Quarter Sessions on this occasion was wrongly constituted and in other words that the case was coram non judice. 