 The League and Solemn Engagement of the Australasian Colonies Declared by the Delegates in the Conference held in Melbourne 1st February 1851.  Whereas in 1840 by an Order-in-Council the practice of transporting convicts to New South Wales was abandoned by the Crown: And Whereas by divers promises the Government of Great Britain engaged not to send convicts from the United Kingdom to New South Wales New Zealand Victoria or King George's Sound: And Whereas by an Act of the British Parliament transportation to South Australia was positively prohibited: And Whereas Lieutenant Governor Denison in 1847 declared to the Colonists of Van Diemen's Land Her Majesty's most gracious purpose that transportation to that island should be discontinued: And Whereas the colony of Van Diemen's Land has been deeply injured by the pouring in of enormous masses of transported offenders: And Whereas divers and repeated attempts have been made to depart from the letter and spirit of these promises: And Whereas the avowed object of Her Majesty's Secretary of State is to transfuse the convicts disembarked in Van Diemen's Land through the Australasian Colonies and thus to evade the spirit of the promises and Act of Parliament so made: And Whereas large tracts of land have been purchased by the colonists from the Crown many millions of capital invested in improvements and many thousands of Her Majesty's subjects have settled in Australia on the pledged faith of the Crown not to disturb their social welfare by the importation of crime: And Whereas the native Australasians are entitled to all the rights and privileges of British subjects and to the sympathy and protection of the British nation: And Whereas many and varied efforts have been made to induce her Majesty's Ministers and the British Parliament to terminate the practice of transportation to these colonies but without success - Now therefore the Delegates of these colonies in Conference assembled do declare their League and Solemn Engagement to the effect following:  That they engage not to employ any persons hereafter arriving under Sentence of transportation for crime committed in Europe.   That they will use all the powers they possess official electoral and legislative to prevent the establishment of English prisons or penal settlements within their bounds; that they will refuse assent to any projects to facilitate the administration of such penal systems and that they will seek the repeal of all regulations and the removal of all establishments for such purposes.  That they solemnly engage with each other to support by their advice their money and their countenance all who may suffer in the lawful promotion of this cause. [163]  It is quite impossible for me to describe to your Lordship the effect which these discoveries have had upon the whole community and the influence which their consequences exercise at this time upon the position and prospects of every one high and low. The discoveries early in the year in the Bathurst district of New South Wales unsettled the public mind of the labouring classes of all the Australian colonies to a certain extent and had a marked and immediate influence upon the labour market and the price of provisions in this colony; still both the distance from the scene of the discovery and the approach of winter were in our favour a journey to the Bathurst district requiring a degree of decision and preparation which few comparatively of the labouring classes were in a position to meet. The discoveries within our bounds coming as they do at the close of the wet season in localities in comparative proximity to our towns exercise a far wider influence upon our exciteable population than did the discoveries in New South Wales upon that colony under the advantages of a larger population and the greater remoteness of the gold field. Within the last three weeks the towns of Melbourne and Geelong and their large suburbs have been in appearance almost emptied of many classes of their male inhabitants; the streets which for a week or ten days were crowded by drays loading with the outfit for the workings are now seemingly deserted. Not only have the idlers to be found in every community and day labourers in town and the adjacent country shopmen artisans and mechanics of every description thrown up their employments and in most cases leaving their employers and their wives and families to take care of themselves run off to the workings but responsible tradesmen farmers clerks of every grade and not a few of the superior classes have followed; some unable to withstand the mania and force of the stream or because they were really disposed to venture time and money on the chance but others because they were as employers of labour left in the lurch and had no other alternative. Cottages are deserted houses to let business is at a stand - still and even schools are closed. In some of the suburbs not a man is left and the women are known for self-protection to forget neighbours jars and to group together to keep house. The ships in the harbour are in a great measure deserted; and we hear of instances where not only farmers and respectable agriculturists have found that the only way as those employed by them deserted was to leave their farms join them and form a band and go shares but even masters of vessels foreseeing the impossibility of maintaining any control over their men otherwise have made up parties among them to do the same. [7] Fortunate the family whatever its position which retains its servants at any sacrifice and can further secure the wonted supplies for their households from the few tradesmen who remain and retain the means of supplying their customers at any augmentation of price. Drained of its labouring population the price of provisions in the towns is naturally on the increase for although there may be an' abundant supply within reach there are not sufficient hands to turn it to account. Both here and at Geelong all buildings and contract works public and private almost without exception are at a standstill. No contract can be insisted upon under the circumstances.  In the country your Lordship will easily conceive that viewing the season at which these circumstances have occurred and the agricultural and particularly the pastoral interests at stake that this is the commencement of the shearing Season and that shortly the harvest will call for labour great embarrassment and anxiety prevails. Convinced as I am that a reaction must very shortly take place I cannot but be alive to the difficulty and anxiety under which all are labouring and should have been glad if it had been in any measure in the power of the Government to alleviate it.  As far as regards the general and popular movement in the first instance of the violence of which it is in vain for me to attempt to give your Lordship a just idea I have already observed that doubtless a strong reaction will take place and that speedily.- Let the quantity of gold distributed under the surface of the country be what it may hundreds who have followed the stream and first impulse and adventured themselves in the gold field will shortly find that they are physically unfitted for the labour and self-denial which it entails. Large numbers will find that they are equally morally unfitted for it and will gladly return to the steady gains and comforts of a fixed sphere of labour and home. The unequal distribution of the precious ore under the surface the great exertion ordinarily required for the search and the failure of the supply of water which must follow the advance of the season will all soon produce their effects and multitudes will be disgusted and disappointed. I have no doubt but a certain amount of distress will follow this excitement and the rash steps which hundreds have taken in consequence of it. Large numbers not only of the labouring classes but also of clerks &c. have thrown themselves out of employment spending their all if not incurring debt for an outfit Which the object failing can be of little value. Doubtless much embarrassment will be experienced by the settlers in the remoter districts for the want of hands at the impending shearing. [8] In the vicinity of the workings this is not the case; and labour even at the time of my visit could be readily secured on the very ground amongst those who while they saw gold drawn by handsful from an adjacent hole had slaved for a week and had got none or who at once on arrival on the ground saw that it was harder work than shearing and held out a chance of less certain profit. The harvest will not be ripe I trust before the reaction may have again supplied the labour market with a sufficiency of hands however expensive.  With reference to the Proclamation issued on the 22nd May instant declaring the rights of the Crown in respect to gold found in its natural place of deposit within the territory of New South Wales his Excellency the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council has been pleased to establish the following provisional regulations under which licences may be obtained to dig search for and remove the same: -   1. From and after the first day of June next no person will be permitted to dig search for or remove gold on or from any land whether public or private without first taking out and paying for a licence in the form annexed.  2. For the present and pending further proof of the extent of the gold field the licence fee has been fixed at one pound ten shillings per month to be paid in advance; but it is to be understood that the rate is subject to future adjustment as circumstances may render expedient.  3. The licences can be obtained on the spot from the commissioner who has been appointed by his Excellency the Governor to carry these regulations into effect and who is authorized to receive the fee payable thereon.  4. No person will be eligible to obtain a licence or the renewal of a licence unless he shall produce a certificate of discharge from his last service or prove to the satisfaction of the commissioner that he is not a person improperly absent from hired service.  5. Rules adjusting the extent and position of land to be covered by each licence and for the prevention of confusion and the interference of one licence with another will be the subject of early regulations. [9]  6. With reference to lands alienated by the Crown in fee simple the Commissioner will not be authorized for the present to issue licences under these regulations to any person but the proprietors or persons authorized by them in writing to apply for the same.  Form referred to No. 185.  The bearer having paid to me the sum of one pound ten shillings on account of the territorial revenue I hereby license him to dig search for and remove gold on and from any such Crown land within the county of Bathurst as I shall assign to him for that purpose during the month of 185.  This licence must be produced whenever demanded by me or any other person acting under the authority of the Government. A B Commissioner  I cannot doubt but that a great number of persons will flock to the gold diggings from the adjoining colonies and that some will be attracted from England while the production of food in the colony itself if not in those adjoining (I mean Victoria and South Australia) will probably be very much diminished. There will therefore be a demand for the agricultural produce which can be raised in this colony at prices amply remunerative to the agriculturist; but on the other hand the free labourers will of course take advantage of the means of communication which are placed at their disposal and will flock to the diggings; and thus while the demand for labour will be daily on the increase the actual supply will diminish and our means of production will decrease in the same ratio. [85]  I lay great stress upon this as a question to a certain extent of life and death. The production of food in the Australian colonies has been calculated upon for years with certainty; The Mauritius and the Cape of Good Hope are in some measure dependent upon supplies furnished from hence. Should then the discovery of gold or any equivalent cause check this production should 'the supply of food fall Short while at the same time the mouths to be fed are increasing great distress if not actual famine must be the result.  It may be said "Look to the American States on the coast of the Pacific;" but the produce of these countries is to a great extent absorbed by the Californian market.  From what I have said your Lordship will I think draw the conclusion that the supply of 2000 men per annum which has only just been sufficient to meet the demand of the present and past years will not be sufficient for the wants of the colony for the next few years. I am confident that ample employment will be found for a greater number and that the interests of the colony will suffer materially should I be obliged to postpone the construction of various public works for Want of labour to carry them out.  The prosperity of the agricultural interests of the colony must depend very much upon the facilities which are afforded for the conveyance of produce to market. The difference between a bad and a good road upon a transport of 40 miles is equivalent to more than the rent of the land; and I hope and trust that the efforts now making for the improvement of our means of internal communication will not be checked by a deficiency of labour.  I would therefore beg to suggest to your Lordship the propriety of sending out a certain number of men on probation for whom ample employment can be found and for the maintenance and discipline of whom I have the means of providing; and I leave it to your Lordship to judge whether any or what extension should be made of the number stated by the Comptroller General is capable of being absorbed by the labour market of this colony; premising that this number (2000) should be irrespective altogether of those sent out on probation.  We the Legislative Council of New South Wales in Council assembled feel it to be a duty which we owe to ourselves to our constituents and to posterity before we give place to the New Legislature established by the 13th and 14th Vict. cap. 59 to record our deep disappointment and dissatisfaction at the Constitution conferred by that Act on this Colony. After the reiterated reports resolutions addresses and petitions which have proceeded from us during the whole course of our Legislative career against the Schedules appended to the 5 and 6 Vict. cap. 76 and the appropriations of our Ordinary Revenue under the sole authority of Parliament - against the administration of our Waste Lands and our Territorial Revenue thence arising - against the withholding of the Customs Department from our control - against the dispensation of the patronage of the Colony at the dictation of the Minister for the Colonies - and against the veto reserved and exercised by the same Minister in the name of the Crown in matters of Local Legislation - we feel that we had a right to expect that these undoubted grievances would have been redressed by the 13 and 14 Vict. cap. 59; or that power to redress them would have been conferred on the constituent bodies thereby created with the avowed intention of establishing an authority more competent than Parliament itself to frame suitable constitutions for the whole group of the Australian Colonies. [323] These our reasonable expectations have been utterly frustrated. The Schedules instead of being abolished have been increased. The powers of altering the appropriations in these Schedules conferred on the Colonial Legislature by this new Act limited as these powers are have been in effect nullified by the subsequent Instructions of the Colonial Minister. The exploded fallacies of the Wakefield theory are still clung to; the pernicious Land Sales Act (5 and 6 Vict. cap. 36) is still enforced; and thousands of our fellow subjects (in consequence of the undue price put by that mischievous and impolitic enactment upon our waste lands in defiance of the precedents of the United States of Canada and the other North American Colonies and even of the neighbouring Colony of the Cape of Good Hope) are annually diverted from our shores and thus forced against their will to seek a home for themselves and their children in the backwoods of America. Nor is this all - Our Territorial Revenue diminished as it is by this most mistaken policy is in a great measure confined to the introduction among us of people unsuited to our wants and in many instances the outpourings of the poor-houses and Unions of the United Kingdom instead of being applied in directing to this Colony a Stream of vigorous and efficient labour calculated to elevate the character of our industrial population. The bestowal of office among us with but partial exception is still exercised by or at the nomination of the Colonial Minister and without any reference to the just claims of the Colonists as if the Colony itself were but the fief of that Minister. The salaries of the Officers of the Customs and all other departments of Government included in the Schedules are placed beyond our control; and the only result of this new enactment introduced into Parliament by the Prime Minister himself with the declared intention of conferring upon us enlarged powers of self-government and treating us at last as an integral portion of the Empire - is that all the material powers exercised for centuries by the House of Commons are still withheld from us; that our loyalty and desire for the maintenance of order and good government are so far distrusted that we are not permitted to vote our own Civil List lest it might prove inadequate to the requirements of the Public Service; that our Waste Lands and our Territorial Revenue for which Her Majesty is but a trustee instead of being spontaneously surrendered as the equivalent for such Civil List is still reserved to the great detriment of all classes of Her Majesty's subjects in order to swell the patronage and power of the Ministers of the Crown; that whilst in defiance of the Declaratory Act (18 Geo. Ill cap. 12 sec. 1) which has hitherto been considered the Magna Charta of the representative rights of all the British Plantations a large amount Of our Public Revenue is thus levied and appropriated by the authority of Parliament we have not even the consolation of seeing that portion of it which is applied to the payment of the Salaries of our Public Officers distributed as it ought to be among the settled inhabitants; and that as a fit climax to this system of misrule we are not allowed to exercise the most ordinary legislation which is not subject to the veto of the Colonial Minister. [324]  We the Legislative Council of New South Wales do accordingly hereby solemnly protest insist and declare as follows: - 1st. That the Imperial Parliament has not nor of right ought to have any power to tax the people of this Colony or to appropriate any of the moneys levied by authority of the Colonial Legislature; - that this power can only be lawfully exercised by the Colonial Legislature - and that the Imperial Parliament has solemnly disclaimed this power by the 18 Geo. III cap. 12 sec. 1 which Act remains unrepealed.  2nd. - That the Revenue arising from the Public Lands derived as it is mainly from the value imported to them by the labor and capital of the people of this Colony is as much their property as the Ordinary Revenue and ought therefore to be subject only to the like control and appropriation.  3rd. - That the Customs and all other Ddepartments should be subject to the direct supervision and control of the Colonial Legislature; which should have the appropriation of the gross Revenues of the Colony from whatever source arising; and as a necessary incident to this authority the regulation of the salaries of all Colonial Officers.  4th.- - That Offices of trust and emolument should be conferred only on the settled inhabitants the office of Governor alone excepted; that this Office should be appointed and paid by the Crown; and that the whole patronage of the Colony should be vested in him and the Executive Council unfettered by Instructions from the Minister for the Colonies.  5th. - That plenary powers of Legislation should be conferred upon and exercised by the Colonial Legislature for the time being; and that no Bills should be reserved for the signification of Her Majesty's Pleasure unless they affect the Prerogatives of the Crown or the general interests of the Empire.  That these grievances having formed the subject of repeated representations and complaints from the former Legislative Council all of which have met with neglect or disregard from Your Majesty's Colonial Minister we owe it to ourselves and our constituents to denounce to Your Majesty as the chief grievance to which the people of this Colony are subjected the systematic and mischievous interference which is exercised by that Minister even in matters of purely local concernment. [325]  That whilst we are most anxious to strengthen and perpetuate the connexion which still happily subsists with our Fatherland we feel it a solemn duty to Your Majesty and our fellow Countrymen in the United Kingdom to declare that it will be impossible much longer to maintain the authority of a Local Executive which is obliged by its Instructions to refer all measures of importance no matter how great the urgency for their immediate adoption for the decision of an inexperienced remote and irresponsible Department.  That in order however that Your Majesty's Confidential Advisers may have no excuse for the continuance of these abuses we unhesitatingly declare that we are prepared upon the surrender to the Colonial Legislature of the entire management of all our revenues Territorial as well as General in which we include Mines of every description description and upon the establishment of a Constitution among us similar in its outline to that of Canada to assume and provide for the whole cost of our Internal Government whether Civil or Military the salary of the Governor-General only excepted - and to grant to Your Majesty an adequate Civil List on the same terms as in Canada instead of the sums appropriated in the Schedules to the Imperial Act 13 and 14 Victoria chap. 59.  They have been fully impressed with a sense of the importance to be attached to that Petition not only as proceeding from a great majority of the Legislature of the Province [...] a statement moreover which was accompanied by your assurance that its sentiments were shared by the most loyal respectable and influential members of the community.  But they are influenced in addition by considerations arising from those extraordinary discoveries of Gold which have lately taken place in some of the Australian Colonies and which may be said to have imparted new and unforseen features to their political and social condition. [326]  They are sensible that they have now to consider the prayer of the Petition thus laid before Her Majesty with reference to a state of affairs which has no parallel in history and which must in all human probability stimulate the advance of population wealth and material prosperity with a rapidity alike unparalleled.  And with the evidence thus before them they cannot but feel that while it has become more urgently necessary than heretofore to place full powers of self-government in the hands of a people thus advanced in wealth and prosperity that people have on the other hand given signal evidence of their fitness to regulate their own affairs especially under legislative institutions amended in the manner which the Council itself has pointed out in the concluding part of this Petition.  It is in this spirit and with these views that her Majesty's Government have approached the consideration of the great subject before them; and under circumstances thus altered it becomes less necessary than it otherwise might have been that they should enter minutely on the consideration of the separate grievances here alleged.  It is however their duty to state that they concur in opinion with their predecessors as to a portion of these grievances and consider the allegations concerning them to have been answered in substance by Lord Grey's Despatch of the 23rd January last. They agree with His Lordship that there is no just complaint in evidence before them as to the distribution of the patronage of the Crown in the Australian Colonies and that the exclusive rule proposed by the Council could not be adopted without great prejudice to the public service. They believe that the wish of the Council that the Customs shall be subject to the direct supervision and control of the Local Legislature has been to considerable extent met by the directions contained in Lord Grey's Despatches of August the 8th 1850 and February the 12th last and they will therefore not at present cuter further into that ground of remonstrance except by saying that they are prepared to give fair consideration to any representations or proposals which the Legislature of the Colony may be disposed hereafter to make with respect to it.  As to the more important question involved in the last head of the grievances stated in the Petition namely the demand for the exemption of legislative enactments of a strictly local character from the disallowing power of the Crown Her Majesty's Government have no indisposition to meet the views of the Council if any practicable mode can be devised of distinguishing Local from Imperial subjects of legislation. But as to the difficulty of fixing on such a mode they cannot better express their views than has already been done by Lord Grey. [327]  Believing that neither the plan noticed and combated by His Lordship nor other plans which have been suggested with the same general purpose would prove useful or indeed practicable substitutes for the system now in force they must add that under the present mode of exercising the Royal Prerogative in this behalf the grievance complained of is in their opinion rather theoretical than practical.  Upon the two remaining grounds of complaint those namely which stand first in the Petition Her Majesty's Government are ready to accede to the wishes of the Council and of the Colony in a spirit of entire confidence.  They are indeed unable to concede the claim advanced on behalf of the Colonists to the Administration of the Waste Lands as one of absolute right in which shape the Petition asserts it. And here again feeling it their duty not to leave this claim unnoticed they are unable to express their views on it better than by adopting the language of Lord Grey in the Despatch referred to.  They concur further in His Lordship's opinion that when and on what conditions it may be desirable to transfer the control of the Waste Lands of a Colony to its Local Legislature is a question of expediency and not of right.  But they have arrived after full consideration at the conclusion that under the new and rapidly changing circumstances of New South Wales the time is come at which it is their duty to advise Her Majesty that the administration of these lands should be transferred to the Colonial Legislature after those changes in its Constitution have been effected which are adverted to in the Petition.  It only remains for me to refer once more to the last paragraph of the Petition which I conclude to express the sentiment of the Council that a reform in the Constitution of the Legislature itself is expedient along with that extension of its powers which they demand. In that sentiment Her Majesty's Government fully concur. They believe that the rapid progress of New South Wales in wealth and population renders it necessary that the form of its Institutions should be more nearly assimilated to that prevailing in the Mother Country and should be better adapted to the enlarged functions and increased responsibilities which will now devolve on the Legislative Body. I will not lengthen this Despatch by enlarging upon the advantages of a double Chamber for the safe and satisfactory government of an important Community under representative Institutions. The people of New South Wales must not only be familiar with the recent discussions in Parliament on this subject when their own Constitution was under debate but they must be aware that the change has been recommended in several able Des-patches from yourself and has been much debated among themselves both on public occasions and by their representatives. [328] In a remarkable Memorial from certain Inhabitants of New South Wales forwarded to my predecessor in your Despatch of April 12th 1850 I find it stated as in their opinion of the highest importance "to protect the Colony against rash and hasty legislation by the interposition of a second Chamber" a step in the progress of Constitutional improvement which they add has from the first been contemplated and ought no longer to be deferred.  Assuming therefore that this is a change as to the expediency of which general agreement prevails Her Majesty's Government believe it to be desirable for the interests of the Colony that it should precede those important concessions which I have now the pleasure of announcing their readiness to make.  Ample powers for the purpose of effecting this alteration appear to be entrusted to the existing Legislature by the Constitutional Act of 1850 subject to the confirmation by the Crown of any Act passed for the purpose.  In compliance therefore with the opinion expressed by the Council in favor of a Constitution similar in its outlines to that of Canada and with a view also to the most simple and expeditious mode of completing the whole transaction it is the wish of Her Majesty's Government that the Council should establish the new Legislature on the bases of an Elective Assembly and a Legislative Council to be nominated by the Crown. Adopting this general outline they would leave it to the judgment of the Council to determine the numbers of the two Chambers and if they think it necessary to make any change in the constituency by which the new Assembly is to be elected subject to the approval of such change by Her Majesty when the Act is submitted to Her.  It is scarcely necessary to add that Her Majesty's Government do not consider that the power which the Legislature of New South Wales at present possesses of changing its Constitution is to be considered as exhausted by this exercise of it; that power must be retained in case further reform should at any time appear expedient.  On the receipt by Her Majesty's Advisers of such a Constitutional enactment by the present Colonial Legislature as I have here generally indicated with a Civil List annexed to it in accordance with what I understand to be the intention of the Legislative Council they undertake forthwith to propose to Parliament such measures as will be necessary to carry into effect the entire arrangement namely the repeal of the Land Sales' Acts and the requisite alterations in the Constitutional Acts and Schedules annexed to them.  And in the meantime it is to me a source of very great satisfaction to be the Agent for conveying to you the consent of Her Majesty's Government which they trust will not only tend to promote the welfare and prosperity of the great Colony over which you preside but also to cement and perpetuate the ties of kindred affection and mutual confidence which connect its people with that of the United Kingdom. [329]  The Supreme Court of New South Wales for the District of Port Phillip was established by Act of Council in October 1840: emanating from the Supreme Court of New South Wales at Sydney its fictitious unity with that court has been in some instances maintained notwithstanding the fact that for many purposes it possessed a distinct independent and subordinate jurisdiction.  This court has been hitherto presided over by one judge invested with all the powers and discharging duties similar to those of the three Judges of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in all its various departments to which by a singular incongruity have been superadded those of the Chairman of the Court of Quarter Sessions. It has had a set of ministerial officers not amenable to the control of any other judges. The boundaries of the district of Port Phillip defined the limits of its territorial jurisdiction within which (with certain exceptions) the writs of the Supreme Court of New South Wales could not run and though thus apparently a distinct and Supreme Court with respect to locality identity and authority it had no separate existence. It has been determined "that there are not two separate and distinct supreme courts in the Colony of New South Wales but that the Supreme Court of New South Wales exists for the entire colony". The court was held in Sydney before three judges at Port Phillip before one but all were alike judges of the same court and yet strange to say an appeal from the Resident Judge of Port Phillip sitting in Banco to his colleagues of the more numerous bench in Sydney was permitted and conducted on a principle similar to that which has regulated an appeal from the Primary Judge in Equity to the Full Court of New South Wales - a course analogous to that from the Master of the Rolls or Vice Chancellor to the Lord Chancellor of England. What is still more incongruous a writ of certiorari has been directed by the Judges of the Supreme Court to the Resident Judge thus establishing two propositions that the court for the district of Port Phillip is independent of that for New South Wales and at the same time its inferior.  In this state the court has existed for eleven years under four judges in succession and its hitherto anomalous position is rendered still more extraordinary since the erection of the district of Port Phillip into the Colony of Victoria. [135]  The style of the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria is "The Supreme Court of New South Wales for the District of Port Phillip" a court of a colony lately severed from a district no longer known by that name. Its judge is a member of the court of another colony. Its Sheriff and Registrar are deputies without any existing official superiors; the power of appeal from the decrees of its judge still subsists but the appeal is to a foreign court in which conflicting opinions have been expressed by the judges as to their appellate jurisdiction.  This outline of the constitution of the court will enable His Excellency to form but an inadequate idea of the duties of its judge. We will enter into them a little more at large.  The judge holds every year ten courts of general gaol delivery in Melbourne and three on circuit at Geelong a town only fifty miles from Melbourne leaving the remote parts of the colony unvisited and rendering it necessary that prisoners should be brought in many instances a distance of two hundred or three hundred miles to either of these towns for trial. Four sittings of nisi prius of fourteen days each are held in Melbourne and three on circuit at Geelong of which the duration is uncertain. Four terms of fourteen days each are also held in Melbourne. Besides this the judge sits weekly to dispose of proceedings in equity and other business. He is in addition liable to have applications many of which are of great importance to the suitors made to him almost daily in his chambers and four times in the year he presides as Chairman of the Quarter Sessions. The extreme pressure of business of this multifarious nature not only entails on the judge unaided as he is excessive labour but also much inconvenience on the suitors. And it not infrequently happens that causes in which great expense has been incurred in bringing witnesses from a distance have unavoidably remained untried and been postponed for some months.  When the judge is compelled to leave the capital for circuit business is suspended to a most prejudicial extent. His absence prevents the possibility of obtaining writs of habeas corpus injunction or capias and other orders in which dispatch is of the highest consequence and without which persons may be detained improperly in gaol irreparable injury may be done to property and fraudulent debtors have opportunities of effecting their escape from the colony.  The Act of the Imperial Parliament by merely perpetuating the legal existence of this court (which would otherwise have been absorbed in the Supreme Court of New South Wales and withdrawn from the Colony of Victoria) and giving validity to its proceedings until Her Majesty should be pleased to issue a Charter of Justice would have afforded no remedy for these inconveniences had not full power been conferred on the local legislature to pass such measures as may be deemed necessary for the better administration of justice.  Were we assured that the advisers of Her Majesty had recommended the immediate transmission to the colony of such a charter we would content ourselves with advising that His Excellency might await the arrival of these letters. But it is to be observed that although a similar provision was contained in the Constitutional Act of New South Wales passed in the year 1828 no Charter of Justice was ever issued under that Act. Moreover the correspondence between the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies and the Governor General induces the belief that as power is imparted to the colonists by the Constitutional Act to frame measures necessary for the due administration of justice there exists no present intention on the part of the Home Government to recommend such a measure. [136] We consider that the judicial establishment should not be allowed to remain in the position we have described longer than actual necessity exacts and we therefore submit it as our opinion that the colonial legislature should be invited at the earliest opportunity to pass such enactments as may be deemed necessary to place the judicial establishment on a proper footing and to provide for a more extensive and effectual administration of justice.  We are also prepared to submit to His Excellency additional and independent reasons which fortify the opinion at which we have arrived.  The personal expenses (above those allowed by the Crown or on taxation) incurred by prosecutors witnesses and suitors in coming from remote parts of the colony to the place of trial are so great the inconvenience so intolerable and the actual loss entailed on them by the necessary absence from their ordinary avocations so large that in numerous instances we hesitate not to state civil rights remain unenforced civil injuries continue unredressed and criminals are by a hardly culpable connivance faintly pursued or reluctantly prosecuted and a fatal encouragement is afforded to those unaffected by religious or moral restraint on beholding a large amount of crime pass wholly unpunished.  While a large demand is made on the public funds and the security of the distant portions of the colony is materially impaired by the necessary abstraction of members of the police force from these districts for the purpose of escorting prisoners and also of giving evidence the extension of circuits will in a considerable degree remedy these grievances although this extension cannot be effected without an augmentation of the judicial establishment. The administration of justice in remote localities will moreover familiarize with its principles those hitherto almost beyond the reach of its influence. The expeditious prosecution of the offender and his speedy and certain punishment near the place of the commission of crime may be expected to alarm and deter from the perpetration of outrage those who have hitherto calculated on escaping with impunity while it will awaken the interest of those concerned in the maintenance of social order and invigorate the arm of the law.  Judging from the petitions submitted with the other papers as well as from our own knowledge and experience it would appear to be the wish of the public that greater facilities for enforcing civil remedies should be afforded by the establishment of local courts with jurisdiction similar to that of the County Court of England - such courts being presided over by professional men. Without entering at length into many of the objections to this partial and unsatisfactory expedient which readily present themselves we conceive that that object may be more beneficially attained by simplifying the pleadings and process and diminishing the legal expenses now incurred in the prosecution of such cases and by conferring on the judge of assize summary jurisdiction with power to reserve for further consideration either by himself or if necessary by the full bench any points of difficulty which may arise.  By these means a uniformity of dispensation of the law in all cases would be maintained the salaries and travelling expenses of the judges of the local courts would be saved and all the trouble and expense of the creation of new departments separate jury lists and multiplied returns would be obviated. [137]  We find also that the extension of the circuits can be recommended on financial grounds and on the footing of general policy. The probable expenses of each prosecution where the witnesses are brought from remote parts of the country are (for example) from Portland £22. 2s. 8d from Belfast £19. 2s. 8d from Gipps' land £22. 2s. 8d: to these must be added the cost of transit and escort of the prisoner. The loss to the locality by the absence of a portion of its protective force as also the great temptation to escape afforded to the prisoner must be taken into consideration. Assuming therefore that twenty prosecutions for crime committed at a distance from the capital take place in the course of the year and deducting from the expense consequent thereon one-third of the estimated cost as a liberal allowance to pay the witnesses for the prosecution at the assize town and the other incidental charges of escort duty the remaining two-thirds would amply suffice for defraying the travelling expenses of a judge of assize and the officers employed in conducting the business of the Crown.  The extra labour imposed on the judges by the proposed extension of the circuits the increase of civil business and the cessation of colonial appeal on the erection of the Supreme Court of Victoria into an independent tribunal render it necessary as well as advisable that additional judges should be appointed.  Before we conclude we conceive it our duty to offer some observations on a subject incidental to the general questions proposed to us. The rapid and apparently unexpected growth of the colony has rendered those provisions originally made for the accommodation of the officers of the different departments in the court house quite inadequate. The accumulation of the records and vast increase of memorials of registered deeds have so encumbered the building that much inconvenience is experienced in consequence of actual want of space as well by those employed in the various offices of the court as by the professional gentlemen attracted to them by their business - while the safe custody of the valuable documents therein is indifferently consulted.  Searches of the registry cannot be satisfactorily conducted at present without exposing those engaged to much personal inconvenience and entailing as a natural consequence great expense on those ultimately concerned. Much of the business which should be performed by officers of the court is thrown upon the profession while on the other hand certain of the officers are occupied in performing at the public expense work which ought to be done by law stationers. The duties of the Registrar of Deeds Prothonotary and Taxing Master devolve on the same person and the performance of those of one office frequently interferes most materially with the due discharge of those of the others . . . It needs no laboured comment to prove that while the amount of business transacted in these departments is so great the extent of property affected by their operations so large and the amount of revenue derived from them so considerable each should be maintained in a state of perfect efficiency.  We beg to conclude our report with a summary of the recommendations we have the honor to submit for the consideration of His Excellency:  1. That a Bill be introduced into the Legislative Council for the purpose of placing the judicial establishment of the colony on a footing independent of the Colony of New South Wales. [138]  2. That provision be made for increasing the judicial establishment by the appointment of additional judges.  3. That provision be likewise made for the extension of the circuits of the Supreme Court.  4. That provision be also made for a simplification of the administration of justice in all civil cases where the amount in dispute is small with a view of determining such cases with facility economy and expedition.  And as measures for ulterior consideration:  5. The establishment of a general Registry for Deeds independent of the  Supreme Court with a totally revised system of registration.  6. The appointment to the sole office of Prothonotary and Taxing Officer  of a duly qualified and experienced person.  WILLIAM F. STAWELL  Attorney-General  REDMOND BARRY  Solicitor-General  29th September 1851.  Whilst I do not wish for a moment to question the sincerity of the feelings which have been expressed against the introduction of convicts yet the reports which it has been your duty to furnish of the readiness and almost indeed the avidity with which the services of the convicts in each Successive ship that arrived have been engaged by the settlers certainly raise at least a presumption that opinions on the subject in the colony are divided and that there must be many who are glad of an opportunity to secure the advantage of this description of labour.  Her Majesty's Government have not overlooked the considerations which on these and on other grounds of great national importance may be urged in favour of transportation. But whatever may be their value taken in themselves we find as I have above stated that there is a general expression of a strong repugnance in Van Diemen's Land and in the adjacent colonies to the further reception of convicts in either of them. Whatever may be the private opinions of individuals who have not come forward on this question numerous public meetings and all the legislative authorities in these colonies have declared themselves strongly against transportation. Her Majesty's Government have therefore felt it their duty to take such steps as may enable Her Majesty with the assent of Parliament to comply with a wish so generally and so forcibly expressed by Her subjects in those colonies.  The propriety of this decision is supported by the effects of the discovery of gold. It would appear a solecism to convey offenders at the public expense with the intention of at no distant time setting them free to the immediate vicinity of those very gold fields which thousands of honest labourers are in vain striving to reach. It is quite true that the offenders have to undergo a preliminary period of imprisonment and of labour; but these are not likely to daunt reckless minds. Making every allowance for your efforts to prevent the desertion of Convicts whilst still subject to control it is to be remembered that they will in time become qualified for conditional pardons: and I think it must be admitted by every impartial observer that transportation would be disarmed of its terrors and that a very undesirable impression would be produced in the minds of the criminal class if offenders should long continue to be sent to an island in the immediate neighbourhood of the gold colonies of Australia. [164]  You will readily perceive that it must be impossible at this moment to fix the actual date for the end of transportation to Van Diemen's Land. In order to diminish the number of convicts sentenced to transportation so as to admit of their being disposed of in the more limited field which will remain available certain alterations in the law must be submitted to Parliament; new buildings must be constructed to accommodate the larger number of prisoners who would have to be detained in this country; and it cannot be expected that so great a revolution in the administration of the criminal law can be accomplished without a sufficient allowance of time for the extensive changes which it will require. On the time by which we may hope that these can be completed I shall probably address you again when the arrangements are further matured. I can only assure you that Her Majesty's Government are sincerely convinced of the good policy of the proposed measures and anxious to carry them into effect as speedily as possible; and I trust that when the full purpose which is entertained of accomplishing the object shall be known in the colony the good sense and moderation of the inhabitants will lead them to acquiesce without reluctance in the continuance of the existing practice until the large alterations required for its abolition can be duly provided for in this country. I may state in conclusion that it is a source of much gratification to me to convey to you a decision so much in accordance with the strongly expressed wish of the colonists of Van Diemen's Land; and I trust that they may recognise in it the desire of the Government of this country to consult their wishes and to strengthen their loyalty to the Crown and attachment to the British Empire.  Upon the Commissioners rests the responsibility of the general enforcement of the regulations under which the Gold Fields are worked and to them according to the position which they hold in various quarters the police and all subordinates look for instructions and general guidance in the discharge of ordinary duty.  It will be perceived that viewing the magnitude of the interests at stake and the necessity of providing a competent authority on the spot to which the many questions of urgency constantly arising in working the multiform details of a perfectly new system might be at once referred as well as to ensure uniformity of arrangement in the different divisions of the field I have deemed it proper to appoint a Chief Commissioner; and I have selected to this end an officer of considerable experience and possessing qualifications which in this particular position would render his services of value.  I may state that Mr. Wright into whose hands I had already in February last committed the duty of exercising the general super-intendence at Mount Alexander under the temporary title of Resident Commissioner has been Commissioner of Crown Lands in this colony for some years; previously to which he held a similar appointment and was also attached to the survey department in New South Wales. [10] He was formerly an officer in Her Majesty's service as subaltern in the 50th regiment. The good effects of his experience and management both upon the different branches of the Government service and as respected the population on the field in general was so evident and satisfactory that I did not hesitate to place him in a more decided position to exercise influence and devote his whole attention and services in behalf of this new department and I trust that your Lordship will approve of the measure.  The great weight and responsibility which attach to his office point out the expediency of the nomination of one or two officers as intermediate between the chief and the ordinary Assistant Commissioners either as strictly resident Commissioners at the more important head quarters of the distant fields or as aids in the general superintendence; but my proposed arrangements are not complete in this respect. The whole correspondence of the department with the Colonial Secretary's office as far as the Gold Fields themselves are concerned pass of course through the Chief Commissioner.  The position of the Assistant Commissioners of whom I have hardly yet a sufficient number varies according to circumstances. Some are necessarily required in carrying on the business at headquarters and others stationed in charge of out-districts. A fair proportion have been placed in the commission of the peace to act independently or to assist the local magistrates in the bench business when requisite.  Two of the number are specially charged at Castlemaine (or Forest Creek) and at Bendigo with the sole duty of managing the so called "gold-tent" the receipt and despatch of all Government or private gold to town by escort &c. while they are altogether relieved from the duty of issuing licences. In common with all other Commissioners on the ground in any way connected with the management and custody of the revenue they enter into bond and give security for the faithful performance of their duty.  The Inspectors are employed under the particular orders of the respective Commissioners their duty being to assist in apportioning out the various claims in deciding disputes or bringing them under the notice of the Commissioners and in detecting unauthorized and unlicensed occupation of the field.  The appointment of two medical gentlemen for the Mount Alexander and Bendigo districts respectively was found absolutely requisite for the service of the large staff of police and subordinates on the ground. They are also duly authorized to act as coroners for the satisfaction of the public. Inquiry into the cause of all deaths occurring on the Gold Fields either from natural or accidental causes as well as from violence if such occur is immediately made and it is gratifying to see that the coroners find no difficulty in collecting juries and in performing their duties. [11]  The establishment of branches of the post office for the advantage of the public both at Forest Creek and at Bendigo needs no comment.  The return of clerks also requires no remark. I have sought to secure as far as practicable the services of really respectable men whose private conduct as well as competence to discharge their duty might strengthen the hands of Government in the peculiar position in which they are placed.  The absolute necessity of bringing a ready administration of justice within the reach of the large population of the Gold Fields was early impressed upon me and hence the appointments which have been made under this head. The two gentlemen named in the list are stationed at Forest Creek (Castlemaine) and Bendigo respectively. They are not required to exercise surveillance over the police on the ground which duty rests with the respective Commissioners but to sit daily in petty sessions assisted if necessary by the Assistant Commissioners; and in short are at hand and ready in the field at all times for the despatch of business. They have each under their immediate orders a chief constable and clerk of petty sessions.  Of the two other gentlemen one is stationed with the usual staff of a bench of petty sessions and a party of police at Keynton [sic] an increasing township on the main line of thoroughfare from Melbourne to Mount Alexander. The other Mr. Eyre acts both as resident magistrate at Buninyong and Ballarat and until the Gold Field assumes greater importance in that quarter as Assistant Commissioner in charge.  The foot police though of course distributed over the field and each party under the more immediate orders of the Assistant Commissioners have been as a body placed under the general control of an officer in the commission of the peace and ranking otherwise as an Assistant Commissioner.  Their duties in maintaining order repressing the illicit sale of spirits and assisting in giving effect to the regulations are too clear to require explanation. Many obstacles have been experienced as your Lordship will have been apprised in raising and maintaining a sufficient force of this description in a proper state of efficiency. Even when proper men could be found accoutrements and many of the appliances requisite or desirable to these ends were wanting. The very character of the service exposes them to temptation of various kinds which it is no wonder that men of ordinary character or principle would scarcely be proof against. I can only repeat that little or no dependence can be placed upon a purely civil police under existing circumstances. [12]  The obstacles that have to be met in forming an efficient body of this character [mounted police] are even greater than those to be surmounted in enrolling a foot police and yet its maintenance is in many respects of still greater importance. The same observations which have been made above apply equally to it. The head quarters of the corps I have stationed at Carlsruhe near Keynton [sic] about forty-five miles from Melbourne and twenty from Forest Creek. The difficulty of securing proper quarters stabling accoutrements and supplies whether at Carlsruhe on the field or in town and the hardship and discomfort which those deficiencies give rise to may justify in some measure the indisposition which has been remarked amongst the proper class of men to enrol or continue in the service. The seduction of the Gold Field is however doubtless the main obstacle in the way. A certain number however have been brought together whose conduct both on the Gold Field or in charge of prisoners and more especially as escorts over the gold from the field to Melbourne has been very satisfactory. The latter is a very heavy service.  The circumstances and agreement under which the services of this small body of men [enrolled pensioners] were obtained from the neighbouring colony of Van Diemen's Land for the term of one year have been fully reported in a previous despatch; and I only need here repeat that when out of the way of temptation on the Gold Field and in the steady performance of set duties suited to their age and habits under the eye of their officers their general conduct has been open to no exception. The main body continue at head quarters at Forest Creek under the command of the officer under whose special control they were placed on their enrolment in Van Diemen's Land. The detachment at Bendigo is commanded by a subaltern officer of the 11th regiment whose services have been temporarily secured with the concurrence of the Major General commanding.  To secure the speedy erection of the necessary quarters and the formation and repair of roads both throughout the workings and on the main thoroughfares would require a far larger staff than I have found it practicable to engage on the work but no effort and no pecuniary sacrifice will effect what might be held desirable; however some advance is made and another dry season and the ' increase in the population may lend some further facilities.  I include further under the head of ecclesiastical the provision ' made for the extension of the ordinances of religion to the scattered population of the Gold Fields which cannot be computed at less than 50000 and upwards. The assistance which I have offered from the gold revenue to the heads of the four principal divisions of the Christian community has been most gratefully received and I am quite sure that were it only to be regarded as an act of policy it has tended greatly to the maintenance of good feeling among the crowd as well as to the decent outward observance of the Sabbath which has been from the very beginning a most striking feature of our Gold Fields. [13]  At the close of the year a great number of the inhabitants of the colony itself who had rushed to the Gold Fields in the first instance and had met with so much success had returned temporarily to their homes and even to their ordinary occupations many of the farming class with a view to secure their harvest which I am glad to state has been after all very generally reaped throughout the colony and others with the purpose of awaiting the season when the search for gold could be prosecuted with less labour hardship and risk. It was reported to me that in this manner above 6000 men left the workings in the ten days preceding the 1st January. The large and continued influx of adventurers from without however prevented any actual decrease in the numbers on the ground itself. The field now became the general rendezvous of a mixed multitude amongst which the expiree population of Van Diemen's Land returned Californians and the most profligate portion of the inhabitants of this and the adjacent colonies became broadly conspicuous. [31] A marked change for the worse has been observable since the beginning of the year in the character of the people in certain divisions of the Gold Fields more especially. At the outset the bad characters bore but a trifling numerical proportion to the general population but now although the preponderance of the well disposed and of those who are friends to law and good order is still overwhelming the number of thoroughly hardened and dissolute characters has greatly increased. It notoriously includes a number of the most determined and desperate ruffians in any community; and this fact taken into account with the great increase and almost general prevalence of the illicit sale of spirits is sufficient to account for any amount of crime and disorder which may really be found to exist in such a mass congregating under such extraordinary circumstances and subjected to so little moral or physical restraint. Violent quarrels thefts both by day or night amongst the huts tents and workings where the auriferous earth collected during the day may remain unremoved for washing have been of common occurrence either amongst those associated together or by the professed plunderers and thieves. The "Friar's Creek" workings more especially have been signalized by these infractions of the law and by disorder arising in "sly grog selling" and no exertion of the police or Assistant Commissioner or magistrates on the ground could suffice in every instance to secure detection conviction and punishments I am satisfied however that in all instances in which charges were properly brought forward and supported which is comparatively seldom the case every effort has been made to meet the evils complained of and to render justice.  With regard to the statements of the universal unchecked prevalence of crime and disorder at the workings detailed with such effrontery and recklessness in the profligate public prints of this colony itself or greedily retailed and commented upon for evident purposes in the New South Wales press all I can say is that they are not true the greater part totally false and in so far as there may be foundation for this or that statement or circumstance so grossly exaggerated as to be unworthy of credit. Your Lordship will allow me to state that viewing the position and character of no inconsiderable number of persons frequenting the workings a far greater amount of crime might prevail without the Government of the colony - circumstanced as it has been - being in any degree justly blameable. In such a crowd one half utter strangers to the other and to the colony met together in a wild tract of broken forested country full of secluded hollows honeycombed with hundreds or thousands of ready-made graves under such strong inducements to cupidity disorder and crime the imagination is free and unrestrained to picture the extent to which crime may however improbable prevail in secret without the possibility of discovery or chance of detection. [32] Many a murder may take place of the existence of which no evidence will ever transpire or record exist; but I can assure your Lordship that whatever crimes may really be perpetrated no indifference to it on the part of the authorities could have existed and that no such general disorder and rejection of law and constituted authority as these statements would represent has ever been observable. On the contrary notwithstanding the extraordinary circumstances under which the multitude finds itself brought together the passions and temptations of the hour the acknowledged insufficiency of the police force to oppose physical force to any really serious outbreak or general disturbance the inability in every instance to afford prompt justice the but partial carrying out of the regulations which must be admitted as a grievance by the well disposed the occasional agitation got up by a knot of well-known advocates for change and I may lastly justly remark the evident disposition manifested from the very outset of a portion of the colonial press for its own purposes to induce political excitement and pander to the passions of the mob spread a spirit of disaffection and induce a want of confidence in the measures of Government by a systematic distortion of facts and of statements pointing out not only what the mob actually do or meditate but what they might do. The orderly bearing and conduct of the great proportion of the people on the ground is undeniable and the subject of surprise to all who have an opportunity of personally ascertaining the real state of the case.  Certain Acts of Council passed in the recent session (15 Vic. no. 15 15 Vic. no. 14 15 Vic. no. 12.) [...] are found to have strengthened the hands of the authorities on the ground to a very great extent giving on the one hand additional facilities in preventing the unlicensed search for gold and on the other greater power in checking gambling and the illicit sale of spirits which not only leads to or favours the crimes actually known to be committed but gives strength to the suspicion just or unjust that far darker villany [sic] may be perpetrated in connexion with it. In the month of January weak as the police force notoriously was no less than between fifty and sixty seizures were made at Mount Alexander. But with every exertion made the evil is very difficult to grapple with and evidently grows with the increase of population. The gains are so enormous that the risks are nothing when weighed against the chance of success.  Your Lordship may rest assured that every effort will be made to put it down; and deeply as certain classes of the mercantile community in the towns are undoubtedly directly or indirectly interested in the traffic and sale of spirits by whatever means effected I cannot doubt the right feeling of the inhabitants of the colony in general or of the legislative body representing it with respect to it or that the latter will not lend its further aid if called upon to do so. [33]  The health of the crowd at the workings despite the habits prevailing there the unwonted style of living indifferent accommodation and heat of the season has been upon the whole good; low fever dysentry and inflammation of the eyes have been common but no disease of an epidemic and more serious character has prevailed. If would be strange if in a population of 30000; there would not be at all times many cases of disease and death from natural causes and accident. There is apparently no want of medical skill amongst the adventurers.  Sunday continues as heretofore to be observed with outward decency as a day of repose; and however little the majority may be disposed to attend to religious duties and dissipation may be prevalent among certain classes decency is rarely openly outraged before evening sets in. Divine service has been always performed by ministers of the several communions in different parts of the field; and I have considered myself justified in holding out to the heads of the four principal divisions of the Christian communion the offer of assistance in securing the services of ministers specially appointed to the duty within the limits of the Gold Fields.  A large proportion of the population is almost altogether furnished with their supplies and necessaries upon the ground shop and store keepers being located at intervals all over the encampments. Meat (mutton) has always been procurable at a reasonable price but every other article is purchased at an advance of from 50 to 100 per cent upon ordinary prices.   It becomes a matter of speculation how so large a scattered multitude are to be provisioned if they really are able to maintain their ground in the wet season when a certain portion of the lines of road connecting this district with the towns must become as they always have been under former comparatively inconsiderable traffic nearly impassable. With regard to Government supplies steps have been taken to secure a certain amount of provisions and stores on the spot as well as the necessary accommodation for the Government officers' before the dry season closes; but with all Our foresight I am prepared to encounter many serious difficulties in carrying on the service of the Gold Fields efficiently and satisfactorily during the winter season.  The gold escort service has upon the whole been despite all difficulties very satisfactorily performed as well as the receipt of gold on the ground and delivery at the Treasury connected with it. No losses have taken place and very few errors or mistakes such as might easily occur under the circumstances have been remarked. At the beginning the gold brought down by escort was deposited at once in the strong rooms of the local banks and delivered upon a Treasury order to the owner or consignee every facility being given by the respective managers to Government in this respect; but after a time it became evident that this accommodation could not be continued without subjecting these establishments to the greatest inconvenience and steps had consequently to be taken to construct a gold-room at the Treasury office and appoint proper officers specially for the receipt and delivery; I am glad to say that the whole arrangement however temporary in the character of many details works very satisfactorily. [34]  The discovery of gold in the neighbouring colonies exercises an injurious effect upon this province independently of its drain upon the population in the following particulars.  The gold coin which is the basis of the paper circulation being withdrawn directly by the numerous emigrants who leave this province for Victoria and being also remitted for the purchase of gold dust the banks from whose coffers the coin is taken are compelled to contract their issues in proportion to the diminished stock of coin.  This contraction of issues causes a corresponding contraction of discounts the effect of which is to peril the solvency of the mass of the traders and indeed of every person who has money to pay especially since the same contraction of issue diminishes the money value of all property to an extent greater even than that of the diminution of the circulating medium.  The same cause has already occasioned a depreciation in the value of bills upon England which are now at a discount of from three to four per cent. instead of at par as was the case a short time since and there is every probability that this depreciation will augment at the least to the present amount at Melbourne ten per cent.  This depreciation is in reality a tax upon exports to nearly the full amount of the discount.  The existence of these evils cannot be questioned nor that they are becoming gradually more pressing and it seems clear that they are directly attributable to the circumstance that a new and very profitable article of export has been discovered in the neighbouring colonies which draws for its purchase the whole available coin of this as well as the other colonies. As gold can be purchased to remit at £3 to £3 5s. per oz. which gives from 25 to 18 per cent profit upon the remittance it is so profitable an investment as it is at the same time free from risk that the banks in the neighbouring colonies are drawing together all the funds they can command in order to employ them in this manner.  It is not merely that there is a period of stagnation owing to the loss of capital and population. There is superadded to this a drain of the coin which forms the basis of our circulating medium and this drain compels a contraction of the circulation altogether disproportioned to the actual diminution of the capital or of the natural business transactions of the colony.  In so far as other colonies offer a better field for the employment of labour and capital we must submit to the inconvenience which the withdrawal for the time of those elements of production necessarily occasions. But the withdrawal of the basis of our circulating medium may perhaps be prevented. The character of the article of export the sudden abundance of which has caused this derangement of the monetary system may afford the means of checking its effects. [87] As gold is the standard its money value is unaffected by its abundance. The purchasing power of gold as a commodity may be in some degree diminished by an undue increase of its quantity but the same weight of standard gold will be worth the same number of sovereigns. Its money value is therefore invariable and it may be safely taken at such a price as will afford a guarantee against the cost of freight and insurance.  It has therefore been suggested to me that a Government assayer should be appointed who should for a small agio receive melt assay and stamp gold and that the gold thus stamped should be received by weight in payment for land at the Government land sales at £3. 8s. or £3. 10 per oz. and should also be received at the same rate at the Customs and the Treasury in payment of taxes and dues.  With regard to the proposal so far as it relates to land sales it would seem that no practical difficulty would arise in the working of it. The gold thus received would be in a very large proportion if not the whole required for remittance to England. And as even sovereigns are received at the Bank of England only according to weight and bullion is received at the same rate the difference between the price which the gold bears in England and at which it would be taken under the plan suggested by me would afford a sufficient guarantee against loss.  With respect to the receipt of stamped and assayed gold in payment of taxes at a recent interview With the managers of the three banks in Adelaide the foregoing views were propounded to them and were regarded by them as well worthy of consideration although at that moment they were not prepared to give any definite opinion on the subject.  Subsequently to the personal interviewing question I received an opinion from one of the bankers adverse to the adoption of the plan at this particular juncture but favourable to it when circumstances were altered. It is to be observed that the plan does not contemplate that the gold in question should be made a legal tender any more than the notes of the bank are at present; but if the gold were authenticated by the Government and taken by the banks and the merchants it would secure such a readiness of circulation as would fit it to perform the part of a basis for a paper issue in the same manner as coined gold does now and to a sufficient extent to free the province from its threatened embarrassments.  The effects of such a plan would be in the first place to create a considerable demand for Government land and to cause probably' large sums to be invested in its purchase from the neighbouring colonies. Moreover the discovery of gold would then instead of forming a drain upon the specie of the colony practically augment its amount and at the same time as it is not proposed to make this stamped gold a legal tender there would be no undue risk of any excessive augmentation of the circulation. [88]  The question of how gold the produce of the soil of Australia and likely to become one of its ordinary exports is to be dealt with by the local Government and the local public as forming a basis for the circulation of the colony is one of very serious importance.  On abstract grounds of public convenience apart from legal technicalities and prerogative rights it seems but natural that gold being the standard itself of value should when ascertained to be of the requisite purity be authorized to circulate as freely as coins circulate which are the representatives and equivalent of standard gold.  Whether gold be locally produced or whether it continue to be raised only in the adjacent colonies in considerable and increasing quantities it is very desirable that Her Majesty's Government should consider of the expediency -   1. Of a branch of the British Mint being established in the Australian colonies.  2. Whether local assay offices in lieu of the above should be established for the purposes set forth in this despatch.  3. Whether in lieu of both of the above propositions local mints may be sanctioned.  I trust the importance of the subject will be my excuse for troubling your Lordship at this great length and that I may not from uncontrollable circumstances be compelled to take provisionally some definite and immediate action on the subject at least of an assay office before I can receive your Lordship's instructions.  I am informed on good authority that unless the Bullion Assay Act had been passed the losses of the bankers and merchants would have been three-fold the amount now anticipated. The Act has enabled rates of exchange to be fixed which prevent mere speculations in gold in Adelaide unless the proceeds are used for investment in South Australia; it has stopped the drain on the banks for coin has facilitated time being given to debtors has promoted the shipments of overstocks of merchandise to Melbourne and the return of gold dust in payment; it has given a strong inducement to the South Australian diggers to return to the colony with their gains; has secured to the farmer a remunerating price for his produce; and nearly the whole of the gold thus attracted to Adelaide is the property of the merchants and diggers of this colony and is legitimately available for meeting their overdue and current engagements. [89] The amount of current paper under discount in the three local banks as compared before and after the panic is reckoned: thus: - South Australian Bank £280000 now £120000; Bank of Australasia £160000 now £60000; Union Bank of Australia £120000 now £70000 that is £560000 reduced to £250000 in about three months an improvement quite unprecedented and which before its actual occurrence might have been deemed almost impossible. As the bullion increases in the banks the surplus not required to cover their circulation will be shipped to England and a first shipment has already been made by two of the banks which will no doubt return them a profit of from four to five per cent. An ingot of pure gold assayed and stamped at £7 1s. per ounce possesses an intrinsic value free from the evils and dangers of a depreciated or worthless paper currency and not only is equal to the coin it represents but as compared with the invariable British standard is ample to cover interest and exchange on its way to the mint in London. The amount that has been received into the assay office since the 10th February 1852 is 87740 ounces or at £3. 11s. per ounce £311477; and the amount brought by the escort on the first two journeys from Mount Alexander is ounces or £89584 The per-centage charged on the assay and that paid for the protection of the police escort overland is reckoned and has hitherto proved more than sufficient to cover the cost of the respective new establishments The future is of course only a subject of conjecture; but present appearances warrant the expectation that a million will reach Adelaide before the termination of the year to which the Bullion Act is at present limited. However impolitic is any semblance even of interference with the currency it is equally certain and notorious that the Bullion Act and overland escort were rendered necessary by a formidable financial emergency and that they have operated to give stability to our banking establishments to revive trade and commerce to afford great relief to all the monetary and industrial pursuits of the colonists and to confer on South Australia much of the advantage unalloyed with any of the inconveniences attendant on the locality of a gold field. The population of the colony on the 31st March 1852 was reduced to 61218 white inhabitants. The migrations to the gold fields chiefly of our adult male population still continue and exceed 16000.  It may be remarked that house accommodation in this colony and in Melbourne particularly has scarcely at any time kept pace with the requirements of the inhabitants viewing the disproportion of mechanical labour to the wants of a rapidly increasing population; and further as I have had frequent occasion to point out since the gold discovery the very cause which induced so sudden an augmentation of the population threw every difficulty in the way of providing the requisite accommodation. At this time the town and its suburbs and the villages for several miles round Melbourne notwithstanding the steady stream setting through it upon the road to the Gold Fields are absolutely choked with the teeming population. The most extravagant remit is paid for the most indifferent accommodation temporary or otherwise. The large profits to be realized from house-rent hold out every temptation to the resident inhabitants to submit to inconvenience and make personal sacrifices to give place to tenants or lodgers and even in many cases appear to justify building enterprises notwithstanding the enormous cost of mechanic labour and materials.  It appeared eighteen months ago as if the age of "weather board" within the city itself was quickly passing away to be succeeded by a far more durable and creditable style of building; but we are evidently from necessity retrograding and "weather boarding" or even unplaned broad paling is now largely employed again in the construction of tenements wherever ground can be secured or circumstances reconcile such erections with the provisions of the local Acts. In the suburbs and adjacent villages a great increase in the amount of temporary accommodation of this description chiefly put up by the labour of mechanics possessed of small portions of land may be observed. Yet it is evident that no ordinary exertion will keep pace with the call for accommodation even from the floating population of the colony. Hundreds of tents may be seen pitched in prescribed localities in the vicinity of the city; and it is acknowledged that during the past weeks as at the present time large numbers of the new corners arriving unprovided with accommodation have in the first instance to pass both day and night without shelter at all.  Whereas by an Act of the Imperial Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland passed in the thirteenth and fourteenth year of the reign of Her present Majesty intituled "An Act for the better Government of Her Majesty's Australian Colonies" it was enacted that it should be lawful for Her Majesty by letters patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland to erect and appoint a Court of Judicature in the Colony of Victoria which should be styled "The Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria;" and that such court should be holden by one or more judge or judges and should have such ministerial and other officers as should be necessary for the administration of justice in the said court and for the execution of judgments decrees orders and process thereof: And that it should be lawful for the Governors and Councils of the Colonies of New South Wales Van Diemen's Land and Victoria respectively from time to time by any Act or Acts to make such provision as to them might seem meet for the better administration of justice and for defining the constitution of the courts of law and equity and of juries within the said colonies respectively or within any present or future dependencies thereof respectively anything in an Act of the ninth year of King George the Fourth intituled "An Act to provide for the more effectual administration of justice in New South Wales and its dependencies" or in the said recited Act or in any Charter of Justice or Order in Council made or issued in pursuance thereof respectively or in any law statute or usage to the contrary thereof notwithstanding: [139] And whereas no such letters patent have been received in the said Colony of Victoria; and the exigencies of the said colony have rendered it necessary to make provision for the better administration of justice therein; and it is expedient to repeal the several Acts and portions of Acts of the Governor and Legislative Council of the Colony of New South Wales hereinafter mentioned: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor of the Colony of Victoria by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof That from and after the commencement of this Act an Act of the Governor and Legislative Council of the said Colony of New South Wales passed in the fourth year of the reign of Her present Majesty Queen Victoria intituled "An Act to provide for the more effectual administration of justice in New South Wales and its dependencies;" and an Act passed in the fifth year of the reign of Her present Majesty Queen Victoria intituled "An Act to make further provision for the trial of cases in the Circuit Courts of New South Wales and to amend in certain respects the Act providing for trial by jury in such courts;" and the first second third fourth fifth sixth seventh eighth ninth tenth eleventh twelfth thirteenth fourteenth and thirty-first sections of an Act passed in the said fifth year of the reign of Her present Majesty Queen Victoria intituled "An Act for the further amendment of the law and for the better advancement of justice;" and also an Act passed in the seventh year of the reign of Her present Majesty Queen Victoria intituled "An Act for regulating the appointment and duties of Sheriff in New South Wales" shall be and the same are hereby repealed so far as they relate to the said Colony of Victoria.  2. That from and after the commencement of this Act a court shall be holden in and for the Colony of Victoria and its dependencies which shall be styled "The Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria:" Provided however and be it enacted that no action suit or other proceeding at law or in equity or any matter or thing whether civil or criminal or relating to affairs ecclesiastical or of any other description whatsoever which shall then be depending in the several departments of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip shall abate surcease or become discontinued; but the same and every of them shall be proceeded with heard and determined in the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria under the several provisions of this Act without any alteration in their intituling address or any part thereof respectively: Provided also that no appeal then pending from the judgment decision decree or order of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip or the Resident Judge thereof heretofore pronounced or made nor the appeal from any judgment decision decree or order of such court or judge to be hereafter pronounced or made in any cause or matter then depending or undecided and upon which judgment has been reserved to the Supreme Court of New South Wales or the judges thereof shall be affected by the provisions of this Act but the same may be respectively instituted proceeded with heard and determined and the judgment thereof enforced as if this Act had not been passed.  3. That such Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria shall consist of and be holden by and before a judge or judges not exceeding three in number; each of whom shall be a practising barrister of England or Ireland or advocate of Scotland of not less than five years standing or a practising barrister of the said court not previously admitted in any of the Superior Courts of Westminister Dublin or Edinburgh of not less than eight years standing. [140] That such judges shall be appointed by Her Majesty's letters patent: And the salaries of such judges shall be paid to each of them so long as their commissions shall remain in force respectively: And it shall be lawful for the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony to appoint such judge or judges until the pleasure of Her Majesty be known: Provided that until such appointment the Resident Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip shall exercise all the jurisdiction power and authorities of a Judge of the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria.  4. That one of the said judges shall be styled "The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria" and until Her Majesty's pleasure he known he shall have rank and precedence above and before all persons whomsoever in the said Colony of Victoria excepting the Governor and Lieutenant Governor thereof and except all such persons as by law or usage take place in England before the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Queen's Bench.  5. That it shall be lawful for the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony with the advice of the Executive Council thereof to suspend from his office until the pleasure of Her Majesty be known any judge of the said court who shall be wilfully absent from the said colony without a reasonable cause to be allowed by the said Lieutenant Governor and Executive Council: And also any judge who shall become incapable or who shall neglect to perform the duties of his office or who shall otherwise misbehave therein: And if any judge of the said court shall die or resign his office or by reason of suspension or in consequence of sickness leave of absence or any other temporary cause be unable to perform the duties of his office it shall be lawful for the said Lieutenant Governor with the advice of the said Executive Council to appoint some other fit and proper person qualified as hereinbefore required to perform the duties of such judge until the pleasure of Her Majesty be known: And such person so to be appointed shall possess all the powers and privileges and perform all the duties of the judge in whose place he may be so appointed.  6. That no judge of the said court shall be capable of accepting taking or performing the duties of any other office or place of profit or emolument within the said Colony of Victoria excepting such office as may be granted to such judge by Her Majesty's Sign Manual or under the Great Seal of the High Court of Admiralty of England; and any such acceptance taking or performance of the duties of any such other office shall be deemed in law an avoidance of his office of judge and his office and commission shall be thereby in fact superseded and his salary thereupon cease.  7. That the said court shall have a Master in Equity who shall be a practising barrister of England or Ireland or advocate of Scotland of not less than five years standing or a practising barrister of the said court not previously admitted in any of the Superior Courts of Westminster Dublin or Edinburgh of not less than six years standing; a Prothonotary a Registrar and Keeper of the Records and such and so many other officers as to the judge or judges for the time being of the said court shall appear to be necessary for the administration of justice and the due execution of all the powers and authorities of the said court: And such Master Registrar Prothonotary Keeper and other officers shall respectively draw up prepare and settle all such and the like orders rules decrees reports and proceedings as are usually drawn up prepared and settled by persons holding similar offices in the Superior Courts of Law and Equity in Westminster without any charge whatsoever for so doing: [141] And the appointment of every such person to any such office as is hereinbefore expressly named shall be by letters patent and shall be made during pleasure and in the first instance and until such letters patent shall issue such appointment shall be made by the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony until the pleasure of Her Majesty be known: And all persons who may be appointed to any other office in the said court than those hereinbefore particularly enumerated shall be so appointed by the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony: And no new office shall be created in the said court unless the judge or judges thereof shall certify by writing under his or their hand or hands to the said Lieutenant Governor that such new office is necessary: Provided that until such appointments be made respectively the Master in Equity Registrar and other officers of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip shall exercise the like powers and authorities and discharge the like duties in the Supreme Court in the Colony of Victoria as were by them severally and respectively exercised and discharged in the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip up to the time of the commencement of this Act.  8. That every barrister and every attorney solicitor and proctor of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port Phillip may lawfully practise in the Supreme or other Courts of the Colony of Victoria in the character in which he has been admitted without its being necessary for him to make application to be admitted to practise in such Supreme or other Courts.  9. That the said Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria shall be a Court of Record and shall have and use as occasion may require a seal bearing an impression of the Royal Arms of England having inscribed on a label thereon the words "The Seal of the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria;" and such seal shall be delivered by the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony to and be kept in the custody of the Chief Justice of the said court: And any person who shall forge the seal or any process document or writing of or issuing from the said court or any copy thereof or who shall serve or enforce any such forged process document writing or copy knowing the same to be forged shall be guilty of felony; and being convicted thereof shall be liable to be sentenced at the discretion of the judge presiding at the trial to be worked on the roads of the said colony for any period not less than five years and not exceeding ten years; or to be imprisoned for any period not exceeding three years.  10. That the said court shall have cognizance of all civil pleas and shall have jurisdiction within the said Colony of Victoria and its dependencies to hear and determine all actions whatsoever real personal and mixed as fully and amply to all intents and purposes as Her Majesty's Courts of Queen's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas at Westminster or either of them lawfully have or hath in England.  11. That the said Court shall have jurisdiction to inquire of hear and determine within the said Colony of Victoria and its dependencies all treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences of what nature or kind soever and wheresoever committed which can or may be inquired of heard and determined in Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench at Westminster or in the Central Criminal Court in London. [142]  12. That all treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences cognizable in the said court or in any circuit court in the said colony shall be prosecuted by information in the name of Her Majesty's Attorney or Solicitor General for the said colony or of such other person as the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony may appoint: And all issues at law joined on every information shall be determined by any one or more judge or judges of the said court and all issues of fact joined on every such information shall be tried by and before any one or more such judge or judges and a jury of twelve men to be summoned empanelled and sworn as by law provided or to be provided.  13. That it shall be lawful for any person by leave of the said court to exhibit a criminal information against any other person for any crime or misdemeanor not punishable by death alleged to have been by such person committed and it shall not be necessary for any person applying to the court for leave to exhibit such criminal information to file any exculpatory affidavits unless required by order of the court so to do: And every criminal information exhibited by leave of the court shall be in the name of Her Majesty the Queen and upon the information of the person to whom such leave has been granted; and the prosecutor shall file such information in the said court; and the same shall be heard tried and determined in the same manner as any other information hereinbefore required to be heard tried and determined in the said court.  14. That the said court shall have equitable jurisdiction within the said Colony of Victoria and its dependencies and such power and authority to do exercise and perform all acts matters and things necessary for the due execution of such equitable jurisdiction as is possessed by the Lord High Chancellor of England in the exercise of similar jurisdiction within the realm of England; and also to do all such other acts matters and things as can and may be done by the said Lord High Chancellor within the realm of England in the exercise of the common law jurisdiction to him belonging and to appoint guardians and committees of the persons and estates of infants and of natural born fools lunatics and persons deprived of understanding and reason by the act of God and unable to govern themselves or their estates and for that purpose to inquire into hear and determine by inspection of the person the subject of such inquiry or by examination on oath or otherwise of the party in whose custody or charge such person may be or of any other person or persons or by such other ways and means by which the truth may be best discovered; and to act in all cases whatsoever as fully and amply to all intents and purposes as the said Lord High Chancellor or the grantee from the Crown of the persons and estates of infants and lunatics natural born fools and persons deprived of understanding as aforesaid may now lawfully do.  15. That the said court shall have ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the said Colony of Victoria and its dependencies and shall have power and authority to grant probate under its seal of the last will of any person who shall die leaving personal effects within the said colony and to commit letters of administration under its seal of all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of any person who shall die intestate and to commit letters of administration under its seal with the will annexed of all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of any person who shall have made a will without having named an executor thereof or without having named an executor thereof resident within the said colony or where the executor being duly cited shall not appear and sue forth probate thereof with reservation nevertheless in any of the two last mentioned cases to revoke such letters of administration and to grant probate of the said will to the executor therein named when he shall duly appear and sue forth such probate: [143] And such letters of administration shall be committed by the said court to any person whether of kin to or a creditor of the person so dying as aforesaid or not as to the said court shall seem meet: And in every case in which letters of administration are granted by the said court it shall have power and authority to sequestrate all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of the person so dying as aforesaid in cases allowed by law as the same is and may be now used in the Province of Canterbury: And the said court shall have power and authority to require hear examine and allow and if necessary to disallow and reject the accounts of the persons to whom probates may be granted and letters of administration committed in such manner and form and as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever as may now be done in the province aforesaid subject nevertheless to such orders and directions as may be made by the said court either generally as applicable to all cases or specially with reference to any case in particular or to such rules of court as may be made as hereinafter provided.  16. That it shall be lawful for the said court to make all such orders as may be necessary for the due administration of the assets of any such estate to all persons entitled thereunto and also for the payment out of such assets to the persons administering the same of any costs charges and expenses which may have been lawfully incurred by them and also such commission or percentage as shall be just and reasonable for their pains and trouble therein: And if any such executor or administrator shall neglect to pass his accounts or to pay deposit or dispose of the goods chattels and credits belonging to the estate of any deceased person at the time and in the manner directed it shall be lawful for the said court on the application of any person aggrieved by such neglect to order and direct that such executor or administrator shall pay interest at a rate not exceeding eight pounds per centum per annum for such sums of money as from time to time shall have been in his hands and the costs occasioned by the application.  17. That it shall be lawful for the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony by any orders to be by him with the advice of the Executive Council thereof from time to time made and proclaimed to define the limits of districts within and the times at which circuit courts shall be holden in the said colony and the said limits and times to alter and vary as he shall with the advice aforesaid deem necessary; and to direct that circuit courts shall be holden at such towns or places within those limits as he shall with the advice aforesaid think fit to appoint; and every such circuit court shall be holden in and for such district by one or more judge or judges of the said court and shall be a Court of Record and shall have power to punish for contempt and shall have the same power authority and jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil issues to be tried within the limits of the circuit district in which the same is held and all treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences wheresoever committed as courts of nisi prius assize oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery in England possess; and also to inquire into and assess damages in any action at law commenced in the said Supreme Court; and all persons convicted in such circuit court of any treason felony misdemeanor or other offence cognizable therein shall be subject and liable to the same penalties and punishments as by law could be inflicted on them if convicted thereof in the said Supreme Court: And every such circuit court shall stand in the same relation to the said Supreme Court with respect to civil issues as the court of nisi prius in England stands with respect to the Superior Court from which the nisi prius record is sent: [144] Provided however that it shall not he necessary to issue any special commission to any judge or judges of the said Supreme Court to empower him or them to hold any such circuit court.  18. That every such circuit court shall be opened by the judge or judges of assize at the place and time proclaimed provided however that should such judge or judges not arrive at the place where such court is to be holden in time to open the same on the day appointed by proclamation it shall be lawful for the said judge or judges or for some other judge of the said Supreme Court to open and hold the said circuit court on any day or days following the day upon which the same should have been opened and held and the proceedings of such circuit court shall be as valid as if the same had been duly opened and held at the appointed time.  19. That every Judge of the said Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria shall have power in vacation if under the special circumstances of the case he shall see fit to make all such orders and grant all such writs as can only under ordinary circumstances he made or granted by the court and every such order and writ shall have the same force and effect as a rule of the said court without the necessity for any further motion or order of the said court: Provided that every such order or writ so made shall be liable to be set aside on application to be made to the said court by motion on notice at any time within the first four days of the next ensuing term.  20. That if at any time there shall be only two judges of the said court and a difference of opinion shall arise between them respecting the judgment or decision to be given or decree or order to be made by them or the said court upon any subject matter or proceeding civil criminal relating to affairs ecclesiastical or otherwise brought before them or the said court the judgment decision decree or order of the Chief Justice or of the senior judge as the case may be shall be the judgment decision decree or order of the said court.  An Act to enable the Governor from time to time to appoint a Barrister to act as Judge of the Circuit Court at Brisbane.  Whereas it is expedient to provide for the case of the Judges of the Supreme Court not being able in future (without injury to the suitors generally of that court) to hold a Circuit Court at Brisbane Be it enacted by His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof as follows: -   1. It shall be lawful for His Excellency the Governor from time to time by commission under his hand and seal as occasion may require to appoint some fit and proper person (being a barrister in actual practice of not less than five years standing) in the place and stead of a Judge of the Supreme Court to be and act as Judge of and at the Circuit Court to be holden at Brisbane in the District of Moreton Bay in this Colony and every barrister so appointed shall from the date of such commission at and in such Circuit Court and in relation thereto and in respect of all matters and things done or to be done at and in such court or in reference to any proceedings therein including the summoning of jurors to attend such court have and exercise all and singular the powers and authorities which are now by law vested in the Judges of the Supreme Court or in the judge presiding or who would otherwise have presided at such court and the title of every such barrister while acting under any such commission as aforesaid shall be "Circuit Judge for the Circuit District of Brisbane." [190]  2. Nothing in the preceding section shall invalidate or affect any act done or ordered to be done or any writ or precept issued in reference to such Circuit Court by any Judge of the Supreme Court before the issue of the Commission for such Circuit Court.  General good order may be said to have prevailed up to a recent date notwithstanding the hold which the agents of political agitation have recently acquired under the peculiar circumstances of the times over a large number of the miners apparently in all quarters; and until latterly the gold districts were equally distinguished as heretofore by a general conformity to the law and absence of crime. [17] One marked act of violence occurred during the month of July which naturally has attracted general attention. This was the attack and robbery on the 20th of the month at a point about ten miles south-west from the camp at McIvor of a private escort composed of six men conveying 2323 ounces of gold and 700£ in cash towards Melbourne. The attacking party consisting it is believed of eleven men lay in ambush and evidently attempted by a general discharge of fire-arms to kill or disable the whole guard. Their object was so far successful that although none Were killed several were severely wounded and the whole of the property carried off. Immediate steps were taken both by the police at McIvor and Bendigo and by the authorities generally to trace and secure the perpetrators of this daring act of violence which had evidently been planned by practised hands and I am glad to be able to report that the prompt measures taken and the amount and character of the recompense held out have resulted in the apprehension of the greater number of the persons supposed to be implicated; some of them having been secured on shipboard on the point of sailing for England. A considerable amount of the plunder has been recovered and as one of the number has turned approver it is believed that there will be but little difficulty in bringing the crime home to them. When all the circumstances of the Colony the real character of no inconsiderable portion of the population which has flocked to it since the gold discoveries and the facilities which the broken forested country over which the long lines of road to be traversed by the gold escorts offer to the perpetration of sudden acts of violence are all taken into account it would appear extraordinary that this outrage forms so far an isolated instance.  I do myself the honour to inform you that on the night of the 6th of October last James Scobie was found murdered on the gold field of Ballarat. As he had been last seen coming from the Eureka Hotel suspicion fell upon the landlord James Bentley his wife and John Farrell all of whom had formerly been convicts in Van Diemen's Land and they were accordingly taken up and brought before the bench of magistrates at Ballarat. [57]  The magistrates after hearing the evidence and examining witnesses pronounced the prisoners not guilty of the charges preferred against them and they were accordingly released.  This decision gave great dissatisfaction to the entire digging community of Ballarat; they denounced the presiding magistrate Mr. Dewes accused him of being connected by interest with Bentley and broadly asserted that he had been bought over.  Infuriated with rage a vast assemblage of diggers was soon on the ground; and notwithstanding the exertions of the Magistrates police and a small party of military they set fire to the hotel sacked it and burnt it to the ground and with infinite difficulty the prisoners obtained safety in the camp and escaped the summary capital punishment to which it was intended to subject them.  The knowledge of strength which they now had acquired and the indecision and oscillation of the authorities in allowing the riot to get head caused the diggers to hold mass meetings use the most threatening language to the officers on the gold field and led them to fear that an attack would be made on the Government buildings and that they in turn might be destroyed.  On obtaining official information of these proceedings I lost no time in making such dispositions as I concluded would enable the authorities to maintain the integrity of the law and within four days 450 military and police were on the ground commanded by an officer in whom I had confidence and who was instructed to enforce order and quiet support the civil authority in the arrest of the ringleaders and to use force whenever legally called upon to do so without regard to the consequences which might ensue.  These dispositions and the knowledge that the military were instructed to act checked all further movement on the part of the diggers. Four of the supposed ringleaders were arrested and very heavy bail taken for their appearance to stand their trial. Gradually the irritation subsided and the diggers returned to their ordinary labour; but the law officers of the Crown being of opinion that sufficient evidence did exist to criminate Bentley his wife and Farrell they were again arrested and are now in prison awaiting their trial at the approaching assize.  The movement being now quelled it behoved me to investigate the charges which poured in from all quarters of general corruption On the part of the authorities of the Ballarat gold field; and accordingly I appointed a Board of Inquiry composed of officers of standing and ability and directed them to proceed to Ballarat and ascertain if there was any foundation for these charges.  The Board report that the stipendiary magistrate Mr. Dewes had obtained loans of money from various individuals resident at Ballarat and state "that such acts cannot be too severely animadverted upon as tending to subvert public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the bench." [58]  They also report Sergeant Major Milne of the police force as guilty of receiving bribes; but with these exceptions they are unanimous in declaring that the conduct of the officers on the Ballarat gold field has been honourable and correct.  I have directed that Mr. Dewes' name be erased from the Commission of the Peace and have requested the Attorney General to inform me whether Sergeant Major Milne can be prosecuted for receiving money illegally.  It is now my painful duty to acquaint you that matters have since assumed an aspect for which I was not then prepared; no sooner was the verdict promulgated than professional agitators repaired to "Ballarat"; public meetings were called at which speeches were made vying with each other in inflammatory declamation and resolutions passed which were to be presented to me by the delegates. For the particulars of my conversation with the delegates on the 27th of November I refer you to the accompanying report the accuracy of which may he relied on in consequence of notes having been taken by the Government shorthand writer.  You will observe the conversation commenced by Mr. Black declaring that he was empowered by the diggers to demand the release of the prisoners; and although the delegates endeavoured to explain away and soften down the word the fact remained that they were acting under instructions and made use of the word because they were enjoined to do so. [61]  Short of relinquishing my authority as Her Majesty's representative I deemed it my duty to spare no effort to conciliate and I would particularly draw your attention to one of my expressions - "Well send your petition and let me see it; I can give no other reply" - to prove that I was prepared to make every sacrifice to avoid bloodshed but as the surest way to prevent a conflict is to arm in time so I assembled a force of 430 military and police at Ballarat and requested the Major General to entrust the command to Captain Thomas of the 40th Regiment and who on previous occasions had shown that he possessed the skill and ability required for the emergency. A detachment of the 12th Regiment which had been forwarded in vans from Melbourne was commanded by an officer unacquainted with the locality; he omitted to take the precaution of forming his men before entering the diggings and the miners seizing the opportunity overturned one waggon maltreated the drivers and some of the soldiers and gained possession of a box of ammunition; the disorder and confusion being terminated by the arrival of a body of mounted police who galloped to the rescue.  On the 29th November; a mass meeting was held and the people were addressed by the usual orators a magistrate and two witnesses attending in compliance with my instructions. The principal topics of discussion were the reception I had given to the delegates and the injustice of the licence fee. On the first I am led to believe that the delegates spoke with moderation and fairness but when called upon to follow the example of the speaker and burn the licences a large number did as they were desired; on the whole however the meeting went off quietly.  On the following day the 30th November the Resident Commissioner directed a commissioner to take with him the usual force and apprehend unlicenced miners; the results will be best comprehended by a perusal of Mr. Rede's Despatch; - suffice to say that a riot ensued the Riot Act was read the military tailed in and shots exchanged but without any loss of life resulting therefrom.  The aspect of affairs now became serious; the disaffected miners formed themselves into corps elected their leaders and commenced drilling; they possessed themselves of all the arms and ammunition which were within their reach they established patrols and placed parties on the high roads leading to Melbourne and Geelong; searched all carts and drays for weapons coerced the well affected issued orders signed by the secretary to the commander-in-chief of diggers under arms despatched emissaries to the other diggings to excite the miners and held a meeting whereat the Australian flag of independence was solemnly consecrated and vows proffered for its defence. [62]  All cause for doubt as to their real intention from this moment disappeared; by the most energetic measures must order be restored and property maintained; a riot was rapidly growing into a revolution and the professional agitator giving place to the man of physical force.  I received the Despatch on the morning of the 1st of December; at 6 p.m. of that day the remaining companies of the 12th and 40th Regiments with two field pieces and two howitzers - the latter being manned by the seamen of H.M.S. "Electra" and "Fantome" under the command of Lieutenants Burnaby and Keene were on their march to Ballarat and Major General Sir Robert Nickle had assumed the command in person; my instructions were repeated to the authorities at Ballarat to act with temper caution and judgment but to enforce the law. I further added my satisfaction at the conduct they had evinced under peculiarly trying circumstances.  Hearing that several foreigners had taken an active part the consuls of the different foreign nations issued a proclamation warning their respective citizens against participating in such unlawful proceedings; in the meantime authority was at an end on the gold field; the Government camp was placed in a state of defence the officers confined to it and every preparation made to repel a general attack which was threatened by the insurgents. Mr. Amos a gold commissioner residing three miles from the Government camp was made prisoner and brought before the insurgent authorities; he found that they had encompassed a large space of ground with a stockade had sentinels mounted and were amenable to military leaders.  On the 4th of December information reached me that a successful attack had been made upon the stockade of the insurgents that thirty had been killed and a large number wounded whilst the loss on the part of the military and police amounted to three privates killed Captain Wise of the 40th Regiment - since dead - dangerously wounded Lieutenant Paul of the 12th Regiment severely wounded and eleven privates of the 12th and 40th Regiments wounded.  The barbarous policy of early Governors has prevented the execution of many of these important [public] works; and it will perhaps be asked how any of them could have been performed in the earlier days of the colony? I answer that nothing was better suited for convict discipline.  It surely was not the object of the British Government to punish without reforming the offender; and what could be better adapted to the work of reformation than the execution of such works? Instead of pouring the corrupted mass into private families or coercing the convict by the lash he should have been fairly and fully paid for his work - he should ever have an interest in his amendment - should even at the latest period have the means afforded of supporting himself by useful labour. [17]  If he were employed in the execution of public undertakings and his work accurately measured and properly paid for he would have the greatest inducement to acquire habits of industry.  Suppose every man's labour were carried to his credit (a rateable deduction being first made for general medical attendance and the support of the sick) that he were then charged for his clothing and maintenance and the balance held at his credit until free; and that he were then allowed to return to his country or settle in the colony. With habits of industry acquired during his probation and generally possessing the means of entering upon some beneficial employment he would have the greatest inducement to become a useful and reformed member of society. What better discipline Could be provided for the road-gangs or the drunkards who now idle away their time in gaols?  It is with sincere pleasure that I can now state that my most sanguine expectations have been fully realised and in some instances surpassed. [64] Good order and quiet have generally prevailed and there are appearances which indicate that a spirit of contentment exists amongst the mining population. In masses of men herded together with one all-absorbing object collected from all quarters of the globe composed of the most enterprising and restless spirits it is only reasonable to suppose that disturbances would occasionally occur; the merest accident produces a brawl swells into a tumult and requires the interference of the authorities. Such a case occurs in every country and under every government; but so long as it is without a political object little importance is attached to it and such has been the case on the gold fields of Victoria. On two late occasions "brawls" arising out of feuds of races have occurred and the police has been strengthened in the neighbourhood; but during the last eleven months this has been the extent of the disturbance and government now enjoys as large a share of respect as I could possibly desire.  Of all the changes which have taken place the nomination of the honorary magistrates is that which has been attended with least success. It has been easy to find gentlemen with sufficient education for the duty but difficult to meet with persons possessing a competent knowledge of the law. Hence they have come into conflict with the constituted and professional authorities and have failed in obtaining the necessary respect from the miners even when their decisions have been legal.  Instead of a restless discontented body the miners have lately shown themselves attached to the local authorities and indisposed to violate the law. Since the Act has come into force public meetings have become less frequent; and on one or two occasions when a temporary excitement has required that the police should be increased in a particular locality a large body of the population have offered its service to the government.  I cannot better illustrate the present condition of this portion of the population than by relating two events which have recently occurred similar in their character and to which I made reference in the early part of my despatch.  In both instances a rich quartz vein led from a part of the diggings on which the miners were at work into purchased land. On both occasions a "rush" as it is called here was made by the miners on the private property to work the vein and on each occasion they retired as soon as the warden informed them of the nature of the law and of the resolution of government to enforce it. Finally they resolved to bring the matter into the Supreme Court and obtain a judicial opinion on the question.  6. Observations on the Present and Probable Future Wants of the Colony in Connexion with the Administration of Justice (1855)  1. Law business so very much fluctuates in this colony both in criminal and in civil matters that it is never very easy to predicate of any year what judicial arrangements will be sufficient for its dispatch. But for the last 18 months at the least the judges (I do not hesitate to say) have with materially reduced incomes been unreasonably and inconveniently over-tasked in work. The Chairman of Sessions being also Commissioner of Requests is so much overworked that he cannot possibly (I conceive) discharge longer all his duties: - his courts being already held at very inconvenient and unprecedented times and he himself being kept flying all the year round from town to town without opportunity for study or one week's repose. The Master being also Insolvency Commissioner never has (so far as I can learn) one hour disengaged throughout the year; and he has no proper assistance under him in his several departments. The Sheriff's duties are largely increased; and he has so many jury summonses to serve (the number being very much beyond all former precedent) that it is really unintelligible to me how the officers contrive to do the duty.  2. Formerly the judges were able to appropriate Saturdays to consultations; and not only were four nisi prius sittings sufficient but there were occasionally two or three days to spare - which were devoted to conferences or drawing judgments or to study. But during the last year and the present we have had to provide for two extra nisi prius sittings; and not only is every day fully occupied but "remanets" are common at each. The court also sits on Saturdays; and almost invariably has a full paper - so that consultations for more than an occasional hour are impracticable. The chamber business has greatly increased. And whereas formerly we had no Brisbane Circuit and five or six days would almost always suffice on the other circuits eight and ten days are now common at each. In 1853 the number of new trial motions causes tried and actions brought in the Supreme Court were respectively 43 162 and 1377. In 1854 the numbers were 83 229 and 2275. In 1853 there were 97 cases in Equity by bill rule nisi claim or petition. In 1854 the number was 114. Insolvencies have increased from 22 to 78; and the monthly present rate of increase is still greater.  3. The Brisbane Circuit is a most inconvenient and harassing one to all parties concerned in going or returning there. It could not be fixed for any other times; but the effect is to prevent consultations (by the three judges) during more than a month of the year at the most desirable periods for consultation and in November to throw on two judges all the other duties at a time when causes are being tried daily - and twice a week two courts sit simultaneously. The same must be said with regard to the Goulburn Circuit. Yet without another judge and (as I think there ought to be in any event) a third Crown Prosecutor this evil could not be avoided. [85]  4. I have little doubt that if the Brisbane Circuit Court be abolished a third Crown Prosecutor appointed and the three remaining circuits all taken (as they then could and ought to be) within one month half-yearly instead of being spread over six weeks half-yearly - and especially if the Supreme Court were relieved of all civil cases up to one hundred pounds by "Recorders' Courts" - on the plan which I shall suggest presently a fourth judge need not be appointed. But still I think that the three would have more duty than is desirable in reference to the public interest - if business should continue to increase as it has done the last eighteen months. Judges should have leisure for professional and general reading. At the end of every term also and every nisi prius sittings they ought to have two or three (or more) open days for conferences. At present they have not - and long have not had. All my own studies and almost all my office work have been at night. All this tends to favor the appointment of a fourth judge. But as a general rule I believe it to be of great importance not to have many judges in the Supreme Court of any country. The responsibility should be and should be felt to be very great; and should not be divided among more than are essentially required for the actual work to be done. The position also should be looked up to; and it is clear that in proportion as you make the members of this class many so will the estimation and prestige of that position diminish.  5. It seems clear to me moreover that if a fourth Supreme Court Judge be appointed (unless indeed he be appointed exclusively for Moreton Bay) there will still be provision required for the due administration of justice in the Northern Districts. At present all that extensive tract of country is placed we may almost say without the pale of municipal law: - and something much more effectual and accessible than a mere circuit court with a Supreme Court in Sydney has long been required there. But to have a resident Supreme Court Judge at Moreton Bay would be every way objectionable; and in truth almost ludicrous. Such a functionary (altho' as originally at Port Phillip he may be called so) will be in no respect a Judge of the Supreme Court which is one and indivisible. The measure will be in effect a contradiction; and a cutting of one court in two for no conceivable purpose. Any separate court at and for Moreton Bay should obviously be so in name as well as in fact - and a separate judge (whether an appeal lay or not to the other judges in Sydney) would be to all intents and purposes a separate court.  6. The objection and it is a very great one to any court established in a confined territory (or a large one with few inhabitants) with a judge exclusively there residing is this; - that he almost necessarily stagnates; he has no means of comparing his legal knowledge with that of other men; however ignorant he may (by gradual deterioration) become there is no one on the spot to detect or at any rate to expose his ignorance; and he has nothing to excite him to superiority or emulation. Independently of all this the judge is liable to suspicions of being biased - and the like. Whether it be expedient therefore or at any rate wise if the measure can be avoided to have a sole superior judge in Brisbane is a question to be considered. I need give no opinion on it. In any event of course the court or judge will not have jurisdiction without appeal. The power of appealing is the best (and often the only) security against the several evil tendencies spoken of. The knowledge that the power exists subject to proper checks and conditions inspires confidence in the suitor; compels watchfulness and care in the judge: and its exercise tends even though an appeal be but rarely interposed to make decisions uniform correct and satisfactory. [86]  7. But as a court of some kind for the Northern Districts is indispensable the only practical question is - (putting aside the question of a circuit court in addition) - what its form shall be. I humbly recommend a "Recorder's Court" - with civil and criminal jurisdiction: the judge to be styled "Recorder for Brisbane". There will be required a Crown Prosecutor (who might be Crown Solicitor also and discharge the duties of Clerk of the Peace) a Registrar and a Sheriff who might be a person holding some other office also. An appeal to be by "special case" to the Supreme Court in civil cases where the question was of importance in itself or the sum exceeded £50; and on all "points reserved" in criminal cases in like manner as at present.  8. If the jurisdiction be limited I would fix the amount in civil cases at £200: and in criminal cases to every case except capital ones wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm perjury and one or two more to be specified; and restrict the punishment in every case to a maximum of seven years hard labour. Perhaps all cases punishable by hard labour or imprisonment might be triable provided that a limit were established in the punishment: - so that if a heavier sentence were supposed to be proper the case might be left for the circuit court. If the jurisdiction be unlimited all these questions will of course be avoided. The "appeal" would remain the same in either event. And in either event it may easily be made matter of arrangement whether the Recorder shall or not hold a court at Ipswich - and eventually at Drayton - or other places.  9. The court in its civil jurisdiction should try summarily (as in a court of "conscience" or "requests") all cases under £20. All cases above that amount should be by a jury of four - or of three; unless the parties should agree that the Recorder may decide without a jury. The union of both judge and jury (as is the practice now in the Court of Requests) in giving the verdict is open to serious objections. These small cases might be called "requests cases" - and the costs be proportionably trifling.  10. If of limited jurisdiction the Recorder should nevertheless have power to initiate proceedings to any amount; as in cases of arrest or ne exeat or waste. And to his court should go all cases of appeal which by the present law are carried to the Courts of Quarter Sessions.  II. If he is to have limited jurisdiction it would seem (or may be thought) to follow that a fourth judge will be indispensable. Such judge would in all respects I presume have the same duties and powers as the present judges. All would alike go the circuit; the only difference being that each judge would take each circuit once in two years; instead of once in 18 months - as at present. This of course would be a considerable relief. Only three should sit in banco at any time; just as at Westminster only four judges so sit while the fifth is engaged elsewhere. The fourth if in Sydney would discharge chamber duties (at present frequently a serious interruption to business in term) prepare judgments and do office work; - as well as probably sit separately in Equity and Insolvency. He might also take perhaps other business; although of what nature I am not prepared now to suggest. But I trust that the appointment of a fourth judge if one be appointed will not result in the imposition [...] the bench of such or so many additional duties as to prevent its affording the other members any relief from undue pressure.  1. In my opinion the Assistant Barrister's Act of Ireland the County Courts Act of England and the Court of Requests Act of this colony furnish materials for legislation out of which a "District Court" Act for this colony may be advantageously constructed. [110]  2. The jurisdiction in the District Court to the extent of £10 in civil cases might he exercised by the judge of the court alone. Beyond that sum and to the extent of £100 the judge should be assisted by two assessors being magistrates of the district in which the court sits. Above £50 an appeal should lie to the Supreme Court.  3. For the present Moreton Bay should not be interfered with; as in the event of the Constitutional Act being approved of by the appointment of a fourth judge the judicial requirements of that district will be provided for. For the present three District Courts (Sydney and the County of Cumberland forming one district) for Maitland Goulburn and Bathurst will suffice. The Maitland District should extent to Armidale and an intermediate court might be held at Jerry's Plains. Goulburn District should embrace Berrima and Yass: Bathurst. Wellington and the Lachlan district.  4. In criminal matters these courts should exercise a jurisdiction in all cases not capital. Cases of criminal information and perhaps cases of perjury should be excepted also.  5. If a person of legal education could be found in the district of Albury it would be very desirable from its great distance and the inconvenience and expense of removing prisoners to the circuit and other courts of the colony that a District Judge should be also appointed for Albury. Or it might be arranged that the Judge of the District Court of Goulburn should visit Albury in his judicial capacity twice a year.  6. The present Commissioner and Chairman whose time is now occupied for the most part in travelling to distant districts might discharge the duties of District Judge for Sydney and the County of Cumberland and also perform the duties of Chief Commissioner of the Insolvent Court.  7. To these courts there should be attached an associate who should perform the duties of Prothonotary Master in Equity Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates Clerk of Arraigns; and also of prosecuting counsel on the trial of criminals.  8. I concur in the suggestion of Mr. Justice Dickinson that the offices of Crown Prosecutor and Commissioner of the Court of Requests should be abolished; and the present officers receive a judgeship as an equivalent appointment. I also concur in the opinion that "recorder" would be an appropriate title for the district judge.  Whereas by reason of the increase in the judicial business of the Supreme Court and of the necessity for providing more effectually for the administration of justice in the District of Moreton Bay the present number of Judges of the Supreme Court has become insufficient and it is expedient therefore to authorize the appointment of an additional Judge of the said Court And whereas by the Act lately passed "to confer a Constitution on New South Wales and to grant a Civil List to Her Majesty" [18 & 19 Vict. c. 54] provision is made for the salary and retiring pension of a fourth Judge of the said Supreme Court for the said District of Moreton Bay but it is not at present expedient to authorize the appointment of a Resident Judge for Moreton Bay exclusively or to establish a separate court for that district Be it enacted by His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof as follows: -   1. In addition to the present Judges of the Supreme Court there shall be appointed one other Judge of the said Court who shall be appointed by the Governor by commission under the Great Seal of the Colony in the name and for and on behalf of Her Majesty and from and after the issue by the said Governor of such commission the person thereby appointed shall be and be deemed a Judge of the said Court to all intents and purposes and shall be entitled to the salary and pension so as aforesaid provided for the Judge for Moreton Bay Provided always that no person shall be so appointed unless he be a barrister of England or Ireland or of this colony of not less than five years standing And provided further that so soon as a separate court shall have been established for the District of Moreton Bay and it shall be deemed expedient that a judge should be resident therein it shall be lawful for the Governor to appoint the judge hereby authorized to be appointed to reside in the said District as the Resident Judge thereof. [191]  2. Until it shall be thought fit to appoint a Resident Judge and to establish a separate Court for the District of Moreton Bay Circuit Courts shall be held at such place or places in the said district and at such times (not being less than thrice in each year) as the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council shall appoint and the judge before whom such court shall be holden shall in addition to the powers and jurisdiction now by law appertaining to Circuit Courts have whilst within the said district the powers and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and of the judges thereof collectively or individually with respect to all matters arising or pending in the district but not so as to affect any act done in Sydney during such period by the Supreme Court or any judge thereof.  3. Until such appointment of a Resident Judge at Moreton Bay or the establishment of a Court of Quarter Sessions therein every Circuit Court sitting at Brisbane shall while so sitting have within and for that district all the jurisdiction and powers of a Court of General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the purposes of appeals and the return of summary convictions to such courts and otherwise.  4. Notwithstanding the addition hereby authorized to be made to the number of Judges of the Supreme Court it shall not be necessary at any time for more than two judges to be actually sitting in Sydney in banco or for more than two judges to join in the making of any general rule or in the doing of any other act in any case where but for the passing of this Act two judges only would have been sufficient.  5. Until such appointment of a Resident Judge and such establishment of a separate court at and for the said district it shall be lawful for the Judges of the Supreme Court or any three of them to appoint from time to time by commission under the seal of the said Supreme Court some fit person residing at Brisbane or within five miles thereof to be a Commissioner of the same court for the purposes hereinafter mentioned which Commissioner shall (subject to such general rules as shall be made in that behalf from time to time by the judges or any three of them) have power to issue writs of summons in actions and writs of capias for the arrest of any defendant therein in cases where by law an arrest is now allowed in an action and writs of subpoena for witnesses in any cause or case (civil or criminal) to be tried within the said district.  6. Every such writ of capias shall be directed to the Sheriff or his Deputy and shall be executed (without other authority) by the Sheriff's Bailiff to whom the same shall be delivered who shall have in respect thereof all the powers and perform all the duties of the Sheriff but nevertheless the Sheriff shall not in such cases be personally responsible.  7. For the purposes of this Act the District of Moreton Bay shall be taken to comprise the Police Districts of Brisbane Ipswich Drayton Warwick Maryborough Gayndah Surat Tenterfield and Tabulam and any other Police Districts that may be established to the northward of any such District.  Your Committee having obtained evidence upon the question of Chinese Immigration and their residence in this Province from every available source have arrived at the opinion that it possesses features having no parallel in any part of the British dominions.  Your Committee are of opinion that the Chinese migrate to this country exclusively to mine for gold and to trade among themselves that their numbers exceed forty thousand (40000) of which there are not more than four or five females and those are of an inferior class. From the evidence adduced it appears that when the Chinese are located in other countries in large numbers they for the most part have the opportunity of intermarrying with native Asiatics - a practice which is largely followed. In this country there is no Asiatic or other race with whom it is desirable they should inter-marry and thus large masses of men congregate together on the various gold fields producing as a necessary consequence great social evils immorality and crime and bringing about results highly detrimental to the habits of the rising generation.  Your Committee have ascertained that the immigrant Chinese are composed principally if not exclusively of natives of Quang Tung or that part of China of which Canton is the capital with which the British nation is at present in open hostility. [69] These immigrants are not of that class commonly known as coolies but comprise men from the country districts as well as from towns cultivators traders and mechanics. Their passage to this country is paid in part by themselves and partly by advances from the native bankers or head men of their village their relations and friends becoming security for the repayment of same.  As far as your Committee have been able to ascertain they find that the Chinese hitherto have in no one instance applied themselves to the cultivation of the land nor indeed to any of the industrial pursuits of the Colony save that of digging for gold; their object being to acquire a sufficiency of means wherewith to return to their own country.  The advantages derived from the trade which the presence of such a vast population necessarily brings with it your Committee feels assured affords no adequate compensation to the country for the large and increasing quantity of gold amounting within one year to about 120000 ounces valued at half a million sterling which they are annually abstracting from the natural wealth and resources of the country.  Your Committee have ascertained that the majority of the Chinese are amenable to the laws of the country; and under a proper system of registration and management through the agency of headmen of their own race selected by themselves order to some extent may be kept amongst them.  The fiscal regulations for the collection of rates or taxes imposed by the Government provided they are clearly and distinctly defined and enforced with Justice and firmness your Committee see no difficulty in carrying out.  That crimes of great magnitude have been committed by these people is evidenced in the records of the Supreme Court. Serious collisions between them and the European population are becoming more frequent and dangerous. The Committee nevertheless think that those collisions may be lessened in some degree by a well-defined and more stringent exercise of authority on the part of the Executive Government.  Your Committee are not insensible to the importance of the efforts which are being made by some members of this community to impart the advantages of Christian instruction to many of the Chinese race now located in the Colony and they wish to express their sense of the high value they entertain of such efforts ; nevertheless they cannot ignore the fact that ninety-nine-hundredths of their race are pagans and addicted to vices of a greatly immoral character They feel bound to state that the presence of such a large number of their class. In the midst of our great centres of population must necessarily have a most pernicious effect upon that of the rising generation with which they most frequently come in contact. [70]  Your Committee having given great attention to the important questions referred to them by the House after careful deliberation are unanimously of opinion that it is absolutely necessary to place some restrictions upon the influx of Chinese into this country without which there is every probability of their coming in such vast numbers as to be wholly beyond the control of the Government prejudicially affecting the welfare and future destinies of this community in an alarming and dangerous degree.  The Bill on this subject which has been brought up from the Assembly and referred to us has been carefully examined in all its clauses and your Committee are of opinion that it is adapted with the alterations and additions suggested below to meet the objects intended to be effected by it and is in accordance with the spirit of the recommendations embodied in this Report.  JOHN P. FAWKNER  Chairman.  (I) That any Chinaman found on the Gold Fields or elsewhere in the Colony without a license or receipt be subject to a penal servitude on the public works of the Colony for a period not exceeding three (3) months.  (2) That any person arrested under this Act as a reputed Chinaman it shall be sufficient for the accuser to prove that the accused is reputed or considered by the accuser to be a Chinaman. His oath or the oath of one witness shall be sufficient proof unless the contrary be shown to make such person amenable to the provisions of this Act.  Whereas having regard to the population and great extent of the District of Moreton Bay and its distance from Sydney it is expedient to establish within that district a separate court to be presided over by a Resident Judge so that justice may be therein administered in all cases both civil and criminal without the delays and inconveniences attendant on the holding of Circuit Courts only and the necessity of resorting to Sydney for the initiation of suits and proceedings as at present Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of New South Wales in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows: -   1. On and from the first day of April next the Act of Council passed in the nineteenth year of Her Majesty's reign intituled "An Act for the appointment of an additional Judge of the Supreme Court and to provide for the more effectual Administration of Justice in the District of Moreton Bay until the establishment of a separate court therein" except only the first section thereof and except as to the matter hereinafter specially excepted shall be and stand repealed.  2. On and after the said first day of April now next there shall be holden at Brisbane in and for the said district a Court of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction which court is hereby erected and established as a Court of Record to be called the "Supreme Court at Moreton Bay" and to be holden by the judge appointed or hereafter to be appointed under the authority of the said first section of the Act hereinbefore mentioned who shall be called the Resident Judge of Moreton Bay.  3. For the purposes of this Act the District of Moreton Bay shall be taken to comprise all such portions of the Colony of New South Wales as lie to the northward of the southern boundaries of the Police Districts of Brisbane Ipswich Warwick Drayton and Surat and of a line west in extension of the southern boundary of the said Police District of Surat to the eastern boundary line of the Colony of South Australia.  4. Within the limits of the said district such Resident Judge shall have exercise and enjoy all such and the like powers jurisdiction and authority as now are or can be legally exercised by the Supreme Court of New South Wales or by all or any of the judges thereof collectively or individually.  5. The said Resident Judge at Moreton Bay with respect to all offences committed within the limits of that district shall exclusively have jurisdiction and with respect to offences committed within any other part of the colony the judges at Sydney shall exclusively have jurisdiction and in like manner with respect to actions and other proceedings at law and suits and proceedings in equity and the granting of probates and letters of administration or orders to collect the Resident Judge shall exclusively have jurisdiction over persons residing and property situate within the District of Moreton Bay and the Judges of the Supreme Court at Sydney shall exclusively have jurisdiction over persons residing and property situate within all other parts of the colony but so nevertheless that no venue shall be necessary to be laid in any case civil or criminal after the passing of this Act other than is now necessary to be laid in any such case.  6. Provided always that nothing in the preceding section shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction of such Resident Judge in respect of any party absent from the said district or the jurisdiction of the judges at Sydney in respect of any party resident in the said district or elsewhere in any case where an action suit or other proceeding might now by law be commenced or carried on in the Supreme Court at Sydney in the absence of such party from New South Wales. [193]  7. Provided always that the decision of such Resident Judge in any matter only which would in Sydney properly belong to the Full Court and every general rule made by such judge may be brought under the review of the Judges of the Supreme Court sitting in Sydney in banco by way of appeal or otherwise in such manner and form and on such terms to be imposed on the litigating parties respectively and subject to such rules and regulations in all other respects as the said last-mentioned judges shall from time to time in that behalf make and prescribe Provided always that no appeal shall be allowed from any order for the granting of a re-hearing only or of a new trial or of any writ of attachment or of any interlocutory order merely whereby the merits of the case shall not be concluded.  8. It shall be lawful for the said Resident Judge from time to time at his discretion and on such terms as he shall think fit to impose in any matter civil or criminal pending before him to state or cause to be stated and to transmit to the judges at Sydney under his hand for their opinion and decision thereon any point or points of law and the said judges after argument before them (or without argument if they think fit) shall as soon as conveniently may be certify and transmit to such judge their opinions and decision thereon accordingly which decision shall thereafter on the point or matter in question be binding and conclusive.  9. Along the borders of the line which shall divide the said district from the other parts of New South Wales and throughout a space or tract of country extending twenty-five miles on each side of such line the Judges of the Supreme Court at Sydney and the said Resident Judge shall respectively have a concurrent jurisdiction in all cases criminal as well as civil.  10. Every writ of execution and writ of subpoena issued out of the Supreme Court at Sydney or by the said Resident Judge and every rule of court or order made and every writ of attachment granted by the said court or such Resident Judge shall be of equal force and validity and shall or lawfully may be served and enforced or carried into effect respectively according to the tenor thereof in every part of New South Wales including Moreton Bay Provided that nothing in this section contained shall be construed to confer on the said Resident Judge any original jurisdiction over any person or matter other than and except as first aforesaid.  11. The said Resident Judge shall or lawfully may on all occasions where by law or custom the seal of a court is used have and use a seal similar to that of the Supreme Court of New South Wales except that on the seal used by such Resident Judge the words "Supreme Court at Moreton Bay" shall be engraven instead of the words "Supreme Court of New South Wales".  12. The plaintiff in any action at law commenced at Moreton Bay may proceed by foreign attachment in the manner prescribed by the Act in that case made in respect of any defendant not residing within that district and in such case no publication of notice as to such attachment shall be necessary other than in two of the public newspapers published in the district and the plaintiff in any action commenced at Sydney may proceed by foreign attachment in respect of any defendant residing at Moreton Bay in the same manner respectively as if such defendant resided out of the colony and no plea in abatement for the nonjoinder of any person as a defendant shall be sustained where the place of residence of such person (if the action be pending at Sydney) shall be within the District of Moreton Bay or where (if the action be pending in that district) such place of residence shall be in any other part of the colony. [194]  13. The provisions of the Act of Council [No. 12] passed in the nineteenth year of Her Majesty's reign intituled "An Act to give further remedies to Creditors against persons removing from one Australasian Colony to another" shall be applied in reference to the District of Moreton Bay in the same manner as if the said district were a separate Australasian  colony.   14. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council to appoint a Sheriff at and for Moreton Bay for the discharge within the limits thereof of all the duties by law appertaining to the office of Sheriff or which are or lawfully may be assigned to that officer to be discharged and the Sheriff of the colony shall not be in any manner responsible for the acts or defaults of the Sheriff so appointed.  15. Every fee now by law payable to the Sheriff of New South Wales or to his Bailiffs or payable to the Master in Equity Prothonotary or Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates at Sydney or to the officer for Registration of Deeds there or to the Commissioners for taking affidavits in New South Wales or any of them shall be equally payable in Moreton Bay to the appropriate officer or officer having the like duties appointed under this Act and shall be demanded received and accounted for by every such officer accordingly.  16. The Governor with the advice of the Executive Council shall appoint for the said court at Moreton Bay one principal officer to be called the "Registrar" of the court who shall possess the powers and perform the duties of Prothonotary Master in Equity and Registrar of Deeds and also such other duties as shall from time to time be required of him by any general rule of the said court and there shall or may be appointed as aforesaid such other officers clerks and servants as may from time to time he deemed by the Governor and Executive Council to be necessary.  17. The said Resident Judge lawfully may whilst so resident in virtue of such his office preside as Chairman of any such Courts of General or Quarter Sessions as the said Governor shall from time to time by proclamation for that purpose appoint and the said Registrar shall act as Clerk of the Peace in relation to such court Provided that in case any Court of General or Quarter Sessions shall be holden elsewhere than at Brisbane the said Registrar may appoint some other person to act as his deputy thereat.  18. The said Resident Judge shall try without a jury all civil actions in which the sum or matter in dispute shall not exceed twenty pounds and he shall also try without a jury all civil actions in which the sum or matter in dispute shall exceed twenty pounds and shall not exceed fifty pounds unless one of the parties shall require a jury and in every action for or in respect of a sum or matter not exceeding fifty pounds the form of process and pleading shall be the same (or as near thereto as circumstances will permit) as are now in use in the Court of Requests in Sydney and in such action the charges shall not exceed (if the sum or matter in question be no more than twenty pounds) one-half the amount allowed on taxation in ordinary cases in the Supreme Court or (where the sum or matter in question is above twenty pounds) two-thirds of the amount so allowed. [195]  19. In every such action every defence which would be good in equity shall be available although not ordinarily cognizable at law and every demand properly cognizable in equity only may be proceeded for in any such action and it shall be lawful for any cestui que trust to sue in his own name and for parties claiming as legatees or under the statute of distributions to sue the executor or administrator And the court may in every case grant a new trial for sufficient cause whether the trial was by a jury or not.  20. The Resident Judge shall in respect of all estates sequestrated by the court as insolvent and all persons whose estates have been so sequestrated have all the powers and shall or may discharge all the duties incident to the office of Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates at Sydney Provided that whenever he shall in that capacity grant refuse or suspend the certificate of any insolvent his decision shall (if appealed from) be reviewed by him and confirmed reversed or varied in open court as upon a re-hearing Provided also that the Resident Judge may direct all or any of the meetings of creditors in any case as occasion may require and all proof of debts thereat to take place before the Registrar or (in his absence) before the Official Assignee.  21. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the said Executive Council to appoint from time to time some fit and proper person for the said District of Moreton Bay (such person being a barrister) by whom and in whose name all crimes misdemeanors and offences cognizable in the Supreme Court and in the several Courts of General and Quarter Sessions shall be prosecuted within the aforesaid limits of Moreton Bay Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit or control any authority vested by law in Her Majesty's Attorney General for the colony.  22. It shall be lawful for the Governor to appoint some fit person at Brisbane to be the Official Assignee of and for Insolvent Estates and to be Curator of Intestate Estates as also of other property exposed or liable to waste left by persons who shall die leaving property within the district and which would or might by law if this Act had not been passed have been collected and administered by the Curator of Intestate Estates at Sydney.  23. The person so appointed shall as such Curator in respect of the estates and property belonging to persons so dying which he shall be directed or empowered to collect have all the powers of the Curator of Intestate Estates at Sydney and shall discharge the duties incident to that office and be entitled to the commission by law payable to an Official Assignee discharging those duties and the several Clerks of the Bench in the District of Moreton Bay shall be his agents for the collection of all such estates and property in like manner as they now are by law agents of the Curator at Sydney.  24. Such Official Assignee and Curator shall in each capacity in all matters connected with the duties of either office be deemed an officer of the Supreme Court at Moreton Bay and be subject to the rules and orders of the court accordingly and shall before entering on such duties give such security by bond to Her Majesty for the due performance of those duties and that he will duly account for and pay into the court or to the parties entitled thereto all property and moneys coming to his hands in either capacity as the Governor shall direct. [196]  25. Every provision contained in the several Acts passed and now in force relating to juries shall be in force and be applicable with respect to and for the purposes of all prosecutions actions and proceedings in the said court at Moreton Bay and for the purposes of the said Acts the said court and the Resident Judge and Sheriff of Moreton Bay respectively shall have all the powers and duties and be subject to the same liabilities as by the same Acts are conferred or imposed on the Supreme Court and its judges and on the Sheriff of New South Wales respectively.  26. Every Commissioner of the Supreme Court for taking affidavits or examinations now or hereafter appointed at any place within the District of Moreton Bay shall have the same power as if this Act had not been passed and every such Commissioner appointed or to be appointed at any place out of that district shall have all the powers also of a Commissioner of the Supreme Court of Moreton Bay.  27. It shall be lawful for the Governor by proclamation issued for that purpose to appoint from time to time places other than Brisbane within the said district at which sittings of the court shall be holden and the Resident Judge shall hold sittings of the court accordingly at such times as he shall by general rule or rules appoint.  28. For the purpose of carrying this Act and the objects thereof into effect and also for the regulation of the practice and proceedings of the court and its officers and touching the admission of practitioners and the fees to be paid to them the said Resident Judge shall have power from time to time to make all such general rules as he may think proper Provided that a copy of every general rule so made shall be transmitted within sixty days next following to the Governor to be by him laid before the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly respectively.  29. After the commencement of this Act all Crown grants wills and other instruments affecting land within the District of Moreton Bay not then already enrolled or registered shall or may be enrolled or registered as the case may require in the office of the Registrar of the said Supreme Court at Moreton Bay and not in the office for registration of deeds at Sydney and for all purposes of and connected with such enrolment and registration the said Registrar shall have and be subject to all such and the same powers liabilities and duties in every respect as the officer for the registration of deeds at Sydney has or would have and is or would be subject to in respect of the like grants wills and instruments enrolled or registered or which of right ought to be enrolled or registered in the said office for registration of deeds at Sydney.  30. The proper officer for the registration of deeds at Sydney shall as soon as conveniently may be after the commencement of this Act make out and transmit to the said Registrar at Brisbane extracts certified under his hand from all memorials and copies of instruments affecting land within the said district registered or deposited for registration in the said office at Sydney and all such extracts shall be received by the said Registrar at Brisbane and be by him entered and preserved and shall be of the same force and effect to all intents and purposes as the original memorials or copies at Sydney.  31. Every extract so made out and transmitted shall contain the particulars of one registered memorial or copy and shall state in columns for those purposes the date of the instrument the names of the parties thereto the description of the lands affected or purporting so to be the estate or term conveyed or stated in the habendum so to be the consideration stated in the instrument the names of the witnesses and the appropriate number and book on the registry and the date when registered. [197] And all such extracts shall be written (or partly printed and partly written) on paper or parchment of one uniform size.  32. Upon the registration of any instrument in the office of the Registrar at Brisbane the receipt required by law to be indorsed upon such instrument shall be signed by the said Registrar or his clerk in his absence and every such receipt so indorsed and signed shall on proof of such signature be taken and allowed as evidence of the registration of such instrument and of the time when such registration was made.  33. The jurisdiction conferred by this Act upon the Resident Judge and Supreme Court of and at Moreton Bay respectively shall not extend to or affect any case in which probate or administration shall have been granted or any order to collect been made or any suit or action have been commenced or prosecution instituted or other proceeding civil or criminal have been taken by or in the Supreme Court at Sydney or the Circuit Court at Brisbane before the commencement of this Act but all such matters shall be dealt with and disposed of in all respects as if this Act had not been passed.  34. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council to appoint the Sheriff of Moreton Bay to be a Justice of the Peace and also a Police Magistrate for the said district or any part thereof and the sheriff if so appointed may lawfully act in those capacities any enactment to the contrary notwithstanding.  35. This Act shall take effect on and from the first day of April now next.  To the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales. I The petition of the undersigned inhabitants of the Pastoral District of Moama Humbly Sheweth:  That your petitioners have learned with extreme regret and considerable alarm that a Bill intituled "A Bill to amend the Electoral Law" recently laid before your Honorable House contains clauses which would - as your petitioners verily believe - if passed into law inflict upon a large and most important class of the community a great and overwhelming injustice; while at the same time they would tend to sap if not totally destroy the great source of the prosperity of the whole colony.  That the Bill would prove a very serious injustice to the digging population of the colony as from the migratory nature of their occupation they would not be able to comply with the conditions of the Act and would be equally disfranchised with regard to property qualification.  Your petitioners while fully recognising the right of every class to possess an amount of representation in the Parliament of the colony in as nearly as practicable an exact proportion to their contributions to the prosperity and welfare of the whole community must beg leave most earnestly and emphatically to protest against the enactment of any law that would place the idle profligate man who does not aid but retard the moral and material advancement of the community upon a level - by giving him equal political power - with the man who by his industry and enterprising energy adds perhaps in an eminent degree to the general wealth and advancement of the colony. [205]  Your petitioners would further beg leave to point out that should the proposed bill be enacted its operation would be vastly unequal inasmuch as while in large towns and thickly peopled districts it would greatly and effectively extend the elective franchise its provisions as far as regarded the extension of the manhood suffrage to the pastoral inhabitants of the far interior forming as they do a. section of the community second to none other as contributors to the wealth of the country would be rendered by the nature of their occupations alone inapplicable and all but totally nugatory because it is manifestly impossible that the large class of people engaged in the daily or nightly tending of sheep in herding cattle or horses could in scarcely any instance register their votes. While as it appears to your petitioners the numerous shepherds and drovers employed during many months of the year in the important operation of transporting live stock through the vast interior to a distant market would not under the proposed law hold the elective franchise at all.  Your petitioners further believe that the proposed law would be unjust inasmuch as it would apportion but twelve members in an Assembly consisting of sixty-eight to represent the purely pastoral districts of the whole colony of New South Wales; while at the same time as your petitioners firmly believe and confidently assert the population of those districts contribute to the wealth and prosperity of the colony many times more than all the other classes combined inasmuch as they are the producers of nearly half if not more of the food of the inhabitants of the colony and of exports of wool tallow and hides sheep cattle and horses of the annual value of nearly if not quite three millions of pounds sterling.  Your petitioners view with feelings of unfeigned astonishment and alarm that by the proposed law it is intended to allot fourteen members to represent in your honourable House the city of Sydney and its suburbs; and taking into their serious consideration the comparative ease with which every member of the population of a large city can exercise his elective franchise; how by powerful combinations easily effected by crowded and often tumultuous meetings of large masses of the people who themselves necessarily ignorant of either the requirements or resources of the- colony are too frequently led by the misstatements of worthless demagogues and professed agitators to entertain feelings of blind hostility towards the inland classes of the community the productions of whose industry being at the same time in reality the mainspring and chief support of the commercial prosperity of the metropolis. Considering these things and the many other influences a dense population can bring to bear upon the course of legislation pursued by a Parliament held in its midst; and comparing these advantages with the impossibility of the large mass of the pastoral population being able even to record their votes. [206] Your petitioners do unavoidably come to the conclusion that the whole governing power of the colony would in reality be centred in the population of Sydney and that the far off pastoral districts would possess no other share in the representation than the mockery of its name.  Your petitioners do therefore most humbly pray that your honorable House will not permit the proposed Electoral Bill to pass into law until its provisions shall have been so modified as to give to every class of the community a practicable just and fair share of representation in the Legislature in proportion to their contributions to the general welfare and prosperity of the colony. And your petitioners will ever pray.  Signed in virtue of a resolution passed by a meeting of the inhabitants of Moama held at Moama on the first of May 1858.  HENRY S. LEWES Chairman.  An Ordinance to improve the administration of the law so far as respects summary proceedings before Justices of the Peace.  Whereas it is expedient that provisions should be made for obtaining the opinion of the Commissioner of the Civil Court on questions of law which arise in the exercise of summary jurisdiction by Justices of the Peace: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia and its dependencies by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof: -   1. That after the hearing and determination by a Justice or Justices of the Peace of any information or complaint which he or they have power to determine in a summary way or by summary remedy by any law or Ordinance now in force or hereafter to be made either party to the proceeding before the said Justice or Justices such party not being a person serving under a sentence for any criminal offence whether such sentence be partially remitted or not may if dissatisfied with the determination as being erroneous in point of law apply in writing within three weeks after the same to the said Justice or Justices requiring him or them to state and sign a case setting forth the facts and grounds of such determination for the opinion thereon of the Commissioner of the Civil Court and such party hereinafter called the appellant shall within three days after receiving such case transmit the same to such court through the Registrar Clerk thereof first giving notice in writing of such appeal with a copy of the case so stated and signed to the other party to the proceeding in which the determination was given and hereinafter called the respondent.  2. That the appellant at the time of making such application and before a case shall be stated and delivered to him by the Justice or Justices shall in every instance enter into a recognizance before such Justice or Justices or any one or more of them or any other Justice exercising the like jurisdiction with or without surety or sureties and in such sum as to the Justice or Justices shall seem meet conditioned to prosecute without delay such appeal and to submit to the judgment of the said Commissioner of the Civil Court and pay such costs as may be awarded by him. [217]  3. That if the Justice or Justices be of opinion that the application is merely frivolous but not otherwise he or they may refuse to state a case and shall on the request of the appellant sign and deliver to him a certificate of such refusal: Provided that the Justice or Justices shall not refuse to state a case where application for that purpose shall be made to them by or under the direction of the Advocate-General of the colony.  4. That where the Justice or Justices shall refuse to state a case as aforesaid it shall be lawful for the appellant to apply to the said Commissioner of the Civil Court upon an affidavit of the facts for a rule calling upon such Justice or Justices and also upon the respondent to show cause why such case should not be stated and the said Commissioner may make the same absolute or discharge it with or without payment of costs as to the Commissioner shall seem meet and the Justice or Justices upon being served with such rule absolute shall state a case accordingly upon the appellant entering into such recognizance as is hereinbefore provided.  5. That the Commissioner of the Civil Court shall hear and determine the question or questions of law arising on any and every case submitted under this Ordinance and shall thereupon reverse affirm or amend the determination in respect of which the case has been stated or remit the matter to the Justice or Justices with the decision of the said Commissioner thereon or may make such other order in relation to the matter and may make such orders as to costs as to the said Commissioner may seem fit:  and all such orders shall be final and conclusive on all parties: Provided always that no Justice or Justices of the Peace who shall state and deliver a case in pursuance of this Ordinance shall be liable to any costs in respect or by reason of such appeal against his or their determination.  6. That the said Commissioner of the Civil Court shall have power if he thinks fit to cause the case to be sent back for amendment and thereupon the same shall be amended accordingly and judgment shall be delivered after it shall have been so amended.  7. That the authority and jurisdiction hereby vested in the Commissioner of the Civil Court for the opinion of whom a case is stated under this Ordinance shall and may (subject to any rules and orders of such Commissioner in relation thereto) be exercised in chambers. .  TO THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE  Government House Brisbane: February 6 1860  My Lord Duke  It has long been known that a large proportion of the animal and vegetable productions of Australia is distinguished by characteristics directly the reverse of what is familiar in Europe. It would almost appear that an anomaly of similar nature exists in the influences exercised at the antipodes by certain political institutions.  I find that it is a very general opinion among competent authorities that vote by ballot and manhood suffrage as compared with open voting and a low property qualification are in this community institutions of a conservative character and calculated to give increased influence to the landed proprietors and rich settlers in the country districts as opposed to the mixed population of the towns.  In Australia aristocratic influence cannot be said to exist but the ballot protects the voter against the occasional violence and dictation of democratic opinion. Again energy and industry with the prosperity consequent on those qualities are so common among the Australian settlers that in the towns and villages of Queensland there is hardly a working man who does not possess at least the property qualification required by the New South Wales Constitution Act of 1853. In fact the majority of our labouring classes live in their own houses built on their own land. In the towns and villages therefore manhood suffrage may almost be said to have practically existed before it was formally enacted (with slight modifications) by the Electoral Law of 1858.  If a general view be taken of the important question now under consideration it will appear that vote by ballot and manhood suffrage are not likely to lead in this Colony to those dangers and inconveniences which have been apprehended from similar institutions in older more thickly-peopled and less universally prosperous communities.  In the first place distress and pauperism those comprehensive terms so frequently used in European politics are unknown in Queensland. All classes of this community appear to be thoroughly imbued with the love of law and order and the other virtues which naturally grow up with the acquisition of property however small and with the enjoyment of that prosperity which is the legitimate reward of honourable industry.  Again in an Australian Colony there exist none of those classes and institutions to which vote by ballot and manhood suffrage are supposed to be antagonistic. Here there are no paid idlers or sinecurists; every man from the Governor downwards is emphatically a working man. Nor have we a Church establishment a House of Lords Lords or hereditary privileges of any kind to which democratic sentiments and prejudices are hostile. [390]  But in this colony there is a numerous class of shepherds stockmen and agricultural labourers settled on the pastoral stations of the interior. Though equally trustworthy and prosperous in most cases with their fellow workmen in the towns these men were excluded from the electoral roll by the provision of the Constitution Act of 1853 because they are regarded in some degree as hired servants living in houses belonging to their employers. They acquired the franchise by the introduction in 1858 of the principle of manhood suffrage and are stated to have usually exercised their new privileges when well treated by their employers as those employers recommended. This class of men are now again disfranchised in consequence of the construction put upon the Order in Council of June 6 1859 by Sir William Denison's legal advisers and many of our great pastoral settlers ('squatters') consider that they have thereby lost a large amount of political influence.  The most important consideration of all yet remains to be stated. In several British dependencies in the Ionian Islands in parts of British India and elsewhere the full concession of political power to the people would have the unfortunate effect of arming alien and disaffected races against British supremacy. But next to an enlightened and reasonable attachment to the principles of local self-government in analogy to the usage of the British constitution the strongest political feelings of the overwhelming majority of the population of Queensland - let me say of all the Australian Colonies are undoubtedly at the present moment loyalty to the person of the Queen and pride in the mother-country. Speaking of Queensland in particular I might say that the feelings to which I allude almost approach in a large proportion of the inhabitants of this Colony to that maladie du pays that passionate love of England which an acute writer of extensive colonial experience (Mr. Gibbon Wakefield) foretold thirty years ago would be the result of allowing the Australian Colonies to manage in their own way their own internal affairs. As Lord John Russell wrote in 1855 the avowed desire of the Australian colonists to assimilate their institutions its far as possible to those of the parent country is in itself a proof that their sympathy with that country is not merely the expression of a common sentiment arising from a common origin but is connected with a deliberate attachment to the ancient laws of the community from which their own has sprung.  An Act for regulating the Alienation of Crown Lands 25 Vic. No. 1. 18 October 1861.  2. On and after the passing of this Act the Orders in Council shall be repealed. Provided that nothing herein shall prejudice or affect anything already lawfully done or commenced or contracted to be done thereunder respectively or to prevent the several provisions of the said Orders in Council from being carried into effect with respect to lands under lease or promise of lease made previously to the twenty-second day of February one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight during the currency of such leases as fully as if the same had not been hereby repealed.  13. On and from the first day of January one thousand eight hundred and sixty-two Crown Lands other than town lands or suburban lands and not being within a proclaimed Gold Field nor under lease for mining purposes to any person other than the applicant for purchase and not being within areas bounded by lines bearing north east south and west and distant ten miles from the outside boundary of any city or town containing according to the then last Census ten thousand inhabitants or five miles to the outside boundary of any town containing according to the then last Census five thousand inhabitants or three miles from the outside boundary of any town containing according to the then last Census one thousand inhabitants or two miles from the outside boundary of any town or village containing according to the then last Census one hundred inhabitants and not reserved for the site of any town or village or for the supply of water or from sale for any public purpose and not containing improvements and not excepted from sale under section seven of this Act shall be open for conditional sale by selection in the manner following that is to say Any person may upon any Land Office day tender to the Land Agent for the district a written application for the conditional purchase of any such lands not less than forty acres nor more than three hundred and twenty acres at the price of twenty shillings per acre and may pay to such Land Agent a deposit of twenty-five per centum of the purchase money thereof And if no other like application and deposit for the same land be tendered at the same time such person shall be declared the conditional purchaser thereof at the price aforesaid Provided that if more than one such application and deposit for the same land or any part thereof shall be tendered at the same time to such Land Agent he shall unless all such applications but one be immediately withdrawn forthwith proceed to determine by lot in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations made under this Act which of the applicants shall become the purchaser. [118]  18. At the expiration of three years from the date of conditional purchase of any such land as aforesaid or within three months thereafter the balance of the purchase money shall be tendered at the office of the Colonial Treasurer together with a declaration by the conditional purchaser or his alienee or some other person in the opinion of the Minister competent in that behalf under the Act ninth Victoria number nine to the effect that improvements as hereinbefore defined have been made upon such land specifying the nature extent and value of such improvements and that such land has been from the date of occupation the bond fide residence either continuously of the original purchaser or of some alienee or successive alienees of his whole estate and interest therein and that no such alienation has been made by any holder thereof until after the bond fide residence thereon of such holder for one whole year at the least And upon the Minister being satisfied by such declaration and the certificate of the Land Agent for the district or other proper officer of the facts aforesaid the Colonial Treasurer shall receive and acknowledge the remaining purchase money and a grant of the fee simple but with the reservation of any minerals which the land may contain shall be made to the then rightful owner Provided that should such lands have been occupied and improved aforesaid and should interest at the rate of five per centum per annum on the balance of the purchase money be paid within the said three months to the Colonial Treasurer the payment of such balance may be deferred to a period within three months after the first day of January then next ensuing and may be so deferred from year to year by payment of such interest during the first quarter of each year But on default of a compliance with the requirements of this section the land shall revert to Her Majesty and be liable to be sold at auction and the deposit shall be forfeited. [119]  21. Conditional purchasers of portions of Crown Lands under sections thirteen and fourteen of this Act not exceeding two hundred and eighty acres or their legal alienees may make additional selection of lands adjoining to the first selection or to each other but not otherwise and not exceeding in the whole three hundred and twenty acres and subject to all the conditions applicable to the original purchase except residence Provided that in the measurement of such additional selection of lands the frontage shall not exceed the extent which would be allowed to an original selection of three hundred and twenty acres Provided also that nothing herein contained shall prevent the sale of the adjoining lands to any other person before such further conditional purchase shall have been made.  22. Holders in fee simple of lands granted by the Crown in areas not exceeding two hundred and eighty acres who may reside on such lands may make conditional purchases adjoining such lands the areas of which shall not with that of the lands held in fee simple exceed three hundred and twenty acres and which shall not be subject to the condition of residence applicable to conditional purchases in other cases Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the sale of the adjoining lands to any other person before such further conditional purchase shall have been made.  23. Crown Lands intended to be sold without conditions for residence and improvement shall be put up for public auction in lots not exceeding three hundred and twenty acres-each at such places in the Police District in which the lands ate situated and at such times as the Minister shall direct to be notified by advertisement in the Gazette not less than one month nor more than three months before the day of sale And the upset prices per acre shall not be lower than for Town Lands eight pounds - Suburban Lands two pounds - other Lands one pound Provided that the upset prices may be respectively fixed at any higher amounts.  26. A deposit of twenty-five per centum of the purchase money for all lands sold by auction under any provision of this Act shall be paid by the purchaser at the time of sale And unless the remainder of such purchase money be paid within three months thereafter the sale and contract shall be void and the deposit shall be forfeited Should the purchaser fail to pay the deposit the land shall be forthwith again put up by the Agent and who shall not accept any bid by the person so failing to pay. [120]  An Act for regulating the Occupation of Crown Lands. 25 Vic.  No. 2. 18 October 1861.  2. On and after the passing of this Act the Acts of Council eleventh Victoria number sixty-one and sixteen Victoria number twenty-nine and the Orders in Council shall be repealed Provided that nothing herein shall prejudice or affect anything already lawfully done or commenced or contracted to be done thereunder respectively or prevent the several provisions of the said Orders in Council from being carried into effect with respect to lands under lease or promise of lease made previously to the twenty-second day of February one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight during the currency of such leases as fully as if the same had not been hereby repealed.  6. In cases in which two or more persons entitled to leases under the Orders in Council or under this Act may claim the same land the lease shall be granted to the person whose right thereto may have been or may be established after due inquiry to the satisfaction of the Governor or the Minister and in any such case in which the right of either claimant to a lease of the land in dispute shall not have been so established it shall be lawful for the Minister to require such right to be inquired into and determined by arbitration and the lease may be granted in accordance with the award of such arbitration.  11. Crown Lands may be demised by lease for any terms not exceeding the following -- For pastoral purposes in the First Class Settled Districts one year For pastoral purposes in the Second Class Settled Districts or the Unsettled districts live years For ferries bridges wharves quarries and for the erection of machinery for saw mills brickmaking and other objects of a like nature five years For mineral purposes other than gold mining fourteen years Provided that lands within areas bounded by lines bearing north east south and west and distant ten miles from the outside boundary of any city or town containing according to the then last Census ten thousand inhabitants or five miles from the outside boundary of any town containing according to the then last Census five thousand inhabitants or two miles from the outside boundary of any town or village having according to the last Census for the time being one hundred inhabitants or lands set apart for sites of towns or villages or for sale for agricultural purposes or otherwise for the use or accommodation of the public shall not be open for lease for pastoral purposes. [121]   12. Leases of runs within the First Class Settled Districts may be granted subject to the next following conditions and to the general provisions of this Act -   (1) Lands shall not be let in portions of less than six hundred and forty acres or one square mile except in special cases hereinafter provided for.  (2) Every such lease shall be for the then current year and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December.  (3) Leases may be renewed annually by payment between the first and thirtieth day of September to the Land Agent of the district or to the Colonial Treasurer of rent for the ensuing year at the rate of two pounds per square mile or such higher rate as the lessee may pay for the current year unless the lands be required for sale or for any public purpose or for the satisfaction of any pre-emptive lease claims in right of new purchases and leases not so renewed may be brought to sale by public auction.  (4) Leases under the regulations of twenty-ninth March one thousand eight hundred and forty-eight shall not be renewed under those regulations but may be converted into leases under this Act by payment to the Colonial Treasurer in Sydney or to the Land Agent of the district not later than two months from the publication in the Gazette of a notice to that effect of rent for the ensuing year at the rate of two pounds per square mile or such higher rate as the lessee may now pay unless the land be required for sale or for any public purpose or for the satisfaction of any pre-emptive lease claims which may arise under this Act.  (5) The holders in fee simple of any lands may be allowed leases of Crown Lands adjoining to their respective properties without competition at the rate of two pounds per section of six hundred and forty acres and to the extent of three times their own purchased or granted lands if there be so much vacant Crown Lands available Provided that such Crown Lands shall be taken in a block of rectangular form in which the external lines shall he directed to the cardinal points and if the country has been divided into sections of square miles then according to the general subdivisions of the land as delineated upon the public maps in the Surveyor General's Office and subject also to the exclusion of water necessary to the beneficial occupation of adjoining lands Provided further that the rent to be charged for land so leased to parties not having the right to take six hundred and forty acres shall in no case be less than one pound. [122]  (6) If there be two or more claimants under the last preceding condition of the same land the division of the land amongst them may be settled by arbitration Provided that if such land be of less extent than six hundred and forty acres it may on an award being made be forthwith occupied in accordance therewith and without further formal apportionment Provided also that if at the expiration of three months from the date of a notice in the Gazette announcing to the several claimants of portions not less than six hundred and forty acres the names of their competitors an award shall not have been arrived at and duly communicated to the proper officer the leases of the lands so circumstanced may be offered for sale by auction.  (7) All leases granted under pre-emptive right shall be notified in the Gazette and if within two months from the date of such notification the rent for the same shall not have been paid to the Colonial Treasurer or to the Land Agent of the district leases of the land shall be submitted for sale by auction.  (8) Crown Lands not previously under lease over which no preemptive right of lease shall have been exercised within one year from the passing of this Act may be put up to lease at auction at the Land Office of the district either on application or otherwise but no such sale of leases shall take place without one month's notice thereof having been given in the Gazette.  (9) The upset price of each lot shall be at the rate of one pound per section of six hundred and forty acres or of ten shillings if half of the current year sisal! have expired before the day of sale and the full price bid for each lot shall be paid at the time of sale.  (10) Any lease bid for but the price of which may not be forthwith paid shall thereupon be again offered for sale at auction.  (11) The lease of any land which may have been offered for sale at auction and not bid for may be obtained on payment of the upset price to the Land Agent of the district. [123]  (12) The sale conditional or otherwise of any portion of land under lease shall cancel so much of the lease as relates to the land so sold and to three times the area thereof adjoining thereto Leases may also be cancelled by the Minister for other sufficient reason and the balance of rent froth the date of such cancellation shall in either case be returned to the lessee Provided that the lessee of the lands from which such sale shall be made shall be at liberty either to retain the remaining portion thereof paying however the same amount of rent as for the whole section or surrender the same.  13. The Governor with the advice of the Executive Council may grant leases of Crown Lands in the Second Class Settled Districts or in the Unsettled Districts subject to the following conditions and to the general provisions of this Act -   (1) Leases of runs shall be converted into leases for five years under this Act by payment to the Colonial Treasurer not later than two months from the date of a notice in the Gazette to that effect of rent to be determined by appraisement of the fair annual value for pastoral purposes of the lands comprised in such runs Provided that in estimating such value neither the construction of dams or reservoirs nor the laying down of grass nor the making of any other improvement by the occupier shall be taken into account Provided also that the rent shall in no case be less than ten pounds per annum Provided also that upon such conversion as aforesaid such runs shall cease to be liable to assessment under the Act twenty-second Victoria number seventeen.  (2) Leases of old runs may on their expiration be in like manner converted into leases for the term of five years under this Act.  (3) The rent shall be payable to the Colonial Treasurer in Sydney for each year after the first year on or before the thirty-first day of December of the year preceding Provided that a fine shall be payable for the whole time during which any rent due shall remain unpaid after that date at the rate of eight per centum on the amount if not more than three months in arrear and of ten per centum if more than three months And if the rent be not paid at or before the end of six months after such date together with such fine 'the lease shall then become forfeited.  (4) Leases shall not confer any right to purchase by pre-emption.  (5) Crown Lands may be resumed from lease for the site of any city town or village or for commonage for the same or for any public purpose whatever and no compensation shall be payable to the holder of such lease for any such resumption excepting re-payment of rent to an extent proportionate to the area withdrawn and the period unexpired Provided also that in any case of partial withdrawal the holder may if he think fit surrender his lease and have the full balance of rent refunded for the unexpired portion of the time for which it was paid. [124]  XIII. That any Member presenting himself in a state of intoxication at any meeting of this Society shall be fined One Shilling. Any Member interrupting another Member while addressing the chair shall be fined Three-pence for every offence. Any Member guilty of cursing or any misconduct during the hours of Meeting shall be fined Three-pence for each offence. Any Member leaving the room without permission of the Chairman shall be fined Six-pence and one of the Stewards shall represent all such fines to the Chairman who shall see them strictly enforced. No business connected with the Society to be transacted after 9 o'clock. If any Member disobey the Chairman or any other officer of the Society when called to order he shall be fined Six-pence for each offence; and any member dictating to the Chairman shall be fined One Shilling. Every Member when addressing the Chair shall do so standing or in default to be fined Three-pence.  XIV. That a Quarterly General Meeting of the Society shall take place every first Monday evening in the months of January April July and October in each year for the election of Officers (as hereinafter mentioned). [182]  At such Meetings a Roll containing the Members of the Society shall be called over by the Secretary immediately after the opening of the Meeting and a second time after the other business of the Meeting is over. Any Member not being in attendance at the first call (if not prevented by sickness or absence out of town in any case to be proved to the satisfaction of those assembled) shall be fined One Shilling.  XV. That the Chairman of this Society be vested with the power to suppress disorder at Meetings and shall to the best of his ability impartially administer and enforce the Laws of the Society and shall not suffer any debate or put any motion to the vote which is contrary to the Laws or can be determined by the Articles; or in default to be fined Two Shillings each neglect.  XVII. That the Stewards of this Society shall hold office Three Months and shall be elected at each Quarterly Meeting from such Members as are eligible to hold office to be chosen in rotation as they stand on the books; and any Member refusing to serve (except he is sick or out of the District) shall be fined Two Shillings and Sixpence; and one of the Stewards shall attend alternately on the Meeting nights or be fined One Shilling each neglect.  An Act to amend the constitution of the Supreme Court of Queensland and to provide for the better Administration of Justice. (7th August 1861.)  2. From and after the passing of this Act there shall be holden at Brisbane a court of civil and criminal jurisdiction which court shall be a court of record and shall be called the Supreme Court of Queensland.  3. Such Supreme Court shall consist of and be holden by and before a judge or judges not exceeding three in number each of whom shall be a practising barrister of England or Ireland or advocate of Scotland of not less than five years standing or a practising barrister of the courts of Victoria New South Wales or of the said court not previously admitted in any of the superior courts of Westminster Dublin or Edinburgh of not less than live years standing and such judges shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council by commission in Her Majesty's name Provided always that on the commencement of this Act the resident judge of the Supreme Court of Moreton Bay shall be a judge of the said court and shall receive a commission as aforesaid and upon the receipt of such commission any commissions that he then holds as resident judge of the Supreme Court of Moreton Bay shall be and be deemed to be forthwith cancelled so far as such commission shall or may be of any force in the Colony of Queensland Provided also that only one judge shall receive a commission as aforesaid until the number of judges shall be increased by an Act of the Legislature of the said colony.  4. Whenever there shall be more than one judge of the Supreme Court one of them may be styled "the Chief Justice of Queensland" and may be designated as such in the commission to be given to him as in this Act provided.  5. The commission or commissions of the judge or judges of the said Supreme Court shall be continue and remain in full force during his or their good behaviour notwithstanding the demise of Her Majesty or of Her Heirs and Successors any law usage or practice hereof in anywise notwithstanding Provided always that it shall be lawful for Her Majesty Her Heirs and Successors to remove any such judge or judges upon the address of both Houses of the Legislature.  12. The said court shall have a Master in Equity who shall be a practising barrister of England or Ireland or advocate of Scotland of not less than three years standing or a practising barrister of New South Wales or Victoria or of the said court not previously admitted in any of the Superior Courts of Westminster Dublin or Edinburgh. of not less than three years standing or an attorney-at-law of not less than seven years standing and such Master in Equity when appointed shall if required perform the duties and discharge the office of Chief Commissioner of Insolvency and the said court shall also have a Prothonotary and Registrar and such and so many other officers as to the judge or judges for the time being of the said court shall appear to be necessary for the administration of justice and the due execution of all the powers and authorities of the said court and such Master Prothonotary and Registrar and other officers shall respectively draw up prepare and settle all such and the like orders rules decrees reports and proceedings as are usually drawn up prepared and settled by persons holding similar offices in the Superior Courts of Law and Equity in Westminster or in such other manner as may have been provided for by any legislative enactment in force in the said colony without any charge whatsoever and the appointment of every such person to any such office as is hereinbefore expressly named shall be made by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council and shall be by commission in Her Majesty's name and under the great seal of the colony and every such officer shall hold his appointment during ability and good behaviour but it shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice aforesaid to remove any such officer for inability or misbehaviour and all persons who may be appointed to any other office in the said court than those hereinbefore particularly enumerated shall be so appointed by the Governor of the said colony with the advice aforesaid and no new office shall be created in the said court unless the judge or judges thereof shall certify by writing under his or their hand or hands to the said Governor that such new office is necessary Provided that until such appointments be made respectively the Registrar and other officers of the Supreme Court as constituted before the passing of this Act shall exercise the like powers and authorities as were by them severally and respectively exercised and discharged in the said court up to the time of the passing of this Act. [199]  13. Every barrister and every solicitor attorney and proctor who practised in the Supreme Court of New South Wales at Moreton Bay before the separation of the Colony of Queensland from the Colony of New South Wales and before and at the time of the commencement of this Act may lawfully practise in the character in which he has been admitted without its being necessary for him to make application to be admitted to practise in the Supreme Court of the Colony of Queensland.  14. Any attorney solicitor or proctor of good repute in his profession having been three years in actual practice in Great Britain or the colony who shall pass the examination in classics or mathematics prescribed for persons seeking admission to the bar or who shall have a certificate of honor or other academical distinction in classics mathematics or law from any university or college within the British dominions may upon motion in open court be called and admitted a barrister-at-law Provided that when so called and admitted he shall cease to practise as an attorney solicitor or proctor and shall be struck off the roll of the Supreme Court but nothing herein contained shall extend to relieve persons so called and admitted from any action suit penalty or liability for misconduct neglect or other matter in the practice of his profession of an attorney solicitor or proctor nor to disable him from recovering the costs and charges due to him when so called and admitted or from asserting his right of lien or from being again admitted to practise as an attorney solicitor or proctor if disbarred by motion in open court at his own request without having been guilty of misconduct in the exercise of his profession of a barrister-at-law.  15. The Supreme Court of the Colony of Queensland shall be a court of record and shall have and use as occasion may require a seal having inscribed on a label thereon the words "the seal of the Supreme Court of Queensland" and such seal shall be delivered by the Governor of the said colony to and be kept in the custody of the Chief Justice of the said court or until such Chief Justice shall be appointed by the judge. [200]  16. The said court shall have cognizance of all civil pleas and shall have jurisdiction within the said Colony of Queensland and its dependencies to hear and determine all actions whatsoever real personal and mixed as fully and amply to all intents and purposes as Her Majesty's Courts of Queen's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas at Westminster or either of them lawfully have or hath in England.  17. Any Judge of the Supreme Court of Queensland shall try without a jury all civil actions in which the sum or matter in dispute shall not exceed one hundred pounds unless one of the parties shall require a jury and the costs to be allowed on taxation in such cases shall be in the discretion of the court Provided that in all cases under twenty pounds and in all undefended cases within the first beforenamed jurisdiction attorneys shall have equal right of audience with barristers.  18. Wherever in any Act in force in this colony provision is made for an appeal to a court of quarter sessions such appeal shall until the establishment of courts of quarter sessions in this colony lie to the said Supreme Court of Queensland or any judge thereof.  19. The said court shall have jurisdiction to inquire of hear and determine within the said Colony of Queensland and its dependencies all treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences of what nature or kind soever and wheresoever committed which can or may be inquired of heard and determined in Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench at Westminster or in the central criminal court in London or by judges of assize or oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery in England.  20. All treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences cognizable in the said court or at any sittings thereof to be holden pursuant to the provisions of this Act in the said colony shall be prosecuted by information in the name of Her Majesty's attorney-general or solicitor-general for the said colony or of such other person as the Governor of the said colony may appoint who shall respectively perform the duties of a grand jury until other provisions shall be made in that behalf by Act of the Legislature and all issues at law joined on every information shall be determined by any one or more judge or judges of the said court and all issues of fact joined on every such information shall be tried by and before any one or more such judge or judges and a jury of twelve men to be summoned impannelled and sworn as by law provided or to be provided.  21. It shall be lawful for any person by leave of the said court to exhibit a criminal information against any other person for any crime or misdemeanor not punishable by death alleged to have been by such person committed and it shall not be necessary for any person applying to the court for leave to exhibit such criminal information to file any exculpatory affidavits unless required by order of the court so to do and every criminal information exhibited by leave of the court shall be in the name of Her Majesty the Queen and upon the information of the person to whom such leave has been granted and the prosecutor shall file such information in the said court and the same shall be heard tried and determined in the same manner as any other information hereinbefore required to be heard tried and determined in the said court. [201]  22. Subject as next hereinafter provided the said court shall have equitable jurisdiction within the said Colony of Queensland its dependencies and such power and authority to do exercise and perform all acts matters and things necessary for the due execution of such equitable jurisdiction as is possessed by the Lord High Chancellor or other equity judges of England in the exercise of similar jurisdiction within the realm of England and also to do all other acts matters and things as can and may be done by the said Lord High Chancellor or other equity judges within the realm of England in the exercise of the common law jurisdiction to him belonging and to appoint guardians and committees of the persons and estates of infants and of natural-born fools lunatics and persons deprived of understanding and reason by the act of God and unable to govern themselves or their estates and for that purpose to inquire into hear and determine by inspection of the person the subject of such inquiry or by examination on oath or otherwise of the party in whose custody or charge such person may be or of any other person or persons or by such other ways and means by which the truth may be best discovered and to act in all cases whatsoever as fully and amply to all intents and purposes as the said Lord High Chancellor or other equity judges or the grantee from the Crown of the persons and estates of infants and lunatics natural-born fools and persons deprived of understanding as aforesaid may now lawfully do.  23. Whenever there shall be more than one judge it shall be lawful for the Governor of Queensland for the time being to nominate and appoint from time to time either the Chief Justice or one of the puisne judges to sit and hear and determine without the assistance of the other judges or either of them all causes and matters at any time depending in the said Supreme Court in equity and coming on to be heard and decided at Brisbane and every decree or order of such Chief Justice or of the judge so appointed shall in any such cause or matter (unless appealed from in the manner hereinafter provided) be as valid effectual and binding to all intents and purposes as if such decree or order had been pronounced and made by the Full Court.  24. The said court shall have ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the said Colony of Queensland and its dependencies and shall have power and authority to grant probate under its seal of the last will of any person who shall die leaving personal effects within the said colony and to commit letters of administration under its seal of all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of any person who shall die intestate and to commit letters of administration under its seal with the will annexed of all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of any person who shall have made a will without having named an executor thereof resident within the said colony or where the executor being duly cited shall not appear and sue forth probate thereof with reservation nevertheless in any of the two last-mentioned cases to revoke such letters of administration and to grant probate of the said will to the executor therein named when he shall duly appear and sue forth such probate and such letters of administration shall be committed by the said court to any person whether of kin to or a creditor of the person so dying as aforesaid or not as to the said court shall seem meet and in every case in which letters of administration are granted by the said court it shall have power and authority to sequestrate all the personal effects whatsoever within the said colony of the person so dying as aforesaid in cases allowed by law as the same is and may be now used in the Province of Canterbury and the said court shall have power and authority to require hear examine and allow and if necessary to disallow and reject the accounts of the persons to whom probates may be granted and letters of administration committed in such manner and form and as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever as may now be done in the Province aforesaid subject nevertheless to such orders and directions as may be made by the said court either generally as applicable to all cases or specially with reference to any case in particular or to such rules of court as may be made as hereinafter provided. [202]  25. It shall be lawful for the said court to make all such orders as may be necessary for the due administration of the assets of any such estate to all persons entitled thereunto and also for the payment out of such assets to the persons administering the same of any costs charges and expenses which may have been lawfully incurred by them and also such commission or percentage as shall be just and reasonable for their pains and trouble therein and if any such executor or administrator shall neglect to pass his accounts or to pay deposit or dispose of the goods chattels and credits belonging to the estate of any deceased person at the time and in the manner directed it shall be lawful for the said court on the application of any person aggrieved by such neglect to order and direct that such executor or administrator shall pay interest at a rate not exceeding eight pounds per centum per annum for such sums of money as from time to time shall have been in his hands and the costs occasioned by the application.  26. Any Judge of the said Supreme Court until a commission of insolvency shall have been appointed shall in respect of all estates sequestrated by the court as insolvent and all persons whose estates have been so sequestrated have all the powers and shall or may act as chief commissioner Provided that until such appointment as aforesaid whenever the said judge shall in that capacity grant refuse or suspend the certificate of any insolvent his decision shall (if appealed from) be reviewed by the court and confirmed reversed or varied in open court as upon a re-hearing Provided also that until as aforesaid any such judge may direct all or any of the meetings of creditors in any case as occasion may require and all proofs of debts thereat to take place before the Registrar or (in his absence) before the official assignee.  30. It shall be lawful for the Governor of the said colony by any orders to be made by him with the advice of the Executive Council thereof from time to time made and proclaimed to define the limits of districts within and the number of times at which circuit courts shall be holden in the said colony and the said limits and times to alter and vary as he shall with the advice aforesaid deem necessary and to direct that circuit courts shall be holden at such towns or places within those limits as he shall with the advice aforesaid think fit to appoint and every such circuit court shall be holden in and for such district by one or more judge or judges of the Supreme Court who shall fix the dates for the holding of the same and every such circuit court shall be a court of record and shall have power to punish for contempt and shall have the same power authority and jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil issues to be tried within the limits of the circuit district in which the same is held and all treasons felonies misdemeanors and offences wheresoever committed as courts of nisi prius assize oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery in England possess and also to inquire into and assess damages in any action at law commenced in the said Supreme Court and all persons convicted in such circuit court of any treason felony misdemeanor or other offence cognizable therein shall be subject and liable to the same penalties and punishments as by law could be inflicted on them if convicted thereof in the said Supreme Court and every such circuit court shall stand in the same relation to the said Supreme Court with respect to civil issues as the court of nisi prius in England stands with respect to the superior court from which the nisi prius record is sent Provided always that so long as there shall be only one judge of the said Supreme Court he shall during the sittings of every such circuit court have power to exercise and perform all the duties which by virtue of his office as a judge of the said Supreme Court he is empowered to perform Provided however that it shall not be necessary to issue any special commission to any judge or judges of the said Supreme Court to empower him or them to hold any such circuit court. [203]  31. Every such circuit court shall be opened by the judge or judges of assize at the time and place proclaimed Provided however that should such judge or judges not arrive at the place where such court is to be holden in time to open the same on the day appointed by proclamation it shall be lawful for the said judge or judges or for some other judge of the said Supreme Court to open and hold the said Supreme Court on any day or days following the day upon which the same should have been opened and held and the proceedings of such circuit court shall be as valid as if the same had been duly opened and held at the appointed time.  32. From the passing of this Act all Acts of the Legislature Crown grants wills and other instruments affecting land cattle mortgages and liens on wool and letters of naturalization within the Colony of Queensland may be enrolled or registered in the office of the Registrar of the said Supreme Court of Queensland and for all purposes of and connected with such enrolment and registration the said Registrar shall have the same powers liabilities and duties in every respect as the Registrar-General would have had under any Act of Parliament for the registration of deeds except for the provisions of this Act.  33. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council of the said colony from time to time to appoint a sheriff for the Colony of Queensland and its dependencies who shall hold office during pleasure that such sheriff by himself or his officers to be by him appointed and duly authorised under his hand and seal and for whose acts he shall be accountable during his continuance in such office and their employment by him shall execute all writs summonses rules orders warrants precepts commands and process of the said court which may be from time to time directed to him and shall make return of the same to the said court together with the manner of the execution thereof as he may be thereby required and shall receive and detain all such persons as shall be committed into his custody and shall discharge such persons as he may be by law enjoined.  34. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council of the said colony to appoint deputies for the said sheriff in the districts in which circuits of the said court are to be held which deputies shall when required by the said court or any judge thereof by any writ process or other proceeding to them respectively directed or in any other manner perform within such districts all such acts as the sheriff would be hound to perform were he personally present and acting in such district. [204]  62. After the passing of this Act all decrees and orders of the Supreme Court in equity and all rules and orders of the said court at common law or in its ecclesiastical jurisdiction whereby any sum of money or any costs charges or expenses shall be payable to any person shall have the effect of judgment at law and such person shall or lawfully may have execution thereon for the moneys so payable and the judges of the said court may from time to time cause writs of execution to be framed accordingly and to issue as they shall think fit and all such writs shall be enforced in the same manner as writs of execution are in ordinary cases.  63. It shall be lawful for any prisoner to apply to the police magistrate of Brisbane for the time being for a conditional rule or order to admit any such prisoner to bail on an application made to him for a writ of habeas corpus and such police magistrate shall have power to issue the same if he shall think fit and the said rule or order shall have the same force and effect as if it had been granted by a Judge of the Supreme Court Provided always that no such rule or order shall be made absolute except by a judge of the Supreme Court.  67. It shall be lawful for the said court from time to time to make such rules for regulating the forms of process and mode of pleading in the said court and for the practice of the same in all its various departments and also for the government and conduct of the officers and ministers of the said court and for regulating the admission of barristers and of attorneys solicitors and proctors to practice therein and such rules from time to time to repeal vary and alter as occasion may require Provided that every such rule when so made by such a court shall be by it sent to the Colonial Secretary of the said colony and by him laid before the Legislative Assembly without delay and it shall be lawful for the said Legislative Assembly at any time within one calendar month after the same may have been laid before such Assembly to present an address to the Governor of the said colony to disallow any such rule who if he thinks fit shall disallow the same accordingly and if after having been so laid before the said Legislative Assembly for such time no address be presented such rule shall be published in the Government Gazette of the said colony and every such rule save as hereinafter provided shall take effect from the promulgation thereof by the said court and shall have the same force and efficacy as if inserted in this Act unless disallowed as herein mentioned Provided also that all the rules and orders for regulating the process pleading and practice and other matters hereinbefore enumerated now in force in the said Colony of Queensland at the time of the passing of this Act shall continue and be in force in the said Supreme Court of the Colony of Queensland until repealed by rules made by virtue of the provisions herein contained except so far as any of them may be inconsistent with or repealed by the provisions of this Act.  68. The judge or judges or a majority of them for the time being of the said Supreme Court shall have power and are hereby required to make such general rules as he or they shall think fit for regulating and diminishing the fees to be allowed attorneys practising in the said court either in its common law equitable ecclesiastical or insolvency jurisdiction and also to make rules and regulations for the taxation of attorney's bills of cost in any of its jurisdictions and as between party and party or as between attorney and client specifying the several items to be allowed and the amount that is to be allowed on taxation for such item and also from time to time to alter vary or repeal any such rules or regulations Provided always that the rules and regulations so made altered or varied shall not take effect until one month after the publication thereof in the Government Gazette. [205]  4. There shall be established in the said colony a Court of Judicature which shall be a Court of Record to all intents and purposes under the style and title of 'The Supreme Court;' and such court is hereby invested with and shall exercise within the said colony and its dependencies all the powers properties rights superintendence force effect jurisdiction authority pre-eminence and advantages which belong to and are enjoyed used and in any manner practised in England in and by the Courts of Queen's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer at Westminster; and the said court shall also be at all times a court of oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery in and for the said colony and its dependencies; [222] and such court shall be holden by and before one judge who shall be called 'The Chief Justice of Western Australia' and shall exercise the jurisdiction of the said court; and the same powers and authorities are hereby given to the said Chief Justice within the said colony and its dependencies that are held exercised and enjoyed in court or chambers by the Judges of the Courts of Queen's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer at Westminster to all intents and purposes whatsoever; and the said Chief Justice in manner aforesaid is hereby authorised empowered and required to take cognizance of and hold all pleas and all manner of causes suits actions pleas of the Crown prosecutions and informations whether civil criminal or mixed with the same and as full power within the said colony and its dependencies to hear judge determine and execute therein as the Courts of Queen's Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer at Westminster and as Justices of oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery have or hath in England and as Justices of the Peace in their sessions there have by law and as shall be necessary for carrying into effect the several jurisdictions powers and authorities committed to the said Supreme Court and Chief Justice respectively; and shall adjudge and determine in all and every the same matters according to the laws and statutes of Great Britain in force here and the laws of this colony: And where any Act of Parliament in force in England on the first day of June one thousand eight hundred and twenty-nine and applicable to the said colony or any Act of Parliament adopted and directed to be applied in the said colony shall authorise and direct any proceeding act matter or thing to be had done performed or executed by or before Her Majesty's Courts at Westminster or the respective judges thereof or by or before the Lord Chancellor or any equity judge in the administration of justice every such proceeding act matter and thing shall be and the same is hereby authorised and directed to be had done executed and performed by the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice thereof in like manner as if the same had been in and by such Act of Parliament expressly authorised and directed to be had done executed and performed by the said Supreme Court or Chief Justice.  5. The said Supreme Court shall be a Court of Equity and the Chief Justice therein and at chambers shall have power and authority to administer justice and to do exercise and perform all such acts matters and things necessary for the due execution of such equitable jurisdiction as the Lord Chancellor of Great Britain can or lawfully may do within the realm of England and all such acts matters and things as can or may be done by the said Lord Chancellor within the realm of England in the exercise of the jurisdiction to him belonging. [223]  29. It shall be lawful for the plaintiff or plaintiffs defendant or defendants against whom any final judgment decree or order of the said Supreme Court shall be given or pronounced which final judgment decree or order shall directly or indirectly involve any claim demand or question respecting property or any civil right amounting to or of the value of five hundred pounds and upwards if no appeal therefrom shall lie to Her Majesty's Privy Council to appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal hereinafter mentioned; and the party or parties appealing from such final judgment decree or order shall within fourteen days from the passing thereof give notice to the adverse party or parties of such appeal and within twenty-eight days from and after such judgment decree and order enter into sufficient security to be approved by such Chief Justice to satisfy or perform such judgment decree or order of the said Supreme Court respectively in case the same shall be affirmed or the appeal dismissed together with such further costs as shall be awarded thereon; and in all cases of appeal when notice shall be given and security perfected as aforesaid execution shall be stayed and not otherwise.  30. The Governor in Executive Council shall from time to time hold a court to be called 'The Court of Appeal of Western Australia' which court shall have power in all such cases as last aforesaid to receive and hear appeals from the final judgments decrees and orders of a civil nature of the said Supreme Court as aforesaid and to affirm alter or reverse the said final judgments decrees or orders in whole or in part or to dismiss the said appeals with costs or otherwise as may seem just; provided that the said Court of Appeal may in their discretion be assisted in the hearing and determining all appeals from the said Supreme Court by the Chief Justice of such Supreme Court; and provided that the record of any final judgment decree or order to be pronounced by the Court of Appeal shall by such court be remitted to the said Supreme Court whence the appeal was brought to be by such court carried into effect according to law; provided also that upon any appeal to be brought to the said Court of Appeal from any final judgment order or decree found on a verdict of a jury the said Court of Appeal shall not reverse alter or inquire into the said final judgment decree or order excepting for error in law apparent on the record.  Whereas to obviate the danger which may arise as well to public morality as to family interests if the law of this colony on the subject of marriage and divorce differed materially from that of the mother country it is expedient to adopt the provisions of the recent statutes amending the law relating to divorce and matrimonial causes in England as far as the same are compatible with the requirements of the colony: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia and its Dependencies by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council. and the authority of the same as follows: -   1. All jurisdiction now vested in or exercisable by the Court of Divorce and Matrimonial Causes in England constituted under the provisions of the Statute 20 and 21 of. Victoria chapter 85 shall in this colony from and after the passing of this Ordinance belong to and be vested in Her Majesty. and such jurisdiction shall be exercised in the name of Her Majesty in a Court of Record to be called the Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes.  2. No decree shall be made for a divorce a mensa et thoro but in all cases in which a decree for a divorce a mensa et thoro might before the operation of the said Statute 20 and 21 of Victoria chapter 85 have been pronounced by any Ecclesiastical Court in England the court now by this Ordinance established may pronounce a decree for a judicial separation which shall have the same force and the same consequences as a divorce a mensa et thoro formerly had.  3. The Chief Justice of Western Australia for the time being shall be the judge of the said court and shall have full authority to hear and determine all matters arising therein and may exercise all the powers and authority of the said court.  4. The Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes shall hold its sittings in such place or places in the colony as the judge of such court shall from time to time appoint.  5. It shall be lawful for the said judge to sit in chambers for the despatch of such part of the business of the said court as can in the opinion of the said judge with advantage to the suitors be heard in chambers; and such sittings shall from time to time be appointed by the said judge.  6. The judge when so sitting in chambers shall have and exercise the same power and jurisdiction in respect of the business to be brought before him as if sitting in open court.  7. The judge of the said court shall procure a seal to be made for the said court; and all decrees and orders or copies of decrees or orders of the said court sealed with the said seal shall be received in evidence. [...] [225]  The Recovery of Small Debts Ordinance 1863 (27 Vic. No. 21)  Whereas it is expedient to facilitate proceedings for the recovery of small debts and demands: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia and its dependencies by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof as follows: -   1. On and after the date on which this Ordinance shall come into operation the Ordinances of the Governor and Legislative Council 6th William IV. No. 2 of 1836 and the 6th Victoria No. 13 of 1842 shall be and the same are hereby respectively repealed save and except so far as relates to anything heretofore lawfully done in pursuance thereof; all proceedings which shall have been commenced and shall be still pending in any court under the said recited Ordinances shall be continued heard and determined under the provisions hereof and all records and all papers connected with the proceedings of the said court shall within three months after the date on which this Ordinance shall come into operation be deposited with the Registrar of the Supreme Court and remain in his custody and keeping.  2. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time and at any time by proclamation published in the Western Australian 'Government Gazette' to constitute Local Courts for the recovery of small debts and demands to be holden at such times and places and within such districts throughout the said colony as may be most fit and convenient and as may be specified in such proclamation and likewise by proclamation to alter the time or place or manner of holding any such courts which courts respectively shall be and are hereby declared to be Courts of Record.  3. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to nominate and appoint such and so many Justices of the Peace as may be deemed fit and proper to exercise the powers conferred on them by this Ordinance: and the term 'The Magistrate' wheresoever occurring in this Ordinance shall be understood to mean the Magistrate so nominated and appointed.  4. Such courts shall have such clerks bailiffs and other ministerial officers as shall be necessary for the administration of justice and the execution of the judgments. orders and process of such courts and all such officers shall be appointed and removable by the Governor at pleasure; and shall execute such other duties as shall be assigned to them respectively by this Ordinance or the general rules and orders to be made in pursuance thereof.  5. Every clerk of such court shall issue all summonses warrants and writs of execution and register all orders judgments and proceedings of court and shall take charge of and keep an account of all court fees and fines payable or paid into court and of all moneys paid into and out of court and shall enter such account in a book belonging to such court to be kept by him for that purpose and shall from time to time whensoever and in such form and manner as he shall be ordered by the Governor submit his accounts to be audited or settled by the Auditor-General.  6. In every case cognizable under this Ordinance it shall be lawful for the Magistrate alone or associated with any other Justice or Justices of the Peace attending at the prescribed time and place in open court to exercise the powers of such court such Magistrate presiding thereat; and in all cases of issuing any summons or warrant taking any recognizance or enlarging continuing or adjourning any proceedings and in all incidental or interlocutory proceedings under this Ordinance or any general rule or order made and confirmed in pursuance thereof it shall be lawful for any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace attending at the prescribed time and place and in open court to exercise the powers of such court. [226] Provided that when two or more Justices of the Peace and the Magistrate shall form such court the decision of the major part of them shall be taken and recorded as the judgment of the court. And provided that during the unavoidable absence of the Magistrate or in any case in which he shall be personally interested it shall be competent for any two or more Justices of the Peace to exercise the powers of the court.  7. Where by reason of the death or unavoidable absence of the Magistrate or Justices of the Peace aforesaid such court cannot be held the clerk or in the event of his absence the bailiff shall adjourn the court to such day as he may deem convenient and enter in the minute-book the cause of such adjournment.  8. All pleas or personal actions where the debt or damage claimed is not more than fifty pounds whether on a balance of account or otherwise may be holden in a court constituted under this Ordinance and shall be heard and determined in a summary way: Provided that no such court shall have cognizance of any action of ejectment or in which the title to any corporeal or incorporeal hereditaments or to any toll fare market or any fee of office shall be in question or in which the validity of any devise bequest or limitation under any will or settlement may be disputed or for any malicious prosecution or for any libel or slander or for criminal conversation or for seduction or breach of promise of marriage.  9. On the application of any person desirous to bring a suit under this Ordinance the clerk of the court shall enter in a book to be kept for that purpose in his office a plaint in writing stating the names and the last known places of abode of the parties and the substance of the action intended to be brought every one of which plaints shall be numbered in every year. according to the order in which it shall be entered and thereupon a summons stating the substance of the action and bearing the number of the plaint in the margin thereof shall be issued according to such form and be served on the defendant so many days before the day on which the court shall be holden at which the cause is to be tried as shall be directed by the rules made for regulating the practice of the court as hereafter provided and delivery of such summons to the defendant or in such other manner as shall be specified in the rules of practice shall be deemed good service; and no misnomer or inaccurate description of any person or place in any such plaint or summons shall vitiate the same so that the person or place be therein described as to be commonly known. [...]  Whereas from the speedy decomposition consequent on death in this climate it is advisable to make some provision that will admit of the early interment of bodies on which it may be necessary to hold inquests when death may have happened on a Sunday or at such time before or under such circumstances as may have prevented the holding of an inquest on some earlier day: [227] Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia and its dependencies by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof: -   1. That in every such case it shall and may be lawful for the coroner to summon assemble and hold an inquest on Sunday for the purpose of viewing examining or dissecting the body and thereupon such body may be interred and the coroner may adjourn the said inquest to any subsequent day for the further investigation of the matter.  2. And whereas it is expedient to punish the neglect of jurors and of witnesses when duly summoned to attend on an inquest: Be it further enacted that if any person having been duly summoned either personally or by a written notice left at his dwelling or place of abode as a juror or witness to give evidence upon any coroner's inquest shall not after being openly called three times appear and serve as such juror or appear and give evidence on such inquest every such coroner shall be empowered to impose such fine upon every person so making default as he shall think fit not exceeding forty shillings; and every such coroner shall make out and sign a certificate containing the name and surname the residence and trade or calling of every such person so making default together with the amount of fine imposed and the cause of such fine and shall transmit such certificate to the Registrar of the Supreme Court and shall cause a copy of such certificate to be served upon the person so fined by leaving it at his residence; and the said Registrar shall copy the fine or fines so certified on the roll on which all fines and forfeitures imposed at such court shall be copied and the same shall be entreated levied and applied in like manner and subject to the like powers provisions and penalties in all respects as if such fine or fines had been part of the fines imposed at such court: Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect any power now by law vested in the coroner for compelling any person to appear and give evidence before him on any inquest or other proceeding or for punishing any person for contempt of court in not so appearing and giving evidence or otherwise.  3. And whereas it is expedient to make provision for supporting coroners' inquisitions and for preventing the same from being quashed on account of technical defects it is further enacted that no inquisition found upon any inquiry in the nature of a coroner's inquest nor any judgment recorded upon or by virtue of any such inquisition shall be quashed stayed or reversed because any juror or jurors shall have set his or their mark or marks to any such inquisition instead of subscribing his or their name or names thereto nor because any such mark or marks is or are unattested provided the name or names of such juror or jurors is or are set forth nor because any juror or jurors has or have signed his or their Christian name or names by means of an initial or partial signature only and not at full length nor because of any erasures or interlineations appearing in any such inquisition unless the same shall be proved to have been made therein after the same was signed nor for nor by reason of any such inquisition not being duly sealed or written upon parchment nor because the coroner and the jury did not all view the body at one and the same instant provided that all viewed the body at the first sitting of the inquest; and in all or any of such cases of technical defects as are hereinbefore mentioned it shall be lawful for any Judge of the Supreme Court or for any Judge of Assize or Gaol Delivery if he shall so think fit upon the occasion of any such inquisition being called in question before him to order the same to be amended in any of the respects aforesaid and the same shall be forthwith amended accordingly. [228]  4. That the term 'coroner' shall include any person lawfully acting in such capacity and legally exercising the powers and performing the duties of a coroner.  MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN:   We Your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects the Legislative Council of Victoria in Parliament assembled beg to approach Your Majesty with expressions of our attachment to Your Majesty's throne and person and of desire that Your Majesty's constitutional authority in this colony may be upheld. [410]  We most humbly desire to bring under Your Majesty's Gracious attention the fact that the laws of this Colony have in a measure been dispensed with the Constitution superseded and Your Majesty's authority disregarded if not abused.  in the month of February 1865 resolutions for altering existing duties of Customs and for imposing new duties were reported and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.  In consequence of a statement made by the Chief Secretary in the Legislative Assembly the Commissioner of Public Works (who was then a Member of this House) was on the 23rd day of March 1865 in his place in the House asked whether it was the intention of the Government to introduce the New Tariff Clauses into the annual Appropriation Bill and in reply to such enquiry he stated that "it was time then intention of the Government to do so".  Upon such answer being given this House appointed a Select Committee to search for precedents on the subject of the tacking of Bills and also on the subject of dealing with Bills of Supply and Tax and Bills of Appropriation and to report thereon.  The Committee brought up their report on the 4th day of May 1865; and in order that full and ample notice might be given to the Government of the impolicy of the course they proposed to adopt this House forthwith and without a division resolved: -   (1) That this House will insist upon adhering to the practice and usage of the Imperial Parliament in regard to the matters which according to such practice and usage may be comprised in one Bill.  (2) That it is contrary to such usage and practice to introduce any clause or clauses of Appropriation or other foreign matter into a Bill of Aid or Supply.  (3) That it is contrary to such usage and practice to introduce any clause or clauses of aid or supply or other foreign matter into a Bill of Appropriation.  After and notwithstanding those resolutions the annexed Bill was in the month of July 1065 transmitted by the Legislative Assembly to this house for its concurrence and until that day no Bill for imposing new or altering the existing duties of Customs was so transmitted.  On the question being put in this House That the Bill be read a second time an amendment was carried by a majority of 20 to 5 - "That as by the thirty-fourth section of the Constitution Act the rules forms and usages of the Imperial Parliament are required to be followed so far as the same may be applicable to the proceedings of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly respectively until altered by some standing rule or order' to be adopted by both time said Council and Assembly and as it is contrary to those rules forms and usages which have not been so altered that any clause of appropriation should be introduced into a Bill of Supply; and as this Bill of Supply contains a clause appropriating the supplies granted during the present session of Parliament to the service of the years 1864 and 1865 and moreover regulates the disposal of minerals in the waste lands of the Crown (over which this House claims to exercise equal power with the Legislative Assembly) and therefore encroaches upon the just privileges of this House the subject-matters of this Bill be not considered until they are dealt with in separate measures and that this Bill be laid aside." [411]  Shortly after the foregoing amendment was carried the following resolutions were on the motion of the Chief Secretary agreed to by the Legislative Assembly: -   (1) That the right of granting aids and supplies to the Crown is in the Legislative Assembly alone.  (2) That the power conferred by the Constitution Act on the Legislative Council to reject Bills for appropriating the revenue and Bills for imposing any duty rate tax rent return or impost is justly regarded by this House with peculiar jealousy as affecting the right of the Legislative Assembly to grant and appropriate supplies and to provide the ways and means for the service of the year.  (3) That to guard against an undue exercise of that power by the Legislative Council and to secure to the Legislative Assembly its rightful control over taxation and supply this House has in its own hands the power so to impose and remit taxes and to frame Bills of Supply that the right of the Legislative Assembly as to the matter manner measure and time may be maintained inviolate.  (4) That this House has learned with regret that a Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly for the supply and appropriation of revenue which was framed in accordance with the rules forms and usages of the Imperial Parliament and with the view of securing the Legislative Assembly its rightful control over taxation and supply has been laid aside by the Legislative Council and that the Legislative Council has refused to consider the subject-matters of such Bill until the same shall be comprised in separate measures; that such refusal evinces a disregard of the rights and privileges of the Legislative Assembly; and that this House hereby declares its determination not to entertain any further or other Bill for the appropriation of supplies for the service of the year 1865 until the rightful control of this House over taxation and supply shall have been acknowledged by the adoption by the Legislative Council of the Tariff approved of by this House and contained in a schedule to the said first-mentioned Bill. [412]  Immediately after such resolutions were passed a notice under the hand of the Treasurer was published in the Government Gazette and in the daily newspapers "That the amount legally available on account of moneys voted by the Legislative Assembly for the public service of the year being insufficient payment of salaries wages and contingencies must be delayed until the necessary authority for the expenditure should have been obtained."  Subsequently to the publication of the beforementioned notice the Governor communicated to this House an Address which he had received from the Legislative Assembly together with His Excellency's Message in reply to such Address and at the same time transmitted to this House a Message to the Legislative Council.  The Legislative Assembly in their Address acquainted His Excellency that in consequence of the laying aside of the Legislative Council without message of communication to the Legislative Assembly of the Bill of Supply and Appropriation passed by the Legislative Assembly the salaries of the civil servants for the month of July had not yet been paid and other obligations were yet undischarged; and prayed His Excellency to cause such measures to be adopted as should in the opinion of His Excellency's Responsible Advisers be expedient or necessary for satisfying the liabilities aforesaid and for maintaining the efficiency of the public service.  The Governor's Message in reply to that Address stated that the Governor had never failed to give respectful attention to the opinions and advice of his Responsible Ministers; and that he desired to assure the Legislative Assembly that he was prepared to take into his earnest consideration any measures his Ministers might recommend whereby in the exercise of his legal and constitutional powers it might seem possible to alleviate the existing pressure upon the civil servants and the public creditor resulting from the delay which had occurred in the passing of the "Annual Appropriation Bill". But the Governor begged to remind the Assembly that so long as the 44th and 55th sections of The Constitution Act and the 24th and 25th sections of the Act 22 Vie. No. 86 (Audit Act Amendment) remained in force it was not competent to him to sanction the issue of money from the public account either for the payment of the salaries of civil servants or for any other object unless the amount required was rendered "legally available" by an Act duly concurred in and passed by the three branches of the Legislature.  The Governor's Message to the Legislative Council stated that it was the Governor's earnest desire to aid by all possible means within the scope of his duty and legitimate authority in accomplishing the objects which the Address of the Assembly had in view; and the Governor trusted that the Legislative Council would recognise in the reference made by the Assembly to a resolution of the Council and in the exceptional and embarrassing position of affairs in the Legislature a sufficient reason for the expression to the Council of the Governor's hope that active legislation in regard to the finance of the colony might be promptly resumed. [413]  In an address in answer to the last-mentioned message this House while pointing out the novelty of such a message thanked His Excellency for his announcement that "he would not sanction the issue of money from the Public Account unless the amount required was rendered 'legally available' by an Act duly concurred in 'and passed by the three branches of the Legislature;" and concurred in the "hope that active legislation in regard to the finance of the colony might be promptly resumed". We also acquainted His Excellency that "the exceptional and embarrassing position of affairs in the Legislature" had been occasioned by a departure from the ordinary usages of Parliament with regard to the annual Appropriation Bill. We recalled to His Excellency's memory a despatch dated 16th April 1849 from Your Majesty's then Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies to His Excellency's predecessor in the Government of Jamaica in which the former stated that "the regular and constitutional practice of keeping Revenue and Appropriation Bills separate from each other was fully established in the United Kingdom" and we informed His Excellency that it had been the invariable practice in this Colony to keep Revenue and Appropriation Bills separate from each other and that even had it been otherwise the Constitution Act which requires the "rules forms and usages" of the Imperial Parliament to be followed so far as the same are applicable to the proceedings of the two Houses imperatively required that we should refuse to entertain a Bill introduced in violation of them and we acquainted His Excellency with the nature and contents of the annexed Bill and informed him that we were and always had been ready and desirous to agree to a Bill for appropriating the supplies in the usual and accustomed manner; we likewise informed His Excellency that we gathered from the Address of the Legislative Assembly that the House considered itself placed in a difficulty by reason of this House having laid aside the Bill without message or communication to the Assembly and we pointed out that when either House disposed of a Bill either by negativing the motion for its being read or by postponing the second or third reading for six months; it was not the practice to send any message or communication to the other House and that therefore we had not omitted any Usual step; we also reminded His Excellency that when either House desired to be informed of the mode in which the other House had dealt with any Bill transmitted to it the practice was to cause a search to be made in the journals of the latter "to see what proceedings had taken place respecting the Bill".  In reply to the last-mentioned address the Governor acquainted the Council that without violating either the letter or spirit of the laws he had with the advice and concurrence of his responsible ministers succeeded in making temporary and provisional arrangements for meeting the inevitable pecuniary liabilities of the Government in the present emergency and he stated that as he understood the view of the Assembly they were in effect contending for a fundamental principle of the Constitution. [414]  The "temporary and provisional arrangements" referred to consist of a loan effected by the Governor and the Executive Council (without the authority of the Legislature) from the London Chartered Bank of Australia after the other banks in which the public account is kept - the Banks of Australasia New South Wales and Victoria the Union Bank of Australia and the Colonial Bank of Australasia - had declined to advance money on the ground that the proposed loan was illegal.  For the purpose of giving to the London Chartered Bank of Australia a semblance of security for the repayment of their advances judgments by confession have been given to that bank in several suits against Your Majesty.  By the law of this colony judgments against Your Majesty may be satisfied out of the consolidated revenue without any specific appropriation.  The confession of judgment for debts incurred without the authority of the Legislature and for the purpose of applying the consolidated revenue without the concurrence of this House appears to us to be not only collusive but unconstitutional if not revolutionary.  In addition to the grievances to which we have already referred we have to bring under Your Majesty's notice the fact that after and notwithstanding the loss of the annexed Bill the duties of Customs thereby proposed to be imposed have been levied not only without the authority of the Legislature but without any attempt to pass a Bill for legalizing their collection ion and a period of about seven months has now elapsed since such duties were first collected by the Executive without any lawful warrant.  Several suits in the Supreme Court have been instituted for recovering back the duties thus levied upon imports and that court has decided that their collection was not warranted by law; but nevertheless the Governor still allows the pretended duties to be collected as if no such judgment had been pronounced.  We would submit for Your' Majesty's consideration whether the Governor was justified in permitting the continual publication of the notice that "The payment of salaries wages and contingencies must be delayed" and in subsequently assenting to a scheme by which through the judgments above referred to such payments were made; and whether after the decision of the Supreme Court in regard to the illegality of the pretended customs duties the further collection of them should have been permitted.  We therefore pray Your Majesty to take the premises into Your Majesty's most gracious consideration and to adopt such measures as to Your Majesty may seem fit for maintaining in this colony the Constitution as by law established. [415]  First I have no hesitation in saying that independently of the judgment of the Supreme Court no consideration at least none that is discernible in your despatches should have induced you to give your concurrence to the levying of these duties.  The plea that taxes are levied in this country on a vote of the House of Commons before they are imposed by law is manifestly irrelevant: such taxes are so levied because it is not doubted that the Bill imposing them as from the date of the resolutions of the House of Commons on which the Bill is founded (and after which only they are levied) will become law by the concurrence of the two other branches of the Legislature. If such concurrence were withheld the sums so levied by anticipation would be repaid and they would of course be no longer levied.  But in the present case you and your Government were perfectly aware that the Bill would not receive the sanction of the Whole Legislature and the exaction of these duties was not in anticipation but in defiance of the judgment of the Legislative Council. It was therefore not only in its origin unlawful but there was every reason to presume that it would remain so. I look with extreme apprehension on a state of things in which the Government of a British colony is engaged in collecting money by mere force from those from whom the Supreme Court has declared that it is not due. It is an example of violence which may do incalculable mischief beyond the limits of the Colony in which it has been allowed to occur.  Next. I do not understand on what ground it can have been imagined that you were legally authorised to borrow from a private bank large sums of money on behalf of the public. No authority is alleged and I am unable to conjecture any. The only excuse for such a proceeding would have been an overwhelming public emergency of such a nature as to justify what was not justified by the letter of the law. But as I have observed you had already declared that no such emergency existed. And you were right - no such emergency did exist. If payments were legally due from the Crown to public officers for salaries or to any other persons on any account it was open to such persons to recover what was due to them in the ordinary course of law. [416] It was for one or other branch of the Legislature to yield or for both to compromise their difference. It was not for you to give a victory to one or the other party by a proceeding unwarranted either by your commission or by the laws of the Colony. I must point out that by such a proceeding the Governor and his Government with the co-operation of a local bank might at any moment withdraw any amount of public funds from the "public account" to which it is consigned by law and place it at their own command relieved from all the checks with which the Legislature has carefully surrounded it.  Thirdly. As to the expenditure of the moneys thus obtained. I find it difficult to suppose that by the Crown Remedies and Liabilities Act the Legislature intended to enable the Government to discharge without its concurrence those ordinary expenses of government which it reserves to itself the right to reconsider annually. It may perhaps be doubted whether office-holders who are under a standing notice that their salaries are dependent on laws annually passed by the Colonial Parliament would be treated by the Supreme Court as having a claim upon the Government independently of any such law. But it is not alleged that the Supreme Court was ever called upon to give judgment on the question and you do not inform me of any law which would warrant you in paying away any public money except under the authority either of such a judgment or of the Auditor's certificate.  As at present advised therefore I am of opinion that in these three respects - in collecting duties without sanction of law in contracting a loan without sanction of law and in paying salaries without sanction of law - you have departed from the principle of conduct announced by yourself and approved by me the principle of rigid adherence to the law. I deeply regret this. The Queen's Representative is justified in deferring very largely to his Constitutional Advisers in matters of policy and even of equity. But he is imperatively bound to withhold the Queen's authority from all or any of those manifestly unlawful proceedings by which one political party or one member of the body politic is occasionally tempted to endeavour to establish its preponderance over another. I am quite sure that all honest and intelligent colonists will concur with me in thinking that the powers of the Crown ought never to be used to authorise or facilitate any act which is required for an immediate political purpose but which is forbidden by law.  It will be for the gentlemen who guide the opinions of the Colony or form the majorities in the two Houses of the Legislature to ascertain and you will of course afford them every facility for ascertaining how the Government of the Colony is to be carried on. It is for you to take care that all proceedings taken in the Queen's name and under your authority are consistent with the law of the colony. [417]  As I said in the beginning of this despatch I could have wished to postpone any expression of my opinion until I should be in possession of the papers which you lead me to expect by the next mail. But the continued violation of the law with the concurrence of the Queen's Representative would be so serious an evil that I have felt compelled thus to address you now. I believe that I have stated correctly the facts of the case. I have given you my view of the law arising from those facts. I have to instruct you in this as in every other case to conform yourself strictly to the line of conduct which the law prescribes.  You say "Whatever course in the exercise of your judgment you may see fit to advise Her Majesty to adopt it is impossible that the relations between the petitioners and myself can in the face of this conspiracy be such as ought to subsist between the Governor and gentlemen holding the Commission of an Executive Councillor whether occupying or not occupying responsible office; and it is at least to be hoped that the future course of events may never designate any of them for the position of a confidential adviser to the Crown since it is impossible their advice could be received with any other feelings than those of doubt and mistrust".  If I had adopted your views with respect to the conduct of the petitioners I might- undoubtedly have tendered to Her Majesty the advice which you suggest but by doing so I should only have deprived those gentlemen of an honorary distinction. It would have been quite beyond my power to obviate the inconvenience to which you point. It would still have remained quite possible that they should again acquire the confidence of a majority of the Assembly and therefore be the persons from whom you would naturally select your Ministers. [418]  It has been my desire to avoid even the appearance of taking part with one side or the other in controversies which ought to be locally decided; to make every possible allowance for the circumstances in which you have been placed; and to lighten as far as I could the painful consequences to you of the answer which I was compelled to return to the Address of the Legislative Council. It is your own act now which leaves me no alternative; you force me to decide between yourself and the petitioners. You place me in the position of having to determine whether you can continue to represent the Queen in a colony in which you have avowed that none of these gentlemen can ever be received by you as confidential advisers with any other feelings but those of doubt and distrust. It is one of the first duties of the Queen's Representative to keep himself as far as possible aloof from and above all personal conflicts. He should always so conduct himself as not to be precluded from acting freely with those whom the course of Parliamentary proceedings might present to him as his confidential advisers. While on the one hand it is his duty to afford to his actual advisers all fair and just support consistently with the observance of the law he ought on the other hand to be perfectly free to give the same support to any other Ministers whom it may be necessary for him at any future time to call to his counsels The colony is entitled to know that the Governor gives this support to his Ministers for the time being and that he is able and willing if the occasion shall arise to give the same support to others. I regret to say that in the present instance you have rendered this impossible. It must be evident to yourself that you occupy a position of personal antagonism towards almost all those whose antecedents point them out as most likely to be available to you in the event of any change of Ministry. This has resulted as I think entirely from your own acts your adoption of a course of conduct which cannot be justified in law and your strong denunciation in which I am wholly unable to concur of those who have objected to that course. It is impossible I much regret to say that after this you can with advantage continue to conduct the Government of the colony.  Looking to your long services and sincerely desirous to make every allowance for the difficulties of your position I have been most reluctant to arrive at the decision which nevertheless I have been obliged to adopt. I am compelled to advise Her Majesty that you should be relieved of your duties and the Government of the colony be placed in other hands.  As soon therefore as your convenience will admit of your leaving the colony I should wish you to place the Government in the hands of General Carey whose duty it will be to administer it until your successor shall be appointed. I trust that no occasion will arise in which it will be clear to his judgment that the advice of his Ministers for the time being would involve a violation of the law. In such a case it would doubtless be his duty to refuse compliance and to endeavour to obtain the aid of other Ministers. [419]  Her Majesty's Government have no wish to interfere in any questions of purely colonial policy and only desire that the colony shall be governed in conformity with the principles of responsible and constitutional Government subject always to the paramount authority of the law.  MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY  To His Excellency the Honorable Sir John Henry Thomas Manners Sutton Knight Commander of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the colony of Victoria &c. &c. &c.  We Her Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the Legislative Council of Victoria in Parliament assembled beg to approach Your Excellency with assurances of our loyalty and attachment to Her Majesty's throne and person and with expressions of our earnest hope that this colony may maintain its legitimate position as an integral portion of the British empire.  The annual Bill for appropriating the supplies for the service of the year 1867 (lately received by this House from the Legislative Assembly) contained a vote of £20000 proposed to be placed at Her Majesty's disposal for the purpose of being applied to the separate use of Lady Darling the wife of the late Governor. The only ground set out in the Bill for such vote is that it is "in accordance with the resolution of the Legislative Assembly adopted on the 9th May 1866". [420]  Believing when that resolution was adopted that effect could not be given to it we took no steps in the matter. But as soon as we observed in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of this session that the subject was revived we took what we conceived to be the Parliamentary mode of expressing our desire to consider the proposed grant separately by sending a message to the Legislative Assembly requesting that they would be "pleased to communicate to this House a copy of the report from the committee appointed by the Legislative Assembly on the 3rd May in last year to prepare an address to His Excellency Sir Charles Henry Darling and to consider and report on the steps the Legislative Assembly should take with reference to his being relieved from his position as Officer Administering Her Majesty's Government in this colony"; that being the mode adopted by the House of Lords in Palmer's case to be presently alluded to.  Our resort to the above form of procedure produced no result and the proposed grant came to us in the Appropriation Bill.  If we had been asked to concur in the principle of such a grant we should have been constrained to express our decided objection to it for the following reasons - In September 1865 we were under the necessity of representing to Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen that Sir Charles Henry Darling then Governor of this colony had made himself a party to several acts which we considered were both illegal and unconstitutional and we prayed Her Majesty "to adopt such measures as to Her Majesty might seem fit for maintaining in this colony the constitution as by law established".  By a dispatch from Her Majesty's Secretary of State dated 26th January 1866 Sir Charles Henry Darling was requested to inform this House that "the Queen had been pleased to receive their address very graciously and that Her Majesty had been advised that the proceedings which gave rise to it were contrary to law and had given instructions intended to prevent their recurrence".  In a subsequent dispatch in allusion to an address to the Queen from twenty-two members of the Executive Council of Victoria Mr. Cardwell wrote as follows. [...]  After information of his recall from the government and before leaving the colony Sir Charles Darling declared his intention of appealing to the British Parliament immediately on his arrival in England against the decision of Her Majesty's Government.  We are assured by the following dispatch of Mr. Cardwell addressed to but which only reached Sir Charles Darling after his return to England that the decision of Her Majesty's Government was not adopted without full deliberation. [421]  That no such appeal appears to have been entertained justifies us in the conclusion that the grounds of his recall as laid down in Mr. Cardwell's dispatches were so thoroughly acquiesced in by all parties in the British Parliament that it was hopeless for Sir Charles Darling to expect that that decision could be - reversed or even modified.  On the 9th May 1866 the Legislative Assembly resolved to present an address to the Queen of which the prayer was as follows - "We therefore humbly pray your Majesty to be graciously pleased to sanction the acceptance of the proposed grant to Lady Darling."  The reply to this address was conveyed through Lord Carnarvon in a dispatch dated 8th December 1866.  The expression of Her Majesty's inability to sanction the acceptance of this grant is so clear and so decided that independently of the objection which after our complaint of the illegal and unconstitutional acts to which Sir Charles H. Darling had made himself a party. Your Excellency's advisers must have known to exist in this House to any such grant we are surprised that they should have brought forward such a vote in any shape much more that they should have recommended the Legislative Assembly to include it in the Appropriation Bill with the general supplies of the year.  We conceive that to have sanctioned this grant would have been to abandon the course we have previously pursued with reference to the unconstitutional acts of which we have complained.  We desire however to submit to your Excellency that this vote ought not in accordance with Parliamentary usage to have been included in the annual Appropriation Bill.  Under the 34th section of the Constitution Act the usages of the Imperial Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland must be followed so far as the same are applicable to the proceedings of the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly respectively until other rules or orders shall have been adopted with the consent of both Houses.  The "usage" therefore of the Imperial Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland where no other rules or orders have been adopted adopted is under our Constitution Act the "law" here and as binding upon this Legislature as the Constitution Act itself.  We appointed a select committee to search for precedents as to that usage the result of which is to assure us that a grant like that to which we have referred should be the subject of a separate Bill.  No rules or orders affecting that usage have been adopted by this Legislature.  It appears to have been the practice in many cases after the passing of such Bills to include the amounts thereby provided in the annual Appropriation Act and in many others not to include such sums in that Act. But in no case does it seem to have been the usage of the House of Commons to include in the annual Appropriation Act any amount which there were reasonable grounds for apprehending would be objectionable to the other branch of the Legislature. [422]  The case of Mr. Palmer is remarkably confirmatory of this view both in itself and in the evidence of such usage brought out in the discussions to which it gave rise extending over a period of sixteen years.  The usage therefore of the Imperial Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland being established we submit that in accordance with the 31th section of the Constitution Act the vote of £20000 to Lady Darling ought not to have been inserted in the Appropriation Bill as we are thereby precluded from expressing the independent opinion to which we are entitled.  In rejecting the Bill however we have had no intention of withholding our assent to the general supplies for the service for the year and if the vote to which we have taken exception should be withdrawn we should gladly acquiesce in passing the Appropriation Bill.  It may not perhaps be out of place to point out another objection to the Appropriation Bill of this year in the form in which it has beers sent to us. A similar form was used in the preamble of a Supply Bill in 1866 and was one of the subjects referred to a conference between the two Houses on the 12th April 1866. The exclusive right to grant money was then claimed by the Assembly. After considerable discussion it was abandoned. A new form of preamble mutually agreed upon by both Houses was adopted and was prefixed not only to the Supply Bill but also to the Appropriation Bill of last year. To return therefore to the abandoned form we can only consider a breach of the compact then made and as tending to destroy that feeling of amity between the two Houses which we had hoped had been restored and would for the future be maintained.  We assure Your Excellency we are not insensible to the suffering and confusion which the rejection of an Appropriation Bill may cause; but we feel that it is necessary to confront them rather than destroy the independence of any branch of the Legislature and break down any of those constitutional forms which are the best securities for the real liberty of the people.  MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT made and entered into this first day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy one - Between Henry Banford Henry Simpson and others of the one part forming the Whaling Company at Encounter Bay in the Province of South Australia And Alexander Ewen of Port Victor in the said province of the other party - That is to say - The said Alexander Ewen doth hereby agree to take the management of the said Whaling Company of Encounter Bay and to use all means in his power to secure Whales on behalf of the above named Company and doth hereby agree to take charge of and securely keep all and sundry the property of the said Whaling Company. Viz: all Boats Oars Storegear at present on the station and also any other property the said Company may from time to time add to the said Whaling Station at Encounter Bay.  And the said Alexander Ewen doth further agree and bind himself to send all Whale-Oil and Whale-Bone (if any obtained) to Port Adelaide and to consign the same to the said Henry Banford Henry Simpson and others of the said Whaling Company and that he the said A Ewen will not sell or allow to be sold or disposed of in any way whatever any portion of the Oil or Bone obtained from any Whales caught and secured by the said Alexander Ewen or the crews under his charge and controul at any other place or in any other way except by the sanction Of the said Henry Banford Henery [sic] Simpson and others - And further the said Alexander Ewen doth hereby agree and hold himself accountable to the said Henry Banford and others for all Boats Oars Stores gear and all other property now in the possession or to come into the possession of the said Whaling company and to be kept at Encounter Bay in the said province and shall deliver them to the said H Banford and others in the same good order as he receives them (ordinary wear and tear excepted) at the end of the Whaling Season on or about the last day in August in this present year 1871.  In compliance with the above conditions the said Henry Banford Henry Simpson and others on their part do agree to pay or cause to be paid to the said A Ewen or his order the sum of Five pounds sterling money for every ton of Marketable Whale-oil and Five pounds per centum upon all monies realized by the sale of Whale bone as witness our hands this first day of June 1871  Witness Henry Banford on behalf of the said Company to Signatures Alexander Ewen  ON the last day of the session which has just terminated one of the most influential members of the Legislative Council gave notice of his intention to bring forward a resolution early in the ensuing session:  1. That this Council after four years practical experience of the working of the system of irresponsible government in- Victoria declares that it has proved itself most injurious to the highest interests of her people confessedly unsuited to their wants opposed most flagrantly to their deliberate wishes destructive alike of their unalienable rights and most cherished constitutional. liberties and ought forthwith to cease for ever in this country.  2. That whether the new Constitution shall have reached Victoria or not this Council is of opinion that it is their paramount duty to call upon the Governor-in-Chief on behalf of the inhabitants whose happiness and prosperity are imperilled present and future to establish a system in consonance with the views and opinions of a free people the enlightened system of Responsible Government.  That this Council pledges itself to make an equitable provision for those officers of Government who may be compelled to retire from office in consequence of the contemplated political changes.  I am informed by the Law Officers of the Crown that no legal objections exist to the adoption of the change which is recommended in the motion; but as it involves the introduction of Responsible Government I am desirous that you should furnish me with instructions as to the course which I should pursue.  Since the despatches of Sir John Pakington No. 95 of the 15th December 1852 addressed to Governor Sir Charles Fitzroy and No. 81 of the same date addressed to Lieutenant Governor Latrobe were communicated to the Legislative Council [...]. a heart burning for I can call it nothing else on the part of the people for Responsible Government has existed; rightly or wrongly they have imagined that benefits are withheld from them which under Responsible Government they would obtain and therefore month by month their dissatisfaction has increased until it finds vent in the motion to which I have drawn your attention. [330]  The commercial state of the colony and its embarrassed finances have greatly tended to augment this dissatisfaction. From over trading many failures have ensued whilst from the mismanagement of its finances great reductions have been necessitated and thus there has been caused a contraction in the expenditure of both government and individuals.  The influences to which I have alluded give rise in all countries to disturbances and bad feeling; but men repaired to this colony in the sanguine expectation of accumulating fortunes with ease and rapidity. They were not prepared to encounter the difficulties which occasionally weigh down the old world but created in their own minds an "El Dorado" in the new and ill brook the checks and embarrassments to which life is incidental be the place of abode where it may.  Hence it follows that an unprosperous social state produces in these colonies more deep discontent than in Europe; half the population will not or are unable to reason. It is sufficient that a check has arisen which temporarily interferes with their views to induce them to become disaffected and to lay the cause to the Government without considering whether it had or had not the powers of preventing it.  It does seem to me of great importance that a constitutional form of government should be granted to the people of these colonies. The popular anger will then be directed - not against the connexion with the old country or against the Governor - but against their own chosen government and their disputes and political animosities will be exclusively confined to themselves.  But there are other circumstances which induce me to urge this subject upon your notice. According to law the present Legislative Council must be dissolved on the 1st of October 1856 and new writs for a general election will follow. From the temper of the colonists and more especially from the feeling which exists on the gold fields I am satisfied that an universal demand for Responsible Government will arise and that they will refuse to proceed to an election unless the government is to be chosen from the majority of the new Council.  If the Constitution should not have arrived before that period either I must accede to the wishes of the people prepare for an excitement which will border on a revolution or leave the colony without a government. [331]  Even supposing matters could be kept where they are the administration of government is in an unsatisfactory state. Unless the policy is in conformity with the wishes of one section of the members of the Legislative Council an average majority cannot be commanded and without such a majority government cannot do justice to the general interests of this important colony.  My previous despatches will have shown you that both the social and financial state of the colony rendered a jar with all parties inevitable. To identify myself with one party was to adopt their views and cripple any powers of usefulness which I might possess but it resulted that although measures of extreme importance were passed at the close of the session the government were defeated in their financial scheme and left hampered with votes and resolutions of the Council but without money to make them good.  Such a state of things could not have happened under Responsible Government. A defeated administration would have resigned and their successors would have been chosen from the 'opposition and the force of the executive maintained.  As it is I am compelled to stop the progress of the colony in its roads and public works and bring suffering on a community who have not merited it and who have not been in any way concerned because the present form of government prevents escape from the dilemma.  I am well aware that Her Majesty's Ministers are alive to the necessity of the change being made but I am desirous to press upon them the importance of removing the uncertainty under which the public mind labours and I would especially request that you do by return of mail inform me -   1. When the Constitution may be expected.  2. Whether in the event of a delay being likely to arise before the arrival of the Constitution Her Majesty's Government will give their Sanction to the object contained in Mr. O'Shanassy's motion. And finally I repeat it is most urgent that I should receive an immediate answer.  RULES and Regulations made by the Lieutenant Governor and Executive Council respecting the issue of Licenses for Mining and other purposes under the authority of the Local Act 17 Victoria No. 4.  None but Lessees or Licensees under the Act 17-Victoria No. 4 entitled to mine for gold.  No person who is not the holder of a Lease or License under the Act 17 Victoria No. 4 intituled "An Act for the better management of the Gold Fields of Victoria" will be permitted to mine for gold or employ any person to mine for gold in any land whatsoever in the Colony of Victoria.  Penalties  No person unless provided with a lease or license under the aforesaid Act will be permitted to carry on or follow any business or become resident upon any of the Gold Fields or Gold Mines on waste lands of the Crown under penalties as follow viz.: - For the first offence a sum not exceeding five pounds; for the second offence a sum not exceeding fifteen pounds nor less than five pounds; and for the third and every subsequent offence a sum not exceeding thirty pounds nor less than fifteen pounds.  Exceptions  With the exception of -  1st. Holders of any license 'or' lease for pastoral purposes within the limits of their own runs.  2nd Officiating ministers of religion and schoolmasters  3rd. The servants of such holders ministers and schoolmasters residing with and being in their actual employment respectively  4th. The servants residing with and being in the actual employment of holders of Licenses to carry on the business of storekeepers.  5th. All females not mining or trading and children under fourteen years of age who shall only reside but not mine on any Gold Field. [14]  All persons recited in the four first divisions of the above exceptions will on application to the Commissioners of the Gold Fields or their assistants be provided with Exemption Tickets without which they will be liable to the penalties provided by the Act for unauthorised occupation of Crown Lands.  Those recited in the fifth division however need not be so provided with exemption tickets.  Licenses to Mine  Licenses to mine will be issued by the Commissioners for the Gold Fields and their assistants for the periods and at the rates following: - [...]  Licenses for Storekeepers  Licenses to carry on business as storekeepers will be issued for periods and at the rates following: [...]  Licenses to take effect from date of issue.  The licenses will have effect from the date of issue and are available throughout the Colony of Victoria.  All persons required to take out licenses are held obliged to do so with all possible despatch after arrival on the Gold Fields and to produce them whenever demanded by any duly authorised person.  Leases  Leases will only be granted within such tracts of auriferous land r as shall be from time to time proclaimed in the Government Gazette as open to lease subject to the charges specified in the Act and such considerations as His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor with the advice of the Executive Council may be pleased to publish; and no applications to lease auriferous lands will be entertained unless for portions of land so proclaimed.  Portions of land which it may be so intended to lease will after being surveyed be described as open to applications for leases at the expiration of not less than six months after the date of such proclamation and any applications which may be received will be published in the Government Gazette and the leases submitted to public competition and sold to the highest bidder.  Leases of quartz veins will be granted and the extent so leased will be not greater than one mile in length of the vein. [15] On application being made for lease of any portion of a quartz vein the same will be put up to public auction and the lease granted to the highest bidder subject to such terms as shall be made known previous to sale in addition to the Royalty cited in the Act.  Licenses and Exemption Certificates  Licenses and Exemption Certificates are not transferable and any person using or exhibiting a license or exemption certificate originally granted to any other person or altering any such license or certificate with a view to defraud the revenue will be subject to the penalties provided for such cases in the Act.  Extent of Claim  The extent of claim to which each license to mine shall entitle the holder shall be: [...]  beyond which no greater area will be granted under license except that where it can be proved to the satisfaction of the Commissioners of the Gold Fields or their assistants that two or more parties of miners taking up claims in the usual manner on worked Or flooded ground can by combining overcome any natural difficulties which may exist by means not detrimental to the interests of the public or of other Licensees the Commissioners or their assistants may at their discretion authorise such amalgamation under the distinct condition that the ground must be worked by the same number of miners as would be required were it divided into the smaller claims.  Any such amalgamated party must be in possession of a written sanction to be produced when required. Disputes  All disputes connected with the occupation of lands held under lease or license whether for mining or other purposes shall be decided by the Commissioners for the Gold Fields or their assistants.  No Claims to be held in Reserve  No miner or party of miners can at one and the same time work more than one claim or hold such claim in reserve or unworked; and such proceeding will be considered as a relinquishment of right to any claim however much previously worked unless satisfactory reason such as sickness or some other urgent cause can be shown to the Commissioner on the claim becoming subject to a dispute. [16]  Claims not allowed to interfere with Public Interest  No claim will be allowed or granted on any ground the working or occupation of which the Commissioners or their assistants shall consider injurious to the interests of the public such as the interference with the supply of water requisite to the wants of the public the undermining or digging up of roads or the erection of stores tents or buildings which may obstruct desirable thoroughfares or interfere with mining.  Sluice Washing  Sluice washing will be permitted at running streams and no sluice washing will be allowed except by special sanction of the Commissioners or their assistants who will guard against conferring the privilege in places where the permanent supply of water may be injured by the operation.  When a party of miners have obtained permission for sluice washing they must procure a written sanction from the Commissioner which is to be produced when required by competent authority.  Permission to work Beds of Creeks and Water Holes  Where the working and clearing of beds of creeks or water holes would be no injury to the public the Commissioner in charge of the Gold Field may grant permission to parties of miners to undertake the same The portion of such beds of creeks or water holes allowed to each miner will be ten yards in length irrespective of the breadth.  The Commissioner in charge will have the power to impose such conditions relative to the working of such beds of creeks and water holes as the interests of the public may require and if deemed expedient to take a deposit from each miner to ensure the due performance of the same.  Half an Acre of Garden Ground may be granted to Annual Licensees  Where it is practicable the Commissioner may grant to holders of annual licenses (on ground not supposed to be auriferous but in the immediate vicinity of the Gold Field on which such holder resides) land not exceeding half an acre in extent for the purposes of cultivation.  This was an action commenced in the Local Court of Adelaide under the provisions of the Local Courts Act No. 15 1861 against the defendants to recover damages for slanderous words spoken by the wife of the defendant of the wife of the plaintiff: Plea  -  not guilty and justification. The action was tried before the Special Magistrate and a jury. Verdict for plaintiffs  -  damages £20 and costs. On the 25th day of April plaintiffs removed the judgment upon that verdict into this court and sued out a writ of capias ad satisfaciendum upon which the defendants were arrested. On the 24th June a rule nisi was obtained calling upon the plaintiffs to show cause why the writ of certiorari to bring up a judgment between the same parties from so-styled Local Court of Adelaide issued in this cause should not be quashed and why the writ of capias ad satisfaciendum issued out of this court by the abovenamed plaintiffs against the abovenamed defendants should not be set aside on the grounds that there was no such court legally constituted as the Local Court of Adelaide and that there was no judgment of this court to warrant the issuing of the said writ of capias ad satisfaciendum.  Gwynne J.  -  Of these Local Courts there are in South Australia some thirty. They were first established by the Local Act No. 5 of 1850 but the principal Act now relating to them is No. 15 of 1861 and this confers upon them very extensive jurisdiction both criminal and civil. They have cognizance of all personal actions (including libel slander breach of promise of marriage and malicious prosecution) when the debt or damage claimed is not more than £100; but by consent they have jurisdiction in any action without any limitation as to amount of claim. (See secs. 23 24 and 25.) By the 27th sec. it is enacted that "a Local Court of Full Jurisdiction shall have cognizance of any action in which the title to any corporeal or incorporeal hereditament or easement shall be in question or in which the validity or effect of any devise bequest or limitation under any will or settlement or document in the nature of a settlement may be disputed." These courts have also jurisdiction to try actions of ejectment. (See amongst others secs. 159 and 169). The only qualification of the judge (called a Special Magistrate) who presides in these courts and exercises this extensive jurisdiction is that he shall be a Justice of the Peace. (See sec. 8). And although in jury cases he is required to direct the jury upon all matters of law and decide upon the admission or rejection of evidence (sec. 18) it is not necessary that he should be bred to the law or have had any legal training whatever. The jury which the Special Magistrate is to direct "upon all matters of law" is not a jury of "twelve good men and true" but a jury of four jurymen (sec. 43) and even this sort of jury can only be obtained in civil matters upon the payment of £2 (sec. 37) and in criminal matters is refused altogether. [184] Then comes this extraordinary enactment  -  "All causes and matters cognizable under this Act by a Court of Full Jurisdiction shall be heard and determined in open court in a summary way according to equity and good conscience and the substantial merits of the case by and before &c. a Special Magistrate and two Justices of the Peace for the said Province or a jury." (See sec. 13.) I need only allude to two more provisions of the Act  -  the one relating to appeals to this court (see sees. 56 et seq.); the other (sec. 54) which enables a successful party to remove the judgment of the Local Courts into this (the Supreme) Court when it is to have the same force as if originally a judgment of this court. It is unnecessary to allude to the criminal jurisdiction of Local Courts except as illustrative of the genius of our local legislation. Certain felonies are matters cognizable under the Act by a Court of Full Jurisdiction (sec. 115) and therefore pursuant to sec. 13 were to be heard and determined not upon the broad principles and liberal spirit of the English Criminal Law but "in a summary way according to equity and good conscience and the substantial merits of the case before the Special Magistrate and two Justices without a jury". This novel mode of administering criminal justice however no longer exists as in the case of The Queen v. Neville I held that thus to try an Englishman encroached upon the great principle of English law "that no man is to be punished until found guilty by a jury of his peers;" and being supported in that view by my learned colleague Mr. Justice Boothby the criminal jurisdiction of Local Courts has ceased to be exercised. But in reference to civil suits what do those words mean "according to equity and good conscience and the substantial merits of the case?" Is the principle of deciding implied by these words applicable alike to jury cases and to cases heard before three magistrates or only to the latter? The requirement that the Special Magistrate is in jury cases to direct the jury upon all matters of law and decide upon the admission and rejection of evidence would seem to imply that the "equity and conscience" principle should only apply to cases where there is no jury; but even this conclusion seems doubtful for although by sec. 56 an appeal is given to either party in a cause dissatisfied with the determination or direction of the Local Court upon a point of law or upon the admission or rejection of evidence yet the Supreme Court shall if of opinion that substantial justice (I suppose upon the equity and conscience principle) has been done between the parties discharge the rule or order. Is it not meant that this new principle shall pervade the whole procedure of Local Courts? Is it not an attempt to administer what is called attributive justice? To me it appears that it is and I cannot convey my sentiments on this attempt better than by quoting the words of Mr. Best: -  "To administer perfect attributive justice in all questions to which the innumerable combinations of human action give rise is the high prerogative of omniscience and impeccability; for to this end are required not only an unclouded view of the facts as they have occurred and a decision alike unerring and uncorrupted on the claims of the contending parties but a complete foresight of all the consequences both direct and collateral and down to their remotest ramifications which will follow from that decision. The hopelessness of ever accomplishing this became early visible to the reflecting portion of mankind; and the observation of nature having taught them that great ends are best attained by the steady operation of fixed general laws they conceived the notion of framing general laws for the government of society  -  rules based on the principle of securing the largest amount of truth and happiness in the largest number of cases however their undeviating action may violate attributive justice or work injury in particular instances." [185] -  Best on Evidence edition of 1860. The law of England (including in that expression the law of evidence) is built up of such general rules and in that fact consists its excellence. In that fact consists all it possesses of certainty and impartiality of administration. "Optima est lex quae minimum relinquit arbitrio judicis" says Lord Bacon; but in the Local Courts as it appears to me the whole matter is left to the will and discretion of the presiding magistrate. His power is absolute. He may declare facts proved or disproved altogether at his will and pleasure. All he is required to do is to determine according to his own idea of equity and good conscience and the substantial merits of the case as they appear to him and this in a question of title to real estate the validity of a will or title in an action of ejectment. It is true that in jury cases the Special Magistrate is required to direct the jury upon all matters of law and to decide upon the admission or rejection of evidence. But is not this a mockery? With every respect for the gentlemen who have been appointed to preside in Local Courts and whom I am bound to admit have as a whole exhibited great integrity and carried themselves wonderfully well considering the difficulty and novelty of their position; yet I cannot refrain from observing that no men who were not bred to the law and had very considerable practical experience in its administration can possibly perform the duties imposed on Special Magistrates by the Local Courts Act . . . Seeing therefore that these courts decide upon the inheritance reputation goods and liberty of the Queen's subjects by a course of procedure unknown to the law of England that they so decide without a jury of twelve men and that in the appointment and tenure of office of the Special Magistrates the English system of judicature is altogether ignorant I am of opinion that the Local Courts Act of 1861 is repugnant to the law of England. It appears to me moreover that the Local Courts Act of 1861 was not within the competency of the Local Legislature of South Australia inasmuch as it abolishes pro tanto the Supreme Court this court being founded not immediately though mediately on Imperial legislation. I am also of opinion that it is opposed to the Constitution Act. 