 To the Queen's most Excellent Majesty  MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN:  WE your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects the Legislative Assembly of Victoria in Parliament assembled approach tour Majesty with the expression of our continued loyalty and attachment to Your Majesty's throne and person.  Serious differences have occurred with the Legislative Council which are fraught with inconvenience and danger to the inhabitants of this portion of Your Majesty's dominions; and as systematic efforts are being made in influential quarters to misrepresent the policy and actions which we have sanctioned by unprecedentedly large majorities we respectfully desire to lay before your Majesty a brief statement of the circumstances which have given rise to the serious complications and difficulties by which Your Majesty's Government in this portion of Your Majesty's dominions is at the present moment confronted. [432]  This Colony on which Your Majesty was pleased as a testimony of your royal favour to confer Your Majesty's own name is subject to a system of government framed as closely as circumstances permitted on the government of Your Majesty's United Kingdom. The framers of the Constitution stated in express terms their intention of creating a Legislature in which one Chamber should possess "the legislative functions of the House of Lords" and the other Chamber "all the rights and powers of the House of Commons". To the Constitution framed in the pursuance of this design Your Majesty with the consent of the Lords and Commons gave your assent and it has been in operation for more than 20 years.  But from the beginning its harmonious working has been constantly disturbed by the claims of the Legislative Council to exercise a control over the public expenditure which has not been possessed or claimed by the House of Lords within the memory of living man. In violation of all constitutional usage the Legislative Council did on 8th November 1877 - before any step had been taken with regard to payment of members - vote an address to his Excellency the Governor the object of which was to induce his Excellency to refuse the anticipated advice of his responsible Ministers by declining to forward at their request the formal message to enable us to consider the question.  The recent general election took place by effluxion of time on the 11th of May last when Sir James McCulloch was Chief Secretary the result being so overwhelmingly adverse to his policy that the Government resigned without meeting Parliament and Mr. Berry was sent for. The ministry then formed has ever since enjoyed our uninterrupted confidence and that in a larger measure than any previous administration ever received from Parliament.  During the present session of Parliament this House cheerfully granted to your Majesty all the supplies necessary for the efficient conduct of the public service of the colony; but when the Appropriation Bill in which they were contained reached the Legislative Council that Chamber ventured on a measure which the House of Lords in the most stormy contest with the House of Commons in past generations never were tempted to employ: they laid aside the Appropriation Bill and left the entire public service the local force for the defence of the country the police for the protection of public order the judiciary and the officers of the public departments without salaries; and the contractors to whom Your Majesty was indebted for the performance of necessary public services without funds for the payment of their claims.  At the same time a Bill to provide forts and armaments in pursuance of the recommendation of Sir Wm. Jervois the officer appointed by Your Majesty's Imperial Government to advise the colony in this respect was adopted in this House and sent to the Legislative Council for their concurrence. It was a measure of pressing and paramount urgency as it was doubtful at that moment if Your Majesty might not find it necessary to take part in the war then waged in Europe. [433] This measure also the Legislative Council laid aside and the hands of Your Majesty's Colonial Government in providing for the public defence of the Colony against foreign aggression in an alarming emergency have been consequently paralysed.  Other measures of supreme importance shared the same fate and a session which should have been fruitful in legislative results has been rendered comparatively barren by obstruction from a Chamber whose ready co-operation and assistance the country had a right to expect after the decisive verdict at the ballot box on the 11th of May last.  The pretence upon which the Appropriation Bill was laid aside is that it contained an item of expenditure which ought to have been provided for by a separate Bill. The Constitution of this Colony confers on the Legislative Assembly the exclusive right to initiate taxation and appropriation and in express terms withholds from the Legislative Council the power to alter in the slightest particular Bills of either class. An Act of the Parliament of Victoria assented to by the Legislative Council on two successive occasions appropriates a portion of the public revenue to reimburse members of both Chambers their expenses in relation to their attendance in Parliament to the extent of £300 per annum. This Act unless renewed expires with the present session. A vote for £18000 was accordingly included in the annual estimates of expenditure to continue this system till the end of the current financial year. Subsequently it was suggested in the Assembly that it Would be more satisfactory to the Legislative Council to have the provision again made in a separate Bill and such a Bill continuing the system till the end of the present Parliament (which will expire by effluxion of time in May 1880) was sent to the Council. They had twice before passed Bills of a similar character but this Bill they negatived the second reading of; and immediately afterwards the Appropriation Bill containing not the same proposal but a sum providing for the same service for a period of six months was also laid aside to assert their unfounded claim of prohibiting a particular item of expenditure authorised by the Legislative Assembly.  We respectfully submit to Your Majesty that the rejection of the Appropriation Bill a measure the Legislative Council has no power to amend or alter because one item among many hundred was objected to is a clear attempt to obtain indirectly and regardless of consequences a privilege which the Constitution Statute has in express terms withheld from that Chamber.  The ground upon which the Forts and Armaments Bill Was laid aside is that it contained the preliminary paragraph known in Acts of Parliament granting aid to the Crown as "the free-gift preamble" implying a free gift made to the Crown by that House on which the Constitution confers the power of the purse. [434] It will be enough to assure Your Majesty that the form of the Bill was expressly copied from Acts passed by the Imperial Parliament during the reign of Your Majesty to provide for the defence of the United Kingdom.  We humbly submit to Your Majesty's gracious consideration therefore that the question at issue is a very simple and intelligible one. It is whether a Chamber elected by a small section of the people in which 16 persons constituted an absolute majority a Chamber whose members are certainly not distinguished by any historic or eminent personal claims on the consideration of the community shall be permitted to assert a control over the public expenditure which the Peers of England have long relinquished.  In the face of this reckless and unconstitutional action by which the supplies granted by us to Your Majesty were arrested in transitu Your Majesty's Colonial Government who possess the full confidence of this House had to consider what measures would most conduce to save at the same time the credit and character of the Colony and the just and necessary authority of Parliament. The refusal of an Appropriation Bill amounted in effect to the discharge of every officer in the public service and to the closing of all public establishments supported by the State which in this country include railways telegraphs public libraries and lunatic asylums as well as schools post offices and prisons. Under these circumstances the choice of Your Majesty's Victorian Government lay between anarchy the sure forerunner of revolution or a recurrence to the practice which obtained previous to the year 1862 of paying the public creditory on our votes in Committee of Supply reported to and adopted by the House. Loyalty no less than sound policy decided for the latter course and we the Legislative Assembly have by a majority of 52 to 23 adopted the following resolution: - "That all votes or grants passed in Committee of Supply become legally available for expenditure immediately such resolutions are agreed to by the Legislative Assembly; and that henceforth in view of the serious public inconvenience caused by repeated rejections of the annual Appropriation Bill by the Legislative Council this House resolves to revert to the practice which prevailed prior to 1862."  In the meantime economy and retrenchment in the public service have been adopted by Your Majesty's Colonial Government with our full concurrence and although personal inconvenience and loss are inseparable from a state of affairs such as now prevails in Victoria we are happy to assure Your Majesty that inconvenience and loss have been reduced to minimum and that up to the present time the provision has been made for the preservation of law and order the administration of justice and the efficient carrying on of Your Majesty's Government.  The Legislative Council in a recent address to Your Majesty have suggested that Your Majesty's Colonial Government instead of proceeding to economise the public funds at their disposal by reducing expenditure wherever it was practicable might have preserved the action of responsible Government either by resigning their functions or by recommending a dissolution of Parliament. [435]   We humbly submit to Your Majesty's consideration that had they resigned their offices while they possessed the undiminished confidence of the House they would not have preserved but have sacrificed and betrayed the principle of responsible government which recognises such confidence as one of its cardinal conditions. And though a dissolution of this House (the only Chamber liable to a dissolution) while fresh from its constituents would be a harsh and unreasonable measure they were restrained from having recourse to it still more powerfully by the consideration that on a former occasion when a minister supported by a large majority in this House dissolved the Assembly in a contest with the Council he had afterwards to report to your Majesty's representative that the Council refused to be bound by the result of the appeal.  If a dissolution of this House would settle once for all the principles upon which the finances of this country shall be regulated for the future we would welcome such an appeal however costly or inconvenient to ourselves. But this is the fourth occasion on which the Legislative Council have thrown the affairs of the Colony into confusion by rejecting an Appropriation Bill and the time has arrived when instead of a temporary expedient to settle a temporary controversy some effectual barrier must 'be established against the recurrence of so grave a public calamity. Nor was their attempt to exercise an unwarranted control over the public expenditure the sole or even the gravest offence of the Council against the public interests of this colony. In that Chamber the owners of great estates and the tenants of great territories leased from the Crown have always predominated and whenever a Government was in office that did not subserve their class interests they have expressed their displeasure by throwing out sometimes without debate or explanation public measures carefully matured in this House and greatly desired by the people. Many times it has happened that nearly all the important Bills of a session were thus sacrificed; and this practice has more or less prevailed during the entire period of their existence. No community could have borne such a calamity with more temper and patience than Your Majesty's subjects in this Colony but the present aggression has brought forbearance to an end.  It is our confident belief that it is the gracious desire of Your Majesty that Your Majesty's subjects in this Colony should enjoy to the same extent with Your Majesty's subjects in the United Kingdom the privileges of Constitutional and Parliamentary. Government on the English model and that is our sole aim and desire. [436]  More than 10 years ago in one of the many controversies which the claims of the Council have provoked an agreement was at length as it seemed arrived at to the effect that the practice of the lords and Commons respectively should be observed by the two Chambers in this Colony as to all subjects of aid and supply. To give effect to this agreement a joint standing order of the two Houses was suggested and the Council have recently pleaded as their justification for not having carried out the agreement that it was not found practicable to frame a standing order having the requisite authority. During the present session this House have assured the Council that they were ready to concur in an Act of Parliament on the subject whose authority could not be doubted. To this proposal the Council have made no reply; and they still persist in claiming and attempting to exercise a power in financial questions far beyond that exercised by the House of Lords.  We have performed a public duty in making Your Majesty acquainted with the actual condition of this portion of Your Majesty's dominions. It would not be decorous to trouble Your Majesty with any forecast of the measures which we consider necessary to restore public tranquillity and prosperity now so seriously disturbed. These measures will reach Your Majesty in the ordinary process of parliamentary procedure through Your Majesty's representative. But we trust Your Majesty will confidently believe that loyalty to your throne and person and attachment to the empire will unite in whatever we undertake with a desire for that wise and broad-based liberty which it will be the chief glory of Your Majesty's reign to have established throughout your dominion.  We cannot conclude without alluding to a paragraph in the address of the Legislative Council to Your Majesty reflecting upon some of the public measures of Your Majesty's Colonial Government as if they were personal acts of his Excellency the Governor. We need scarcely assure Your Majesty that Your Majesty's representative in this Colony has strictly followed the example of his Sovereign in performing no public act except with the advice of sworn councillors upon whom alone the responsibility of such act devolves. It is only by ignoring fundamental maxims of the British Constitution that any personal or individual responsibility can be placed on the Crown or its representative for such proceedings.  It is suggested that whatever may be considered as open to party objection in the recent measures of Your Majesty's Colonial Government might have been avoided if the Governor had only refused to give them his assent. But it will be well known to Your Majesty that if the advice of Ministers possessing an immense majority in the popular branch of the Legislature were refused by the Crown and recourse had to advisers representing a minority the result would not be peace but more perplexing and disastrous trouble.  We trust the impartiality and neutrality of the Crown which endears it to the people will never be relinquished in any part of Your Majesty's dominions; and we do not hesitate to say that if any representative of Your Majesty were so unwise as to employ the influence and authority of the Crown to help a minority in impeding the wishes of the great body of the people the certain result would be to diminish the just authority of his office and the legitimate influence of the Crown. [437]  (a) The Operation of Local Courts  Besides the criminal and quasi-criminal jurisdiction conferred upon Justices of the Peace the acceptance of the office imposes upon them the responsibility of acting when called upon as members of Local Courts. Justices are liable to a fine of £5 by the SM. then present for non-attendance at the court when summoned to sit.  These are courts established throughout the province somewhat on the principle of the County Courts in England having for their object the speedy and inexpensive settlement of all personal actions in respect both of contracts and wrongs where the amounts claimed do not exceed £100. Except as an Appeal Court from summary orders of justices Local Courts have now no criminal jurisdiction those sections of the Act which gave a direct criminal jurisdiction as a court of first instance having been repealed by Act No. 8 of 1869-70.  Local Courts have also power to try causes of interpleader replevin and ejectment where the property or lands are within certain values and may also entertain demands within the amounts for which they have jurisdiction for the unliquidated balance of partnership account or for the amount of a distributive share under an intestacy or of a legacy.  As regards the principles which are to guide the Local Courts in administering justice the Act (section 13) prescribes that all causes and matters are "to be determined according to equity and good conscience and the substantial merits of the case". These words seem to give to Local Courts that equitable jurisdiction in respect of all matters under its cognizance which enables it to temper the rigour of strict technical law in favour of a litigant who in equity has the substantial merits in his favour. The language of this section is derived from the Imperial Acts constituting Courts of Requests or Courts of Conscience as they were also termed. These were Small Debts Courts in the cities and counties of England and were regulated by 23 Geo. Ill c. 38. They were required to give judgment "according to equity and good conscience and according to the usual course of proceedings at common law" - language by no means so strong as that used in the Local Courts Act. The Superior Courts at Westminster constantly refused to entertain jurisdiction over the judgments of these courts of conscience holding that the "equity and good conscience" clause precluded them as a Court of Common Law from interfering. The Supreme Court also declines to interfere with the judgments of Local Courts below the appealable amount. (Phillips v. Bennett Pelham's S.A. Reports p. 75.)  In causes below £30 the Local Courts are after judgment in the position of the Court of Requests i.e. no appeal lies to the Supreme Court from their judgment. Before judgment all causes are removable by writ of certiorari if a Judge of the Supreme Court sees fit; and since the fusion in the administration of law and equity in the Supreme Court it would seem that the objection to the interference by certiorari of the Supreme Court with the equitable jurisdiction of the Local Court would not be tenable.  In the court of full jurisdiction when presided over by a Special Magistrate and two justices the latter are placed as judges in all respects on an equality with the Special Magistrate. They are at liberty on the hearing to examine witnesses to express their opinion openly in court both on the facts and the law. They may together or singly dissent from the opinion of the Special Magistrate on the facts or the law and they may together overrule the Special Magistrate both on the law and the merits. [187] With one or two exceptions however a justice has alone no jurisdiction either judicial or ministerial in matters relating to Local Courts but must exercise that jurisdiction in company with others.  An Act to provide for the establishment of an Australasian Court of Appeal.  Whereas the colonies of New South Wales Victoria South Australia Queensland Western Australia New Zealand and Tasmania have expressed their desire that a Court should be established as hereinafter provided for the hearing of appeals from the Supreme Court of each such colony: And whereas the sanction of the Imperial Parliament is necessary in order that such Court may be duly established and be invested with the necessary powers and authorities in that behalf: And whereas the said colonies have through their respective Legislatures consented to the constitution of the said Court by an Act of the Imperial Parliament upon the basis with the authority and subject to the provisions hereinafter declared and expressed: [237]  Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows: -   1. This Act may be cited as "The Australasian Court of Appeal Act."  2. In this Act and any general rules and orders made in pursuance hereof unless the context otherwise requires - "The Court of Appeal" means the Australasian Court of Appeal; "Colony" means any one of the colonies of New South Wales Victoria South Australia Queensland Western Australia New Zealand or Tasmania;  "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court Appellate Court or other Court of last resort in any colony;  The "Registrar" means the Registrar of the Court of Appeal and includes any person who may be appointed by the Court to perform any of the duties of the registrar;  "Judgment" includes any rule order decision decree decretal order sentence or determination of any Supreme Court;  "Governor" means the Governor (or officer administering the Government) in Council or the Governor (or such officer) with the advice of the Executive Council;  "Prescribed" means prescribed by any general rule or order made by the Court of Appeal under the provisions of this Act.  3. A Court of Appeal to be called the Australasian Court of Appeal shall be constituted in and for New South Wales Victoria South Australia Queensland Western Australia New Zealand and Tasmania which shall have and exercise appellate civil jurisdiction within and throughout each and all of the said colonies.  4. Such Court of Appeal shall be a Superior Court of Record and shall have and use as occasion may require a seal of office having inscribed thereon the words "The Australasian Court of Appeal."  5. The Governor of every colony shall by commission under the Great Seal of the colony under his Government appoint for any term not exceeding one year the Chief Justice or any Puisne Judge of each such colony to be one of the Judges of the Court of Appeal constituted by this Act. The senior Chief Justice or in the event of no Chief Justice of any colony being present at any sitting of the Court the senior Puisne Judge then present shall be the President. The Court may lawfully be held by and before any three or more Judges and shall be held to be lawfully constituted for all purposes notwithstanding any vacancy in the office of any Judge thereof provided that three members of the Court at least shall have been appointed and have taken the judicial oath hereinafter prescribed.  6. Every Judge of the Court of Appeal shall before acting judicially take the following oath: - "I do swear that I will well and truly serve our Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria in the office of Judge of the Australasian Court of Appeal and I will do right to all manner of people according to law without fear or favor affection or ill-will. So help me God."  The said oath shall be administered to every Judge before the Governor of the colony in which the first sitting of the Court of Appeal shall be held during the term of the commission of such Judge. [238]  7. The appointment of the Chief or Puisne Judge of any colony to be a Judge of the Court of Appeal constituted by this Act shall not vacate or otherwise affect the commission under which such Judge holds his commission in and for such colony but any Judge of the said Court of Appeal may resign his commission as a Judge of such Court by writing addressed to the Governor of the colony by whom he was appointed. Every Judge shall hold his office as Judge of the Court of Appeal for the term of his commission on the same tenure and conditions as he holds his office of Chief or Puisne Judge.  8. The Court of Appeal shall have power to appoint some fit and proper person being a barrister attorney or practitioner of the Supreme Court of any colony of at least five years' standing to be the registrar of the Australasian Court of Appeal and such other persons as may be necessary to be clerks and servants of the said Court. Such registrar clerks and servants may be dismissed by the Court.  9. The Court of Appeal shall sit at such times and places as may be prescribed. The determination of the place and time for holding any sitting of the Court shall so far as possible be governed by the preponderance of the appeals set down for hearing before the Court as between any one colony and any other as well as by the condition of the appellate business of the Court. In appointing the sitting of such Court provision shall be made as far as practicable for hearing appeals at least once a year in the colony in which the judgment appealed from shall have been given. The first sitting of the Court shall be held within twelve months after the passing of this Act at Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales.  10. Any person may appeal to the Court of Appeal from any final judgment of the Supreme Court of any colony pronounced made or given in any civil suit or proceeding in such manner within such time and under and subject to such rules regulations and limitations as this Act directs:  Provided that nothing in this Act shall abridge or affect the right of any person to appeal to Her Majesty in Council pursuant to the provisions of the several Imperial Statutes regulating appeals to be heard by the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council and Her Majesty's Orders in Council made thereunder: Provided further that if any person entitled under the next succeeding section of this Act to appeal to the Court of Appeal constituted by this Act shall desire so to appeal he shall give the prescribed notice of such his intention to the other party and thereupon it shall be lawful for such other party to apply to the court from whose judgment it is intended to appeal for an order directing that such appeal shall be preferred to Her Majesty in Council pursuant to the said firstly-mentioned Statutes and Orders in Council and the said Court so appealed from may in its discretion grant or refuse such order upon such terms as to costs and otherwise as the said Court shall think just.  11. In case any such judgment shall be given or pronounced in the Supreme Court in any colony for or in respect of any sum or matter at issue above the amount or value of Five hundred pounds sterling or in case such judgment shall involve directly or indirectly any claim demand or question to or respecting property or any civil right amounting to or of the value of Five hundred pounds sterling the person or persons feeling aggrieved by any such judgment may within fourteen days next after the same shall have been pronounced made or given and after service of the prescribed notice of his intention so to do on the other party apply to the said Supreme Court by motion or petition for leave to appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal. [239]  12. In case such leave to appeal shall be prayed by the party or parties who is or are directed to pay any such sum of money or perform any duty the said Supreme Court shall be and is hereby empowered either to direct that the judgment appealed from shall be carried into execution or that the execution thereof shall be suspended pending the said appeal as to the said Court may appear to be most consistent with real and substantial justice.  13. In case the Supreme Court shall direct such judgment to be carried into execution the person or persons in whose favor the same shall be given shall before the execution thereof enter into good and sufficient security to be approved by the said Supreme Court for the due performance of such judgment as the Court of Appeal shall think fit to make thereupon.  14. In all cases security to the satisfaction of the Court appealed from shall be given by the party or parties appellant of not less than the value of Five hundred pounds sterling for the prosecution of the appeal and the payment of all such costs as may be awarded by the Court of Appeal to the party or parties respondent.  15. If such last-mentioned security shall be given within two months from the date of such motion or petition for leave to appeal then and not otherwise the Supreme Court shall allow the appeal and the party or parties appellant shall be at liberty to prefer and prosecute his her or their appeal in such manner and under such general rules and orders as are or may be observed in appeals made to such Court of Appeal.  16. The Supreme Court may at its discretion on the petition of any party who considers himself aggrieved by any preliminary or interlocutory judgment of the said Supreme Court grant permission to such party to appeal against the same to the Court of Appeal subject to the same rules regulations and limitations as apply to appeals from final judgments.  17. It shall be lawful for the Court of Appeal upon any appeal to remit the matter which shall be the subject of such appeal to the Court from the decision of which such appeal shall have been made and at the same time to direct that such Court shall re-hear such matter in such form and either generally or upon certain points only and upon such re-hearing take such additional evidence though before rejected or reject such evidence before admitted as the Court of Appeal shall direct and further on any such remitting or otherwise it shall be lawful for the Court of Appeal to direct that one or more feigned issues shall be tried in the Supreme Court at such sitting of that Court and in such manner as the Court of Appeal may direct either by general rule or by order in the particular case.  18. It shall be lawful for the said Court of Appeal to direct one or more new trial or new trials of any issue either generally or upon certain points only and that in case any witness examined at a former trial of the same issue shall have died or have through bodily or mental disease or infirmity become incapable to repeat his testimony it shall be lawful for the said Court of Appeal to direct that parol evidence of the testimony of such witness shall be received.  19. If in any action suit or other proceeding it shall so happen that no final judgment can be duly given in consequence of a disagreement of opinion between the Judges of the Supreme Court then and in such case the final judgment may he entered pro forma on the petition of any of the parties to the action suit or other proceedings according to the opinion of the Chief Justice or in his absence of the senior Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court provided that such judgment shall be deemed a judgment of the Court for the purpose of an appeal against the same but not for any other purpose. [240]  20. The Court of Appeal may upon the petition of any person or persons aggrieved by any judgment of the Supreme Court admit his her or their appeal therefrom upon such terms and upon such securities limitations restrictions and regulations as the Court of Appeal shall think fit and shall have power to confirm reverse or vary such judgment as to the Court of Appeal shall seem meet.  21. In all cases of appeal allowed by the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal the Supreme Court shall certify and transmit to the Court of Appeal a true and exact copy of all evidence proceedings judgments had or made in such cases appealed against so far as the same have relation to the matters of appeal such copies to be certified under the seal of the said court; and the Supreme Court shall also certify and transmit to the Court of Appeal a copy of the reasons given by the Judges of such Supreme Court or by any of such Judges for or against the judgment appealed against where such reasons shall have been given in writing and where such reasons shall have been given orally then a statement in writing of the reasons given by the Judges of such Supreme Court or by any of such Judges for or against the judgment appealed against.  22. The Supreme Court shall in all cases of appeal to the Court of Appeal conform to and execute or cause to be executed such judgments as the Court of Appeal shall think fit to make in the premises in such manner as any original judgment of the said Supreme Court should or might have been executed.  23. Whenever it shall be found that the decision of a matter on appeal is likely to turn exclusively on a matter of law such question may with the sanction of the registrar be submitted to such Court in the form of a special case in the prescribed manner.  24. The judgment of the Court of Appeal in any matter shall be enrolled for safe custody in such manner and the same may be inspected and copies thereof taken under such general rule or order as the Court shall direct.  25. The judgment of the Court of Appeal shall in all cases be final and conclusive and no appeal shall be brought from any judgment of such Court: saving any right which Her Majesty may be graciously pleased to exercise by virtue of Her Royal Prerogative.  26. Proceedings in appeals shall when not otherwise provided for by this Act or by the general rules and orders to be made in pursuance hereof be as nearly as possible in conformity with the practice for the time being regulating appeals before the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council.  27. The Court of Appeal may make alter or rescind any general rule or order requiring the Judges' notes of the evidence taken before such Court on any cause appealed from which notes of evidence shall by such Court be transmitted to the registrar of the Court of Appeal within one month next after the leave given by such Supreme Court to prosecute any appeal to the Court of Appeal; and such rule or order shall be binding upon all Judges of such Courts in each colony. [241]  28. The costs incurred in the prosecution of any appeal and of such issues as the Court of Appeal may direct shall be paid by such party or parties person or persons and be taxed by the registrar and in such manner as the Court shall direct: Provided however that an appellant who shall succeed in obtaining a reversal or material alteration of any judgment appealed from shall be entitled to recover the costs of the appeal from the respondent except in cases in which the Court of Appeal may think fit otherwise to direct.  29. All persons being barristers or advocates in any colony shall have the right to practise as such in the Court of Appeal;  All persons being attorneys solicitors or proctors of the Supreme Court in any colony shall have the right to practise as such in the Court of Appeal;  And all persons who may practise as attorneys solicitors or proctors in the Court of Appeal shall be officers of such Court.  30. All persons appointed or authorized to administer affidavits in the Supreme Court in any colony may administer affidavits to be used in the Court of Appeal.  31. The process of the Court of Appeal shall run throughout every colony and shall be tested in the name of the President for the time being.  32. All fees received by the officers of the Court of Appeal shall be appropriated towards defraying the expense and cost of maintaining such Court and if such fees are not sufficient to defray all such expense and cost the amount of the deficiency shall be made up from time to time by a contribution from each colony calculated proportionately as nearly as may be according to the population of each colony.  33. Any four Judges of the Court of Appeal may from time to time make alter or rescind such general rules and orders as the Court may think fit - for regulating the places and times of the sitting of the Court of Appeal and the place and mode of keeping the records books documents and papers of or in the custody of such Court; for regulating the mode form and time of appealing to the Court of Appeal and the procedure in all matters; for preventing delays in the making or hearing of such appeals; as to the expenses attending appeals the fees payable to the Court and the taxation of costs; as to conduct and duties of all officers and practitioners in the Court of Appeal; and generally for carrying out the intention and objects of this Act; and all such rules and orders not being inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act shall have force and effect in each colony as if herein enacted and copies thereof shall be laid before the Parliament and be published in the Government Gazette of each colony.  Whereas it is expedient that the amended principles and practice of the Law of England should be extended and applied to this colony so far as the different circumstances of the two countries will permit:  4. Subject as in this Act is mentioned there shall be transferred to and vested in the court the jurisdiction which at the commencement of this Act was vested in or capable of being exercised by the Central Criminal Court or by any Court of Assize or by the Court of the Chief Judge of Courts of Mines. The jurisdiction by this Act transferred to the court shall include the jurisdiction which at the commencement of this Act was vested in or capable of being exercised by any of the judges of any of the said courts sitting in court or at chambers or elsewhere when acting as a judge in pursuance of any statute and all powers given to any such court or to any of the said judges by any statute and also all ministerial powers duties and authorities incident to any and every part of the jurisdiction so transferred.  8. In every civil cause or matter commenced in the court law and equity shall be administered by the court according to the rules following: -   (1.) If any plaintiff or petitioner claims to be entitled to any equitable estate or right or to relief upon any equitable ground against any deed instrument or contract or against any right title or claim whatsoever asserted by any defendant or respondent in such cause or matter or to any relief founded upon a legal right which heretofore could only have been given by a Court of Equity the court and every judge thereof shall give to such plaintiff or petitioner such and the same relief as ought to have been given by the court in its equitable jurisdiction in a suit or proceeding for the same or the like purpose properly instituted before the passing of this Act.  (2.) If any defendant claims to be entitled to any equitable estate or right or to relief upon any equitable ground against any deed instrument or contract or against any right title or claim asserted by any plaintiff or petitioner in such cause or matter or alleges any ground of equitable defence to any claim of the plaintiff or petitioner in such cause or matter the court and every judge thereof shall give to every equitable estate right or ground of relief so claimed and to every equitable defence so alleged such and the same effect by way of defence against the claim of such plaintiff or petitioner as the court in its equitable jurisdiction ought to have given if the same or the like matters had been relied on by way of defence in any suit or proceeding instituted for the same or the like purpose before the passing of this Act. [148]   (3.) The court and every judge thereof shall also have power to grant to any defendant in respect of any equitable estate or right or other matter of equity and also in respect of any legal estate right or title claimed or asserted by him all such relief against any plaintiff or petitioner as such defendant shall have properly claimed by his pleading and as the court or any judge thereof might have granted in any suit instituted for that purpose by the same defendant against the same plaintiff or petitioner; and also all such relief relating to or connected with the original subject of the cause or matter and in like manner claimed against any other person whether already a party to the same cause or matter or not who shall have been duly served with notice in writing of such claim pursuant to any rule of court or any order of the court as might properly have been granted against such person if he had been made a defendant to a cause duly instituted by the said defendant for the same purpose; and every person served with any such notice shall thenceforth be deemed a party to such cause or matter with the same rights in respect of his defence against such claim as if he had been duly sued in the ordinary way by such defendant.  (4.) The court and every judge thereof shall recognise and take notice of all equitable estates titles and rights and all equitable duties and liabilities appearing incidentally in the course of any cause or matter in the same manner in which the court in its equitable jurisdiction would have recognised and taken notice of the same in any suit or proceeding duly instituted therein before the passing of this Act.  (5.) No cause or proceeding at any time pending in the court shall be restrained by prohibition or injunction; but every matter of equity on which an injunction against the prosecution of any such cause or proceeding might have been obtained if this Act had not passed either unconditionally or on any terms or conditions may be relied on by way of defence thereto: Provided always that nothing in this Act contained shall disable the court from directing a stay of proceedings in any cause or matter pending before it if it shall think fit; and any person whether a party or not to any such cause or matter who would have been entitled if this Act had not passed to apply to the court to restrain the prosecution thereof or who may be entitled to enforce by attachment or otherwise any judgment decree rule or order contrary to which all or any part of the proceedings in such cause or matter may have been taken shall be at liberty to apply to the court by motion in a summary way for a stay of proceedings in such cause or matter either generally or so far as may be necessary for the purposes of justice and the court shall thereupon make such order as shall be just. [149]  (6.) Subject to the aforesaid provisions for giving effect to equitable rights and other matters of equity in manner aforesaid and to the other express provisions of this Act the court and every judge thereof shall recognise and give effect to all legal claims and demands and all estates titles rights duties obligations and liabilities existing by the common law or created by any statute in the same manner as the same would have been recognised and given effect to if this Act had not passed.  (7.) The court in the exercise of the jurisdiction vested in it by this Act in every cause or matter pending before it shall have power to grant and shall grant either absolutely or on such reasonable terms and conditions as to such court shall seem just all such remedies whatsoever as any of the parties thereto may appear to be entitled to in respect of any and every legal or equitable claim properly brought forward by them respectively in such cause or matter; so that as far as possible all matters so in controversy between the said parties respectively may be completely and finally determined and all multiplicity of legal proceedings concerning any of such matters avoided.  9. The law to be hereafter administered as to the matters next hereinafter mentioned shall be as follows: -   (1.) In the administration by the court of the assets of any person who may die after the commencement of this Act and whose estate may prove to be insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities and in the winding-up of any company under "The Companies Statute 1864" whose assets may prove to be insufficient for the payment of its debts and liabilities and the costs of winding-up the same rules shall prevail and be observed as to the respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors and as to debts and liabilities provable and as to the valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities respectively as may be in force for the time being under the law of insolvency with respect to estates placed under sequestration; and all persons who in any such case would be entitled to prove for and receive dividends out of the estate of any such deceased person or out of the assets of any such company may come in under the decree or order for the administration of such estate or under the winding up of such company and make such claims against the same as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of this Act:  (2.) No claim of a cestui que trust against his trustee for any property held on an express trust or in respect of any breach of such trust shall be held to be barred by any Statute of Limitations:  (3.) An estate for life without impeachment of waste shall not confer or be deemed to have conferred upon the tenant for life any legal right to commit waste of the description known as equitable waste unless an intention to confer such right shall expressly appear by the instrument creating such estate:  (4.) There shall not after the commencement of this Act be any merger by operation of law only of any estate the beneficial interest in which would not be deemed to be merged or extinguished in equity: [150]  (5.) A mortgagor entitled for the time being to the possession or receipt of the rents and profits of any land not being land under the "Transfer of Land Statute" as to which no notice of his intention to take possession or to enter into the receipt of the rents and profits thereof shall have been given by the mortgagee may sue for such possession or for the recovery of such rents or profits or to prevent or recover damages in respect of any trespass or other wrong relative thereto in his own name only unless the cause of action arises upon a lease or other contract made by him jointly with any other person:  (5a.) In any action for the foreclosure of the equity of redemption of any mortgaged property the court may upon the request of the mortgagee or of any subsequent incumbrancer or of the mortgagor or of any person claiming under them respectively direct a sale of such property instead of a foreclosure of such equity of redemption on such terms as the court may think fit to direct; and if the court shall so think fit without previously determining the priorities of incumbrances or giving the usual or any time to redeem: Provided that if such request shall be made by any such subsequent incumbrancer or by the mortgagor or by any person claiming under them respectively the court shall not direct any such sale without the consent of the mortgagee or the persons claiming under him unless the party making such request shall deposit in court a reasonable sum of money to be fixed by the court for the purpose of securing the performance of such terms as the court may think fit to impose on the party making such request:  (5b.) No action shall be open to objection on the ground that a merely declaratory judgment is sought thereby and it shall be lawful for the court to make binding declarations of right without granting consequential relief:  (5c.) If after an action shall have been instituted in relation to any real estate it shall appear to the court that it will be necessary or expedient that the said real estate or any part thereof should be sold for the purposes of such action it shall be lawful for the court to direct the same to be sold at any time after the institution thereof; and such sale shall be as valid to all intents and purposes as if directed to be made on the trial of such action and any party to the action in possession of such estate or in receipt of the rents or profits thereof shall be compelled to deliver up possession or receipt to the purchaser or such other person as the court shall direct:  (6.) Any absolute assignment by writing under the hand of the assignor (not purporting to be by way of charge only) of any debt or other legal chose in action of which express notice in writing shall have been given to the debtor trustee or other person from whom the assignor would have been entitled to receive or claim such debt or chose in action shall be and be deemed to have been effectual in law (subject to all equities which would have been entitled to priority over the right of the assignee if this Act had not passed) to pass and transfer the legal right to such debt or chose in action from the date of such notice and all legal and other remedies for the same and the power to give a good discharge for the same without the concurrence of the assignor: [151] Provided always that if the debtor trustee or other person liable in respect of such debt or chose in action shall have had notice that such assignment is disputed by the assignor or any one claiming under him or of any other opposing or conflicting claims to such debt or chose in action he shall be entitled if he think fit to call upon the several persons making claim thereto to interplead concerning the same or he may if he think fit pay the same into the court under and in conformity with the provisions of the "Statute of Trusts 1864" or any Act amending the same. Provided also that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the thirty-ninth section of the Act of the Parliament of Victoria numbered 474:  (6a.) Where any real or personal property shall form the subject of any proceedings in the court and the court shall be satisfied that the same will be more than sufficient to answer all the claims thereon which ought to be provided for in such action it shall be lawful for the court at any time after the commencement of such proceedings to allow the parties interested therein or any one or more of them the whole or part of the annual income of such real property or a part of such personal property or a part or the whole of the income thereof up to such time as the court shall direct and for that purpose to make such orders as may appear to the court necessary or expedient:  (7.) Stipulations in contracts as to time or otherwise which would not before the commencement of this Act have been deemed to be or to have become of the essence of such contracts in a court of equity shall receive in the court the same construction and effect as they would have heretofore received in equity:  (8.) A mandamus an injunction or a writ of ne exeat colonia may be granted or a receiver appointed by an interlocutory order of the court in all cases in which it shall appear to the court to be just or convenient that such order should be made; and any such order may be made either unconditionally or upon such terms and conditions as the court shall think just; and if an injunction is asked either before or at or after the hearing of any cause or matter to prevent any threatened or apprehended waste or trespass such injunction may be granted if the court shall think fit whether the person against whom such injunction is sought is or is not in possession under any claim of title or otherwise or (if out of possession) does or does not claim a right to do the act sought to be restrained under any colour of title and whether the estates claimed by both or by either of the parties are legal or equitable:  (9.) In any cause or proceeding for damages arising out of a collision between two ships if both ships shall be found to have been in fault the rules hitherto in force in the Court of Vice-Admiralty so far as they have been at variance with the rules in force in courts of common law shall prevail: [152]  (10.) In questions relating to the custody and education of infants the rules of equity shall prevail:  (11.) Generally in all matters not hereinbefore particularly mentioned in which there is any conflict or variance between the rules of equity and the rules of the common law with reference to the same matter the rules of equity shall prevail.  SITTINGS AND DISTRIBUTION OF BUSINESS  10. The Full Court shall hear and determine -   (1.) All motions for new trials:  (2.) All appeals from a single judge whether sitting in court or chambers:  (3.) All appeals from the Court of Insolvency:  (4.) All appeals from County Courts and Courts of Mines:  (5.) All proceedings by way of appeal or review from General and Petty Sessions respectively:  (6.) All applications under section twenty-one of Act No. 502:  (7.) All proceedings upon or connected with caveats under the "Transfer of Land Statute":  (8.) All motions on points reserved whether civil or criminal:  (9.) All rules returnable before the Full Court:  (10.) All business referred to the Full Court by a single judge whether sitting in court or chambers:  (11.) All trials at bar:  (12.) And generally all causes and matters which by any rule of court shall be required to be heard or disposed of by the Full Court.  11. Any single judge sitting in court may subject to appeal in civil or mixed matters to the Full Court hear and determine - All motions causes actions matters and proceedings not required under any Act or rules of court to be heard and determined by the Full Court.  12. Whenever the Full Court is equally divided in opinion the judgment of the court shall be given in accordance with the opinion of the Chief Justice or in his absence of the senior judge then present.  13. The division of the legal year into terms shall be abolished so far as relates to the administration of justice and there shall no longer be terms applicable to any sitting or business of the court; but in all other cases in which under the law now existing the terms into which the legal year is divided are used as a measure for determining the time at or within which any act is required to be done the same may continue to be referred to for the same or the like purpose unless and until provision is otherwise made by any lawful authority. .  14. Subject to any rules of court the court and the judges thereof respectively shall have power to sit and act at any time and at any place for the transaction of any part of the business of such court or of such judges or for the discharge of any duty which by any Act of Parliament or otherwise is required to be discharged during or after term. And the provisions of sections sixteen and seventeen of the Act No. 502 shall apply to the court as though the court had been expressly named in such sections instead of Courts of Assize. [153]  15. Subject to any rules of court the Full Court shall sit in Melbourne on such days as shall be necessary for the continuous and prompt despatch of the business of such court excepting from the twentieth day of December to the first day of February following and excepting upon Sundays public holidays and during the time when the business of the court shall prevent the number of judges requisite to form the Full Court from attending.  16. All such arrangements as may be necessary or proper for the transaction of the business from time to time pending before the Full Court and for constituting and holding such court shall be made by and under the direction of the judges of the said court and in case of difference among them in such manner as a majority of the said judges of whom the Chief Justice shall be one shall determine.  17. The Chief Justice may by writing addressed to any judge request the attendance at any time of such judge at any sitting of the Full Court; and the judge whose attendance is requested shall attend accordingly.  18. Subject to any rules of court sittings shall be held in Melbourne for the trial of causes and questions or issues of fact on such days and by so many judges as may be necessary for the trial of causes and questions or issues of fact so soon as possible after they are ready for trial excepting from the twentieth day of December to the first day of February following and except on Sundays public holidays and during the time when sittings in other bailiwicks shall prevent the attendance of a judge for the trial of causes in Melbourne. Sittings shall be held for the hearing of criminal trials at such times and in such places as are now or shall hereafter be fixed by law.  19. Provision shall be made by rules of court for the hearing in Melbourne at all times by a judge of the court of all such applications as may require to be immediately or promptly heard.  20. Subject to any restrictions or conditions imposed by any rules of court any party to any cause or matter involving the trial of a question or issue of fact may with the leave of a judge require the question or issue to be tried and determined at sittings to be held in any bailiwick whether central or other as hereinafter in this Act mentioned and such question or issue shall be tried and determined accordingly. A cause or matter not involving any question or issue of fact may be tried and determined in like manner with the consent of all the parties thereto.  21. Any judge of the court sitting for the trial of causes and issues in any bailiwick at any place heretofore accustomed or to be hereafter determined by law shall be deemed to constitute the court.  22. Any judge of the court may subject to any rules of court and to the provisions herein contained exercise in court or in chambers all or any part of the jurisdiction by this Act vested in the court in all such causes and matters and in all such proceedings in any causes or matters as before the passing of this Act might have been heard in court or in chambers respectively by a single judge of the court or by a judge of assize or by a judge of the central criminal court or as may be directed or authorized to be so heard by any rules of court to be hereafter made: in all such cases any judge sitting in court shall be deemed to constitute the court. [154]  exercise of its jurisdiction may reserve any case or any point in a case for the consideration of the Full Court or may direct any case or point in a case to be argued before the Full Court; and the Full Court shall have power to hear and determine any such case or point so reserved or so directed to be argued; but nothing in this Act nor in any rule or order made under the powers hereof shall take away or prejudice the right of any party to any action to have the issues for trial by jury submitted and left by the judge to the jury before whom the same shall come for trial with a proper and complete direction to the jury upon the law and as to the evidence applicable to such issues and the said right may be enforced by motion in the court. Any party dissatisfied with the direction of the judge to the jury may before verdict deliver an exception in writing to the judge which shall be entered upon or annexed to the copy of the pleadings delivered for the use of the judge at the trial or to the judge's notes with any additions the judge may make thereto; but no party shall be obliged then and so to except and if he does so except he shall not be confined to the grounds stated in the exception on any motion to enforce the said right and he may enforce the same by motion in the court though no exception has been delivered.  26. Any case or point in a case which for any reason may be deemed fit to be re-argued before decision or to be re-heard before final judgment may be so re-argued or re-heard before the Full Court if such court so direct. The Full Court shall have power to hear and determine any such case or point so directed to be re-argued or re-heard.  27. No order made by the court or any judge thereof by the consent of parties or as to costs only which by law are left to the discretion of the court shall be subject to any appeal except by leave of the court or judge making such order.  28. Every order made by a judge in chambers except as in the last preceding section may be set aside or discharged upon notice by the Full Court.  TRIAL AND PROCEDURE  29. Subject to any rules of court and to such right as may now exist to have particular cases submitted to the verdict of a jury the court or judge may in any cause or matter (other than a criminal proceeding as aforesaid by the Crown) refer any question arising in such cause or matter for inquiry and report to any special referee to be named by the court or judge and the report of such referee may be adopted wholly or partially by the court or judge and may if so adopted be enforced as a judgment by the court. The court or a judge may also in any such cause or matter as aforesaid in which it may think it expedient to do so call in the aid of one or more assessors specially qualified and try and hear such cause or matter wholly or partially with the assistance of such assessors but the court or judge shall not be bound by the opinion or finding of any such assessors. The remuneration (if any) to be paid to such referee or assessors shall be determined by the court.  Sections 30 to 32 made further provision for the use of referees or assessors. Sections 33 to 37 stipulated for rules of court (set out in their original form in the Second Schedule to the Act) and for their alteration after the commencement of the Act.) [155]  38. Subject to the Second Schedule hereto and any rules of court to be made under this Act the practice and procedure in all criminal causes and matters whatsoever in the court including the practice and procedure with respect to Crown cases reserved shall be the same as the practice and procedure in similar causes and matters before the commencement of this Act. And subject as in the earlier part of this section is provided error in criminal causes shall lie to the Full Court from the court when presided over by a single judge in like cases and in like manner as before the commencement of this Act error would lie from the Central Criminal Court or from a Court of Assize to the Supreme Court.  It is very much to be regretted that a scandalous outrage upon public decency should escape even for a time well-merited though wholly inadequate punishment in consequence of a technical defect in the imperfect framing of the information. The mere exhibition of these diagrams or representations to the public for gain is an offence under this Act unless justified by the circumstances of the exhibition such for instance as diagrams or sketches used by a lecturer to illustrate an anatomical lecture in a class-room of students; but to use them to illustrate the pernicious teaching of a filthy book so far from justifying their exhibition enormously aggravates this offence against public morals and public decency. With regard to that book I wish to refer to the case In re Besant (11 Ch. Div. 508; 48 L.Ch.J. 497) which was an application by the Rev. F. Besant who petitioned the Court that his daughter a child of tender years might be delivered up by her mother Mrs. Annie Besant (a lady who in conjunction with a person named Bradlaugh - an individual who from one cause or another has within the last few years attained a large amount of notoriety - had brought out this wretched pimblication) to the custody of her father. Sir George Jessel M.R. delivering judgment after pointing out that a course of education in the speculative opinions of her mother was not only reprehensible but detestable and likely to work utter ruin to the child and that on that ground alone he should decide that the child ought not to remain another day under her mother's care said: "I am sorry to say that there is another ground which I should be glad to avoid dealing with if I could. Another accusation against Mrs. Besant is this - it is said that in addition to these opinions as to the existence of a Deity and other speculative subjects Mrs. Besant has been guilty of immoral conduct in publishing an immoral or obscene book or rather pamphlet. Now I am sorry to say that on my attention being directed to some of the pages of this pamphlet I can entertain no doubt whatever as to its being an obscene publication. My view is exactly the same as was entertained by the Lord Chief Justice of England and a jury on the occasion of the trial of Mr. Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant for the publication of this book at which trial they were convicted and although that conviction has been set aside on a technical point - a flaw in the indictment - no judge as far as I am aware has for a moment doubted the propriety of that conviction. Besides that it has also been condemned by a magistrate to be destroyed and that decision has been confirmed by a Court of Quarter Sessions a number of magistrates being assembled there. [401] I think my view of this book is if I may say so fully confirmed and borne out by these previous decisions; although even if I entertained a less strong opinion than I do I ought hot to hesitate to express that opinion. That decision was appealed from and confirmed by the Court of Appeal consisting of Lords Justices James Baggallay and Bramwell. In reference to that book they say (at page 520): "The appellant has not only taught what she calls matters of speculative opinion in religion but has published other works which she avers to be in the domain of physiology of medical science and political economy some of which works she herself has written. She avers that she has done this from a desire to promote the happiness of the poorer millions of her fellow-creatures and from a conscientious conviction that she is doing a good work. From the particular nature of the topics which she has chosen to select they may easily be so handled as to be immoral indecent and corrupting. [...] It is impossible for us not to feel that the conduct of the appellant in writing and publishing such works is so repugnant so abhorrent to the feelings of the great majority of decent Englishmen and Englishwomen and would be regarded by them with such disgust not as matters of opinion but as violations of morality decency and womanly propriety that the future of a girl brought up in association with such a propaganda would be incalculably prejudiced. And who can doubt. that such a publication must exercise a corrupting and depraving influence upon any but firm and stable minds - disgusting all whom it did not deprave - a direct corrupter of chastity in the vast majority of cases - a vile instrument of furthering the vilest purposes?  10. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that past Australian experience shows that the separation of a portion of territory fitted for self-government from a colony by vast extent and its creation into an independent colony invariably tend to the advantage of both. Your Majesty's humble petitioners crave leave to adduce the progress of the originally insignificant colony of Queensland during the first five years of its existence and the increased trade of New South Wales as conspicuous instances of this result.  11. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that in view of the federation of the Australian colonies it is essential that the important district of North Queensland should be formed into a separate colony; as otherwise it will be deprived of all the privileges of representation in the Federal Council.  12. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that in the settlement trade revenue and productive power the districts north of the twenty-second degree of south latitude near Cape Palmerston in Your Majesty's colony of Queensland are fairly to be considered equal to those of the said Colony in its entirety in the year one thousand eight hundred and sixty-five; and that in variety of resources and prospect of progress arising from their development the Northern territory exhibit a great superiority  13. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that inasmuch as the revenue receipts from the Northern territory are far beyond the general average of those of the whole Colony the Northern districts lose the difference amounting to many thousands of pounds between the just and actual payments; while in consequence of the incidence of the public debt being distributed generally the apportionment of the expenditure being local the Northern districts receive much less than is justly due to them and Your Majesty's humble petitioners are charged with an annual sum for interest greatly beyond that with which they ought to be burdened. For such injustice unless by the relief afforded by self-government there is no redress.  14. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that in the expenditure of the funds derived from the public loan grave inconvenience and loss is sustained by the Northern districts in consequence of the long delay necessarily occasioned in the completion of their public works even when the application of these funds is justly apportioned while it Sometimes happens that the postponement of Northern requirements to those of the other districts aggravates the injury thus sustained. [222]  15. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that the great distance of the capital from the Northern districts combined with the numerical superiority possessed and likely to be possessed for an indefinite period by the electorates in proximity to it operates very seriously to their detriment. Were the interests of the North and South identical in nature the evils arising from such circumstances might be ameliorated; but Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that those interests and industries and the essentials to success in either are from differences of climate and soil exceedingly diverse; and that the real conditions of the northern portion of Your Majesty's Colony of Queensland are but imperfectly understood or appreciated in the southern end of the Colony; the natural consequences being aggravated by the latter having in the Legislative Assembly a large permanent majority conservative of and giving naturally preference to what they consider the claims of their own constituents.  16. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that such conditions would operate most disastrously to the North in the event of hostilities occurring between Your Majesty's United Kingdom and any foreign Power. Along the whole seaboard from Cape Palmerston on the eastern coast to the junction with the Northern Territory of Your Majesty's Colony of South Australia and in the one hundred and thirty-eighth degree of east longitude there is not a single port of the seven which have been formed that is not entirely defenceless against the most insignificant piratical attack; and until very recently not the slightest effort has been made to induce naval or military organisation in any form or opportunity given for it. The distance of any of them from Brisbane would render co-operation thence impossible while the absence of skilled direction - concentrated on the capital - would paralyse voluntary effort. Your Majesty's humble petitioners humbly urge that with self-government not only would the necessity for self-defence be recognised but provision for it would undoubtedly follow.  17. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners further humbly represent that they have calculated the expenditure required for all purposes of government in the proposed new colony and found that they would be more than provided for out of the revenue that would be immediately available.  18. That Your Majesty's humble petitioners crave leave to inform Your Majesty that upon all these matters they have as was their duty fully informed Your Majesty's Secretary of State for Your Majesty's Colonies and have furnished that Minister with statistics and documents from official sources in proof of their humble representation. [223]  19. Your Majesty's humble petitioners beg humbly to express their confidence that the justice and regard to public obligation which have distinguished the Imperial Government during Your Majesty's reign will be extended to them. Trusting in the promises implied by the Act of Parliament cited and expressed in the words of Your Majesty's Minister; they have laid the foundation for the establishment of a colony superior were it once created to many that enjoy the blessing of Your Majesty's protection and second to none in the magnitude and variety of its resources as yet but slightly developed. Your Majesty's humble petitioners pray for self-government in order that they may fully employ those resources not merely to the great advantage of the Northern District but to the increase and prosperity of the trade and commerce of the United Kingdom and of that greater Empire over which Your Majesty so wisely reigns. In what Your Majesty's humble petitioners crave leave to look at as the first fulfilment of an obligation they recognise a further step towards that consolidation of the interests and affinities between the Empire and its dependencies which Your Majesty's humble petitioners venture to conceive must tend to the prosperity and happiness of Your Majesty's subjects throughout Your Majesty's dominions.  Wherefore Your Majesty's humble petitioners most humbly pray That Your Majesty considering the premises will be graciously pleased to direct such measures to be taken as in your Royal discretion may appear consonant with existing legislation and may be. necessary for the creation of the Northern portion of the Colony of Queensland into a separate colony with such boundaries as to Your Majesty's wisdom may seem fit and under a continuance of the form of representative government at present existing.  And Your Majesty's humble petitioners will as in duty bound ever pray &c.  To Her Most Gracious Majesty VICTORlA  By the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen Empress of India Defender of the Faith.  The Humble Petition of the undersigned Residents of the Gold Fields of Charters Towers and Ravenswood and the town of Townsville and other places in Your Majesty's Colony of Queensland  SHEWETH -   1. That Your Majesty's petitioners approach Your Majesty desiring to express their loyalty to Your Majesty's person and Government.  2. That Your Majesty's petitioners have learnt that a petition is being prepared for presentation to Your Majesty on behalf of certain "residents and householders in Northern Queensland" praying that "Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to separate that portion of the Colony of Queensland north of Cape Palmerston from the present Colony of Queensland and to erect it into a distinct colony" such prayer being based mainly upon the following alleged grounds that is to say: - That "Northern Queensland is both in population and in wealth well fitted to undertake the onus of self-government and would have a firmer basis to stand upon than the Colony of Queensland had on its separation from New South Wales."  That "Northern Queensland is so inadequately represented in the Legislature of the Colony of Queensland that the inhabitants therein have practically no voice in the arrangement of their own affairs."  That "the inhabitants of Northern Queensland have out of their own resources to pay the interest on large sums of money borrowed by the Government of the said Colony and used principally for the benefit of the southern portion thereof."  That "the seat of Government is situated more than 1000 miles from the majority of the towns and cities of Northern Queensland."  That "the interests of Northern Queensland as a country of exclusively tropical productions are at variance with the interests of the southern portion of Queensland and that in consequence of such variance the development of the resources of the North is hampered and its general progress is retarded."  That "the Government of the Colony has not only failed to supply suitable labour for the requirements of the tropical agriculturalists" (that is the sugar-planters) "but has prohibited them from taking steps to procure such labour for themselves; that large acreages have in consequence been thrown out of cultivation; that there is every reason to apprehend that in a short time these properties will in consequence of the action of the Government have to be abandoned." [225]  3. Your Majesty's petitioners have also learnt that another petition is being prepared for presentation to Your Majesty; on behalf of certain "residents in the electoral districts in Northern Queensland praying that Your Majesty will be pleased to direct the creation of the Northern portion of the Colony of Queensland into a separate colony" such prayer being based upon the same alleged grounds as mentioned in the said first-mentioned petition with the exception that no reference whatever is therein made to the tropical productions of the Colony or the desire of the owners of sugar plantations for coloured labour.  4. Your Majesty's petitioners have also learnt that on or about the fourteenth day of January 1885 a letter was written by certain persons named "J. Ewen Davidson and J. B. Lawes on behalf of themselves and others interested as investors of a large amount of capital in the north-eastern seaboard of the Colony" and addressed to the Right Honourable the Earl of Derby Your Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies expressing' "their sympathy with the present movement for the separation of the Northern or tropical from the Southern or temperate portion of the Colony" and urging in favour of such separation reasons similar to those stated in the first paragraph hereof and stating inter alia as such reasons "that there are millions of acres of rich land along the northeast sea-coast covered with tropical jungle of no use for pastoral purposes and which can only be utilised for tropical productions by the means of coloured labour" and that "this coloured labour is denied to the inhabitants of the North by the representatives of the South" and that "the inhabitants of Northern Queensland are anxious to obtain coolies from India."  Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that the said B. Ewen Davidson and J. B. Lawes and other persons interested as aforesaid are either the original promoters or in league with the original promoters of the said petitions for separation mentioned in the first and second paragraphs hereof.   5. That the movement for the separation of Northern Queensland leading to the said petitions originated a few months ago in the district of Mackay which is an 'agricultural' district in which the cultivation of sugar is prosecuted to a considerable extent and is promoted as Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe only by persons interested directly or indirectly in the cultivation of sugar or who are either actually engaged in the production of sugar or have purchased or selected land with a view of holding the same for the purposes of speculation intending to sell at a large profit in case the importation of Indian coolie or other coloured labour should be authorised by law. [226]  6. That until recently the sugar-planters of Queensland have been accustomed to import coloured labour for their plantations from the islands of the South Pacific but in consequence of gross irregularities - almost rivalling the atrocities of the African slave trade - having been permitted by the planters the Government of the Colony has been compelled to insist upon regulations being observed with which (although not going beyond what is indicated by the plainest dictates of common humanity) the planters find themselves unable to comply the consequences being that they must abandon the mode of cultivating sugar by a species of semi-slave labour which they had heretofore adopted for some other method less incompatible with the institutions of a free country such as Your Majesty's Australian colonies are.  7. That at the last general election of members of the Legislative Assembly of the Colony held in the year 1883 the question of the importation of Indian coolie or other coloured labour for sugar cultivation was the most prominent question before the constituencies of the Colony which in Northern Queensland as well as in Southern Queensland decided by very large majorities against such labour by returning as their Parliamentary representatives members pledged to oppose the introduction of coloured labour of any description whether Kanaka Chinese or Indian coolie.  8. That the sugar-planters being no longer able to obtain black labour after their own peculiar fashion and being assured of the hopelessness of inducing the Parliament of the Colony to provide them with any other than white labour have raised the cry of separation of Northern Queensland trusting that in the event of their movement being successful they may in a new colony possibly obtain that which it is perfectly impossible to obtain under present circumstances.  9. That Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that in consequence of the well-known antipathy of the majority of the inhabitants of Northern Queensland to the introduction of coloured labour and the great improbability of ever being able to induce them to advocate the separation of that portion of the Colony on that ground the promoters of the separation movement have had resort and are now resorting to the expedient of concealing their real intentions as far as possible; and with that object they have promulgated the two petitions mentioned in the first and second paragraphs hereof: the first mentioned petition being intended for signature by the inhabitants of Mackay and other sugar-growing districts where there is no necessity to conceal the real motives of the promoters and the other petition being intended for signature by the inhabitants of other parts of the Colony who would probably refuse to sign it if the real motives of the promoters were revealed and hence the suppression from the second petition of all reference to the question of coloured labour. [227]  10. That although situated geographically within tropical latitude Northern Queensland except a narrow strip of land on the coast seldom extending more than twenty miles inland differs entirely from what is generally and popularly known as a tropical country. That the only lands fit for agriculture are the narrow strips along the coast which form but a very small proportion of the whole Territory. That the area of mineral lands already known is of much greater extent; and gold silver tin copper and other mines and minerals are found and worked to a very large extent That the greater part of northern Queensland consists of pastoral land similar to the pastoral land of Southern Queensland and the other Australian Colonies. And that the climate of Northern Queensland is generally healthy and salubrious and the country is in every way and undoubtedly fitted to be occupied by white people.  11. That although Your Majesty's petitioners are convinced that in case of necessity the inhabitants of Northern Queensland are able to govern themselves as a separate colony yet Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that it would be much more beneficial to the North to remain a portion of the present Colony than to be separated therefrom.  12. That although the representation of Northern Queensland in the Legislative Assembly of the Colony is not so great as Your Majesty's petitioners believe it ought to be yet Your Majesty's petitioners deny that any real injustice has been done to the interests of the North since the coming into power of the Ministry of Mr. John Douglas and they affirm that during that interval of eight or nine years very large sums of public money have been expended in the construction of Railways Harbours Public Buildings and other Public Works quite as much as could reasonably be expected under any possible system of Government and that the reasonable wants and wishes of the inhabitants of the North have been in all cases carefully and promptly attended to by the Government of the Colony.  13. That in the years 1878 and 1879 a system of local self-government was instituted under "The Local Government Act of 1878" and "The Divisional Boards Act of 1879" under which municipalities have been established in all parts of the Colony there being no part of the Colony not included within the jurisdiction of either a Municipal Council or a Divisional Board (the members of which are elected by the people themselves) who have full power to raise money by rates or loans for all purposes and to expend the same at their own discretion upon such works as they may deem best.  14. That in consequence of this system of local self-government the inadequacy of representation of the North in the Legislative Assembly of the Colony has been less prejudicial than was formerly the case when all local works were authorised and undertaken only by the central Government. [228]  15. That Your Majesty's petitioners therefore deny that there is any truth or foundation whatever in or for the statement that the inhabitants of Northern Queensland have practically no voice in the arrangement of their own affairs.  16. That Your Majesty's petitioners deny that the inhabitants of Northern Queensland have out of their own resources to pay the interest on large sums of money borrowed by the Government of the Colony and used principally for the benefit of the Southern portion of the Colony. Your Majesty's petitioners submit that it is impossible for any Government to expend money equally over all portions of the Colony; that the very idea of a community precluded any such system; that the North no more contributes the money spent in the South than the South contributes the money spent in the North; that the money spent all over the Colony by the Government comes from a common fund and Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that for many years the common funds of the Colony have been expended in fair proportion amongst the various portions of the Colony so far as it has been possible in a political community and that if the said prayer for separation were granted the very same observation might then be made by the northern portion against the southern portion of the then new colony and with as much show of justice.  17. That whilst Your Majesty's petitioners are fully aware of the inconvenience of having the capital of the Colony so far distant from some portions of it Your Majesty's petitioners submit that the difficulty is one that must necessarily arise in all cases where a country is so sparsely populated and the means of internal communications are so limited as in Queensland and Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that the same inconvenience would be experienced for the very same reason in the event of Northern Queensland being constituted a separate colony by all persons except those residing in or near to the capital.  18. That Your Majesty's petitioners would point out however that Brisbane the present capital of the Colony has been connected by telegraph with all portions of the Colony and that therefore for all practical purposes of communication it is quite as near and accessible as any other place can possibly be.  19. That Your Majesty's petitioners deny that there is any conflict whatever between the interests of Northern Queensland or the interests of Southern Queensland other than such as are necessarily involved in the idea of a political community or that the development of the resources of the North is hampered or its general progress retarded as alleged. [229]  20. That Your Majesty's petitioners Submit that even if there were any truth or foundation in fact whatever in or for the grounds for separation of Northern Queensland set forth in the first paragraph hereof such grounds would not be sufficient to warrant the disruption of the Colony since the complaints are such as if true and reasonable are capable of being remedied by the existing form of government.  21. That Your Majesty's petitioners verily believe that a very large majority of the inhabitants of Northern Queensland are opposed to its separation from the Colony.  Your Majesty's petitioners therefore humbly pray that Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to refuse to accede to any request for the separation of North Queensland from the present Colony or for any other dismemberment of the Colony.  And Your Majesty's petitioners will ever pray.  Sir - Your telegram explanatory of your views in favour of bringing the machinery of the Federal Council into operation in giving effect to the recommendations of General Edwards for the federalisation of Australian troops reached me last week in Brisbane. Being extremely anxious to meet your wishes I lost no time in re-examining the provisions of the Federal Council Act; and I regret that I cannot concur in your view that the Council possesses the requisite power to constitute direct and control an united Australian army. The sub-section of clause 15 to which you specially referred me appears to supply evidence to the contrary. The two words "general defences" are included in a long list of secondary matters such as "uniformity of weights and measures" and the "status of corporations and joint-stock companies" and it would be a very strained interpretation that could give to those two words so used a definition of legal authority to deal with a matter second to none other in the exercise of National power. It is not for me to say what is the precise meaning of the words on which you rely; but it is contended that they cannot be construed to mean the creation direction mobilisation and executive control of a great army for the defence of the whole of Australia.  For more than twenty years I have had the question of Australian federation almost constantly before me; and I cannot be accused of indifference to it at any time merely because I had become convinced from earlier examination while others were adopting the scheme of the present Federal Council at a later period that no such body would ever answer the great objects of Federal Government. ; Leaving the provisions of the Act as to the legislative capacity of the Council we are at once precipitated upon an impassable barrier in the fact that there does not exist in it or behind it any form of executive power. Supposing for example that the Federal Council's recommendations or enactments for the movement of Australian soldiers could be accepted there could not be found anywhere a corresponding executive authority to give effect to them. [471]  The vitally important recommendation made by General Edwards is one in any light from which it can be viewed of national magnitude and significance. The vast sums annually expended by the Continental Colonies for defence works and Services would be of greatly enhanced value in time of public danger if the scattered j and unconnected forces locally maintained could be brought under one command and whenever advisable directed to one field of operations. I am satisfied that this cannot be done by any existing machinery. The Executive Governments of the several colonies could not act in combination for any such purpose nor could they so act independently of each other. The Federal Council has no executive power to act at all. The Imperial Parliament on the application of the colonies could no doubt pass an Act to constitute the Federal Army under one command and to authorise its operations in any part of Australia; but the colonies could never consent to the Imperial Executive interfering in the direction of its movements. Hence then this first great Federal question when looked at fairly brings us in spite of preferences or prejudices face to face with the imperative necessity for a Federal Government. And why should we turn aside from what is inevitable in the nature of our onward progress? It must come a year or two later possibly but in any case soon.  I hope I need not assure you that this Government is anxious to work in harmony with the Governments of the sister colonies in the matter under consideration and is desirous of avoiding subordinate questions coloured by party feeling or collateral issues. It is a question to be put to the mind and heart of Australia in view of the destiny of Australia and on which it is hoped all sections of the collective population will unite without regard to narrower considerations. Believing that the time is ripe for consolidating the Australia's into one this Government respectfully invites you to join in taking the first great step namely to appoint representatives of Victoria to a National Convention for the purpose of devising and reporting upon an adequate scheme of Federal Government. With much deference to the views of the other colonies it is suggested that in order to avoid any sense of inequality in debate or any party complexion the number from each colony should be the same and should be equally chosen from both sides in political life; and that in the case of each colony the representatives should be elected by Parliament and receive commissions from the Governor in Council. It is further suggested that six members from each colony would be a convenient number both in regard to combining a fair representation of the two Houses and at the same time not making the Convention too unwieldy. In each case four members might be taken from the Assembly two from each side; and two members from the Council one from each side. [472] In the case of Western Australia where only one House exists possibly only four members might be elected. If New Zealand joined the Convention would as a result consist of forty members.  The scheme of Federal Government it is assumed would necessarily follow close upon the type of the Dominion Government of Canada. It would provide for the appointment of a Governor-General for the creation of an Australian Privy Council and a Parliament consisting of a Senate and a House of Commons. In the work of the Convention no doubt the rich stores of political knowledge which were collected by the framers of the Constitution of the United States would be largely resorted to as well as the vast accumulations of learning on cognate subjects since that time.  Although a great and pressing military question has brought to the surface the design of a Federal Government at the present juncture the work of a national character which such a Government could in the interest of all the colonies most beneficially and effectively undertake would include the noblest objects of peaceful and orderly progress; and every year the field of its beneficent operations would be rapidly expanding. I devoutly hope that you will be able to take the view which I have briefly explained of the necessity now pressing upon these colonies to rise to a higher level of national life which would give them a larger space before the eyes of the world and in a hundred ways promote their united power and prosperity.  Permit me in conclusion to say that you place much too high an estimate on my individual influence if you suppose that the accession of New South Wales to the Federal Council rests with me. In my judgment there is no person and no party here that could persuade Parliament to sanction the representation of this colony in the present Federal Council.  I have the honour to be Sir  Your most obedient servant  HENRY PARKES.  (a) County Courts  In examining the local administration of justice we shall have to discuss three items - County Courts Magistrates' Courts and Courts of Mines. We will begin with County Courts but we shall see ultimately that there is a substantial connection between all three.  County Courts are the modern successors of the old Courts of Requests established for the decision of small civil cases principally relating to recovery of debts. We have seen these introduced into New South Wales proper and their extension to Port Phillip. Soon after separation they were abolished to make way for the new system which has been since amplified in many directions.  County Courts are from time to time established and held at places proclaimed by the Governor in Council. Strictly speaking each court has jurisdiction throughout the whole of Victoria; but if on the hearing of a common law plaint it appears that the defendant does not reside and that the cause of action did not arise within 100 miles of the court or that the defendant resides at least 10 miles nearer to some other court (the cause of action not arising nearer the court chosen than such other court) the defendant is entitled as a matter of right to a non-suit.  Not more than nine barristers or advocates of seven years' practice may be appointed by the Governor in Council to be Judges of County Courts in Victoria. Such judges hold office during good behaviour. The Governor may remove them for absence from Victoria without leave for incapacity and upon the Address of both Houses of the Legislature. Each judge presides over such courts as may be assigned to him by the Governor in Council but his jurisdiction runs throughout the colony. A County Court Judge may not practise at the Bar nor sit in Parliament and he may be compelled to reside within his district.  In addition to the judge there are appointed for each County Court one or more registrars who may appoint deputies to act for them in cases of emergency and one or more bailiffs (removable by the judge for inability or misbehaviour) with power to appoint assistants by writing under their hands. The registrar's duties are briefly to conduct the administrative business of the court especially the proceedings prior to the hearing. He issues and receives all process decides on points of practice administers oaths receives fees and other monies prepares lists of causes for trial and registers orders and judgments. [157] Assistant registrars may be appointed at places at which no courts are held to conduct preliminary process. The duties of the bailiff are briefly to execute the process of the court by serving notices and summonses enforcing warrants and levying executions. Officers of the court must not be concerned for any party in any proceeding before it and registrars and bailiffs must not perform one another's duties. Both registrar and bailiff give security for the due performance of their functions. Any registrar assistant or deputy proceeded against for any act done in obedience to a warrant issued by him may plead the warrant and the judgment upon which it is founded as a justification; in similar cases the bailiff or his servants may justify under the warrant alone. And all actions brought against any person for anything done under the County Court Act must be commenced within six calendar months after the commission of the act complained of. All constables and police officers must aid in the execution of County Court process.  Subject to the limits of locality previously mentioned the jurisdiction of a County Court extends to the following cases -   1. All personal actions where the amount value or damages sought to be recovered do not exceed £500.  2. All actions of replevin where the goods seized do not exceed in value £500. (The action must be brought in the court nearest to which the goods are situate.)  3. All actions of ejectment in which the value of the premises the possession whereof is sought to be recovered does not exceed £50 a year or where the rent (exclusive of ground rent) does not exceed that sum.  4. All suits for account administration execution of trusts foreclosure or redemption of mortgages specific performance of agreements for sale purchase or lease appointment of guardians to or maintenance or advancement of infants and dissolution or winding up of partnerships or companies where the property in question does not exceed in amount or value the sum of £500.  5. All such actions of tort as may be remitted by the Supreme Court upon the affidavit of the defendant that the plaintiff has no visible means of support.  But no County Court may try any action for  1. Seduction  2. Breach of promise of marriage  3. Decision of title to a toll fair or franchise unless -   1. The parties have consented in writing to the jurisdiction or  2. The case has been remitted by the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court has power within certain limits to order a transfer from the County Court to the Supreme Court in cases where it shall consider the latter the preferable tribunal.    (b) Justices of the Peace; General and Petty Sessions  The specific title of every magistrate in Victoria is "justice of the peace". Many of the justices have other offices of a more important character which influence their powers as justices but in order that they may act in a magisterial capacity they are specially invested with the title. It is generally known that the office of "justice of the peace" is very ancient. [158] It goes back beyond question to the fourteenth century and there are traces of similar offices at a still earlier date. As the powers of the autonomous local authorities disappeared in England their places were gradually taken by these officials until the whole character of the local administration was changed. For it has always been a distinguishing feature of the office that it has been created by the Central Government whereas the older local authorities were created by the localities. Every justice of the peace holds his office from and at the pleasure of the Crown. Another remarkable feature of the office is that from early times though not from its commencement it has been of an honorary character. The overwhelming importance of the justices in local administration dates from the time of the Tudors and the Reformation.  Justices of the Peace in Victoria are of two kinds -   (a) Specially appointed.  (b) Ex officio.  (a) In every bailiwick such and so many justices as are necessary are "assigned" by commission under the seal of the colony to keep the peace. The commission is in the Queen's name and is signed by the Governor. Justices thus specially appointed have jurisdiction only in their own bailiwicks. At present there are in Victoria between two and three thousand of such justices.  (b) The following persons are ex officio justices of the peace -   1. Members of the Executive Council  2. Judges of the Supreme Court  3. Chairmen of General Sessions for every bailiwick.  4. Coroners and deputy coroners  5. Police magistrates  6. The president of every shire and for every bailiwick the mayor of every borough in which any part  7. The mayors and mayors elect of their municipality Melbourne and Geelong is situate during their terms of office and twelve months afterwards.    No insolvent is capable of acting as a justice and the Governor in Council may prohibit any justice from acting.  The duties of justices are now so numerous and important that it will be impossible to give more than a brief outline of them. The simplest way will be to note the different capacities in which a justice may act and shortly touch upon his duties in each.  Broadly speaking a justice acts in three capacities -   (a) As a magistrate out of sessions.  (b) As a magistrate or judge in petty sessions.  (c) As a magistrate or judge in general sessions.  (a) The great function of a justice out of sessions is to receive information of the commission of offences and to prepare the cases for trial.  Having heard information either by mere statement or oath which raises in his mind a reasonable probability of an offence having been committed he issues a summons calling on the accused to appear and answer the charge or if the information has been on oath and an indictable offence is charged he may issue a warrant ordering his immediate arrest. [159] If the accused does not obey the summons a warrant may also be issued after sworn proof of service. A justice may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents.  During the preliminary hearing the witnesses for the prosecution are examined on oath they may be cross-examined by the accused or his counsel and their depositions are taken down by the justice and signed by them. Such examination is not a judicial proceeding and the justice may if he thinks fit exclude the public; but if the evidence in the opinion of the justice raises a prima facie case against the accused the latter must be allowed to call witnesses for the defence whose depositions are similarly taken. Before hearing the accused's witnesses however the justice if he thinks there is a case must ask the prisoner if he wishes to make a statement. But the question is accompanied by an elaborate caution as to the effect of such a statement and the accused is not bound to say anything. If he does so his statement is treated in the same way as the depositions of the witnesses.  If the justice after these steps makes up his mind to commit the prisoner for trial he forwards the information and depositions to the Crown Solicitor (if the trial is to take place in the Supreme Court) or to the clerk of the peace for the bailiwick (if the trial is to be at general sessions). The witnesses for the prosecution may be and the material witnesses for the prisoner (except mere witnesses to character) must be bound by recognisance to appear and give evidence at the trial. If the proceedings require adjournment at any stage the justice may (subject to certain restrictions) remand the accused to custody but he may at any stage even after committal for trial take bail for his reappearance except upon a charge of treason. The powers previously enumerated may be exercised by a single justice or by two or more in conjunction. Besides these functions as committing magistrate a justice of the peace may be called upon to perform an almost countless number of acts of a purely administrative character. .  (b) As a judge or magistrate in Petty Sessions. A Court of Petty Sessions is an open court constituted by two or more justices a single police magistrate or (where the parties consent in writing) a single justice. Courts of Petty Sessions are held at places and times fixed by the Governor in Council. At present there are about 240 of such places in Victoria.  Every Court of Petty Sessions has a clerk attached to it whose duty it is to keep the register of the proceedings of the court and conduct its formal business.  Besides the powers conferred on it by special statutes a Court of Petty Sessions has jurisdiction in the following cases -   1. Offences made punishable on summary conviction.  2. All cases of assault where the damages claimed do not exceed £50.  3. Claims for the restitution of goods alleged to be illegally detained where the value of the goods does not exceed £50.  4. Actions for "civil debts recoverable summarily" where the sum claimed does not exceed £50. (Under the head of "civil debts recoverable summarily" are specified a large number of cases which do not as a rule involve much dispute as to facts.)  5. Enforcement of fines and penalties recoverable before one or more justices where no special provision is otherwise made for their enforcement. [160]  But the following cases are expressly excluded from its jurisdiction -   1. Civil cases in which a County Court has not cognisance for the same cause.  2. Cases involving title to land.  Procedure is by information and summons and the order of the court may be enforced by warrant of distress or commitment issued by a single justice or by an attachment of debts except that a warrant of commitment cannot issue to enforce a "civil debt recoverable summarily." But in all matters involving the payment of a fine of £5 or damages for assault or for trespass by cattle or involving immediate or contingent imprisonment an appeal lies from the Court of Petty Sessions to the next practicable Court of General Sessions of the Peace. And after notice of such appeal by consent of the parties and an order of a Judge of the Supreme Court a case may be stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court the parties agreeing that a judgment in accordance with such opinion shall subsequently be entered at the sessions. A Judge of the Supreme Court may also on the application of any person injured by a summary conviction or by any order or warrant of a Court of Petty Sessions or a justice issue an "order to review" calling on the other parties and (if he shall think fit) the justice or justices involved to show cause why the proceeding should not be reviewed. An appeal lies from the refusal of a single judge to the Full Court and in any case the return of the order takes place before the Full Court which may confirm quash or vary the proceeding complained of. The justices whose decision is questioned may file explanatory affidavits.  (c) As a judge or magistrate in General Sessions. There is a Court of General Sessions of the Peace which corresponds with Quarter Sessions in England for every bailiwick and sessions are held at twenty-eight places provided by statute at times directed by the Governor in Council. To each Court of General Sessions is attached an official known as the "Clerk of the Peace" appointed by the Governor in Council who issues process arraigns prisoners records verdicts judgments and proceedings enters appeals files convictions and generally conducts the ministerial business of the court.  The only essential member of the Court of General Sessions is the chairman who is a specially qualified official appointed by the Governor in Council; but any one or more ordinary justices having jurisdiction within the bailiwick in which the court is held may sit with him. In civil matters the court may hear all appeals and take cognisance of all matters cognisable by the appellate jurisdiction of courts of general and quarter sessions in England. In its criminal capacity it may try all indictable offences within its bailiwick except about twenty from the more serious classes of crimes. Criminal trials at General Sessions are held before juries of twelve.    (c) Insolvency  The Governor in Council is entitled to appoint "a judge" of the Court of Insolvency and all Judges of County Courts in Victoria are ex-officio judges of the court subject however to the local limits of jurisdiction imposed upon them by the assignment of special districts. So that the Court of Insolvency would appear to be a central court with local branches. [161] An appeal from any order of the court lies to the Supreme Court.  Proceedings are commenced by the presentation of a petition to the court either voluntarily by the insolvent himself or his representative or as a hostile step by creditors upon the happening of certain events. In the voluntary cases the court upon proof of the facts makes an order vesting the estate of the petitioner in one of the official assignees of the court. In contentious cases the court makes a provisional order or order nisi contingent upon the alleged insolvent not showing cause within a certain time and in the interval the court may place the estate under temporary sequestration. When the order is made absolute the estate as in the voluntary cases vests temporarily in an official of the court but the creditors are entitled to appoint a trustee and a committee of inspection and upon confirmation of the appointment by the court the property passes to the trustee. The insolvent is bound to give up all his property except that which he holds as trustee and the tools of his trade and necessary apparel and bedding of himself and family to an amount not exceeding £20. The trustee or assignee realises the estate and distributes it amongst the creditors having for this purpose large disciplinary powers over the insolvent. If the latter complies with the provisions of the law and has not in the opinion of the court been guilty of causing his own insolvency by fraud or negligence he may be granted his certificate of discharge which will free him from all claims provable in his insolvency.  Instead of adopting the process of the court the creditors may accept a proposal for liquidation by arrangement in which the estate is realised privately by the creditor's trustee or they may accept at once a payment of a composition without realising the estate or divesting the insolvent of it.    (d) Courts of Mines  "Within and for" every Mining District there is a Court of Mines which is held at such times and places as are appointed by the Governor in Council. Judges of County Courts are ex officio judges of all Courts of Mines in Victoria and as a matter of fact Courts of Mines are generally held on the same days and at the same places as County Courts. Owing to the peculiar wording of the legislation on the subject it is somewhat difficult to pronounce whether Courts of Mines are strictly local courts but there can be little doubt that a Court of Mines is primarily intended to confine itself to matters arising within its own district. It is however expressly provided that a judge of such a court may sit outside its territorial limits.  Besides its judge each Court of Mines has its clerk with assistant and deputies who issue process and keep accounts of the court fees and generally act under the direction of the judge and also a bailiff and his deputies who attend the sittings of the court and serve and execute its process. Each clerk and bailiff gives security for the performance of his duties and the functions of clerk and bailiff may not be performed by the same person. Clerks and bailiffs of Courts of Mines are protected against vexatious proceedings in the same way as registrars and bailiffs of County Courts.  Apart from the question of locality the jurisdiction of a Court of Mines extends generally to all questions and disputes of law or equity arising between miners in relation to mining on Crown Lands and particularly to questions concerning - [162]  1. Claims by virtue of miners' rights or licences to the user of Crown Land or the user or sale of water thereon.  2. Trespass to or ouster of such claims.  3. Contracts and partnerships for the conduct of mining operations on Crown Lands.  4. Mortgages or charges of mining property.  5. Boundaries of mining property.  Moreover it has jurisdiction to award compensation to owners of private property whose lands have been claimed for mining purposes.  Within the scope of its jurisdiction a Court of Mines acts both as a Court of First Instance and as a Court of Appeal from the Warden of the District. But where in an action of debt or contract which could have been brought in the Warden's Court the plaintiff does not recover more than £100 he cannot recover more than the costs which would have been payable in the Warden's Court unless the judge of the Court of Mines issues a special certificate. Subject to this limitation however a Court of Mines has when acting within its jurisdiction all the powers of the Supreme Court in analogous cases including the power to grant a warrant of possession. But the form of proceedings is similar to that in use in the County Court except that in all cases either of the parties as well as the judge may require the trial of any question of fact by a jury of six assessors.  The decree or order of a Court of Mines is enforced by execution against the property and any person failing to pay money directed by it may be summoned and examined as to his assets with liability to imprisonment if he fail to attend. Moreover the court may grant injunctions appoint managers of undertakings and provisional guardians of lunatics against whom it is desired to take proceedings. And bailiffs of Courts of Mines must execute the decisions of Wardens duly certified to them.  Finally an appeal lies from the decision of a Court of Mines to the Full Supreme Court either by way of special case stated by the judge himself or by way of substantial appeal from his decision. But unless the proceeding is an appeal from an order of the Court of Mines granting a rehearing before itself (which it is competent to make) the appellant must give security for the costs of the appeal. The Full Court may either affirm reverse or vary the decision appealed from or may direct a rehearing before the Supreme Court and in either case the result is transmitted to the clerk of the court from which the appeal is brought and is binding on it.  It is a principle clearly established that the Common Law is the inheritance of all the subjects of the realm and that upon the voluntary exodus of any body of them for the purpose of colonisation by occupation or settlement they carry that law with them whereby their rights duties and obligations are ascertained and determined. The date of occupation or foundation of the colony is all essential in determining what law is so carried and in force.  The settlers from the mother country carry with them such portion of the Common and Statute Law as is applicable to their new situation and they also enjoy the rights and immunities of British subjects.  Whilst intending colonists are migratory or in transitu they are amenable to and within the protection of the law of England; but so soon as they settle or found a colony upon the shore of any uninhabited country such of the principles of that law as are applicable to their then existing circumstances and condition e.g. the general rules of inheritance and protection from personal injuries form the nucleus of their system of jurisprudence; and such part of the Common Law imports with it such of the Statute Law as is in affirmance of it. Such law is carried ex necessitate by the colonists since there can be no lex loci at the place of settlement by which they might be controlled no existing laws to contest the superiority and no power in the occupants to establish laws independently of the mother country. to whom allegiance is still due. [249] It thereupon becomes local and peculiar to the settlement and does not retain its character of Imperial law: otherwise Imperial statutes amending or repealing any portion of it in England. would have the like effect in the colony; but they have not unless they themselves extend to the colony; and further colonial Acts may be passed repugnant to it. that is it may be amended or repealed by local authority. Where there is a lex loci e.g. in conquered or ceded colonies colonists do not carry with them the laws of England but accept and are bound by that law already existing there.  The first or original settlers are the only persons who can import so much of the English law; and the date of original settlement marks the period of time at which the law so introduced by them is to be ascertained; those who emigrate subsequently do not carry with them into the colony any law of later date but they and the descendants of the original settlers are subject to the same laws and the same rights as were originally introduced except so far as they have been altered by competent legislative authority. All colonists subsequent to them stand in the like position and those who live amongst them and become members of their community become also partakers of and subject to the same laws.  The general principle touching the introduction of English law into a settled colony is of time-honored authority and is enunciated in the opinion of Mr. West counsel to the Board of Trade in the year 1720 but is there too generally and widely stated. He says: - "The Common Law of England is the Common Law of the plantations and all statutes in affirmance of the Common Law passed in England antecedent to the settlement of a colony are in force in that colony unless there is some private Act to the contrary though no statutes made since these settlements are there in force unless the colonies are particularly mentioned. Let an Englishman go where he will he carries with him as much of law and liberty as the nature of things will bear."  The same remark applies to the determination of the Lords of the Privy Council in the year 1722 and to the dictum of Holroyd J. in Forbes v. Cochrane (2 B. & C. 463). Blackstone states the principle more correctly thus : - "It hath been held that if an uninhabited country be discovered and planted by English subjects all the English laws then in being which are the birthright of every English subject are immediately in force (Salk 411 666). But this must be understood with very many and very great restrictions. Such colonists carry with them only so much of the English law as is applicable to their own situation and the condition of an infant colony; such for instance as the general rules of inheritance and of protection from personal injuries. The artificial distinctions and refinements incident to the property of a great and commercial people the laws of police and revenue (such especially as are enforced by penalties) the mode of maintenance for the established clergy the jurisdiction of spiritual courts and a multitude of other provisions are neither necessary nor convenient for them and therefore are not in force. What shall be admitted or what rejected at what times and under what restrictions must in case of dispute be decided in the first instance by their own provincial judicature subject to the decision and control of the King-in-Council; the whole of their constitution being also liable to be new-modelled and reformed by the general superintending power of the Legislature in the mother country." [250]  Blackstone in that passage was setting right an opinion attributed to Lord Holt that all laws in force in England must apply to an infant colony of that kind. If the learned author had written at a later date he would probably have added that as the population wealth and commerce of the colony increase many rules and principles of English law which were unsuitable to its infancy will be gradually attracted to it; and that the power of remodelling its laws belongs also to the colonial legislature.  This section contains three substantive declarations: - (1) That all the laws of England then in force shall be applied so far as they can be in the administration of justice. (2) When any doubt shall arise as to whether any law applies to the colony the Governor with the advice of the Legislative Council is to declare whether it extends to the colony or not and to limit and modify such law as might seem expedient. (3) Before the Governor makes such declaration the Supreme Court shall as often as any doubt shall arise upon any proceeding before it adjudge and decide as to the applicability thereof.  Upon this section three views may be taken: - First. That it operates to make "all" laws and statutes then in force in England applicable for all purposes irrespective of their nature and including statutes which would not be held to be in force in any colony e.g. those of local policy and application. This extreme view is overruled by Lord Chancellor Chelmsford in Whicker v. Hume and by Lord Romilly M.R. in the same case [7 H.L.C. 124]. The opinion of the Chief Justice of New South Wales [Sir Francis Forbes] in 1836 was to the like effect as follows: - "This section is affirmative of the text law as it is laid down by Sir W.  Blackstone and other elementary writers and as it has been received and acted upon by the courts of England at least ever since the resolutions of the Privy Council in 1722 [2 Pr. Wms 75]. It has always been and must I contend always be a preliminary point to adjust whether the Act of Parliament intended to be applied is applicable to the condition and circumstances of the colony whether its provisions are adopted to the status personarum actually existing in the colony into which it is transplanted. To maintain a contrary doctrine - to hold that Parliament intended to enforce the whole mass of English laws the laws of an old and settled society which have grown out of occasion during a long course of years and which are become more refined and complicated than the laws of any other country in the world to apply all these laws at once to an infant community without limitation or restraint is a proposition much too inconvenient in its consequences to be perfectly just in its principle." [R. v. Maloney Legge 74 p. 77.]  Second. This the narrowest view that the section only introduced such laws as were requisite for the administration of justice. is thus stated by Chelmsford L.C. in Whicker v. Hume [7 H.L.C. 124 at 151].  "What is the Act of Geo. IV? It is an Act 'to make better provision for the administration of justice' and for that purpose a court is established. The greater part of the Act consists of regulations and rules for the government of that court". The Lord Chancellor then states the provisions of this section with reference to the introduction of the laws of England; [273] and proceeds "and then it provides for ordinances being made in doubtful cases to say whether the law shall extend to the colony or not. . . Now it would be a most extraordinary thing that this provision should apply to those general laws to which the argument of the appellant seeks to apply it (i.e. all those general laws which are in force in a settled colony according to the principles hereinbefore stated) and that the colonists of New South Wales should not at all know under what law they were living until they had brought an action and until in the course of that action they had ascertained the decision of the judges that the particular law about which they were ignorant was really applicable to the colony. I consider that there is a limitation with regard to the particular laws which are referred to by this Act of Parliament; and that it applies to laws for the administration of justice in the courts of New South Wales that if any question arises as to the laws which are applicable to the modes of proceeding in the courts there the judges are to decide upon that question incidentally arising in the course of the trial of any information or action brought before them whether the law is or is not applicable to the colony."  This expression of opinion was not necessary for the decision of the case and was not expressly concurred in by the other law lords who gave judgment in that case.  The Lord Chancellor here considers that the sole object of the statute is to make further provision for the administration of justice and that section 24 was passed to introduce the law so far only as it related to the practice of the courts but a glance at the statute shows that other matters of equal importance such as the appointment of a Council and conferring legislative authority on that body occupy fully one half in number of the sections. This 24th section is in position wholly unconnected with that part of the statute which deals with the Supreme Court and the administration of justice. The sections dealing with that latter subject are similar to and in fact re-enactments of the provisions of 4 Geo. IV c. 96 which contains no clause similar to this one. If this section related exclusively to the administration of justice in the Supreme Court it would be an additional and new provision and (like the 10th section) would have been placed in an unequivocal position.  But assuming that this narrow interpretation of the Lord Chancellor is correct the limitation of the power of the court to decide upon the applicability of any law regarding procedure in cases where doubts arose on a trial &c. would be redundant and unnecessary; for it would be the proper province of the court to decide thereon and would hardly require an express legislative enactment. It could not be supposed that it would be as proper for the Governor and Council considering their military and naval professions and vocations to pass an opinion upon a law regulating technical practice. But regarding the section as one dealing not with procedure only but with substantive law the limitation imposed upon the court to decide only when the question arose during a trial &c. was most proper; because otherwise it might well claim a general legislative authority in all cases whatsoever equal if not superior to that conferred upon the Governor and Council. Further this is a constitutional statute and from its very nature ought to receive a most liberal interpretation. '[Per Hargrave J. in R. v. Valentine 10 S.C.R. (L) at 130].  Third view which is the one now adopted. [274]  This section was in fact an addition to and improvement on the legislative powers conferred by the statute 4 Geo. IV c. 96. By it all the laws of England are declared to be in force so far as the same can be applied that is "can be reasonably applied" which in the opinion of Knight Bruce L.J. lets in all those considerations which guide in the ascertainment of laws in a settled colony Whicker v. Hume.  This question of applicability is a pure question of law McHugh v. Robertson [II V.L.R. 414].  It has been already stated that the question of the introduction of any particular portion or principle of English law must be determined by ordinance judicial determination or statute and the remarks by Lord Watson in Cooper v. Stewart [14 App. Cas. 292] have been quoted as indicating that in the case of judicial decisions principles of English law existing at the time of the foundation of the colony may at any time subsequently be held applicable where the altered conditions or growth of the colony render them suitable though they were unsuitable to its infancy. But where by statute a date has been fixed absolutely as the point of time at which such portions or principles of English law are applicable the courts are bound to take their stand at the line so drawn and at the time so fixed and to view the question of applicability and general suitableness of the law from that particular standpoint only and no subsequent expansion of the population wealth or commerce of the colony can be relied upon as making any principle of law applicable to the altered condition of the colony if it were not so at the date determined. .  The true effect of 9 Geo. IV c. 83 s. 24 is therefore that it introduced all the laws of England into New South Wales that could be reasonably applied to that colony in 1828 and not so far as they can be reasonably applied to that colony when the question arises.  The practical effect of this section was to make for such purposes the Colony of New South Wales a settled colony having its date of foundation fixed at the date of the passing of that statute. The beforestated general principles would then operate to ascertain what particular laws and statutes were in force.  PROPOSED SCHEME OF RECONSTRUCTION  I. That the present company (afterwards called the "old company") be placed in voluntary liquidation with a view to reconstruction.  II. That a new company be formed (whose name shall be the same as the existing or "old" company) with a capital of £6000000 representing 600000 shares fully paid-up to £10 each and composed of preference shares and ordinary shares as follows: - 300000 preference shares of £10 each to be subscribed for by creditors of old company and paid for out of their deposits; or by shareholders of old company and paid in cash £3000000 300000 ordinary shares of £10 each paid up to £4 per share to be allotted to shareholders in old company in exchange for their present shares £1200000 The uncalled capital amounting to £6 per share on the foregoing 300000 ordinary shares to be paid by quarterly instalments of 5s. each per share extending over six years £1800000  Total capital of new company £6000000  III. That the formation and completion of new company shall not depend upon the obtaining of the whole of above capital of £6000000.  IV. That the preference shares shall be preferential as to capital until new company shall have paid ten half-yearly dividends of 8 per cent per annum when their preference as to capital shall cease.  V. That the preference shares shall be preferential as to dividend so as to be entitled to dividend at rate of 5 per cent per annum before ordinary shares be entitled to dividend up to 5 per cent per annum after which both preference and ordinary shares shall be entitled to equal dividends.  VI. That in order to provide for the event of the requisite number of preference shares not being subscribed for by depositors and shareholders a resolution be passed and the sanction of the court thereto obtained to bind all depositors to apply for them pro rata. .  VII. That the liability of shareholders in old company for uncalled capital in old company be extinguished.   VIII. That the new company take over all the assets and liabilities of the old company.  IX. That the creditors of old company (except the Government and holders of old company's notes) accept deposit receipts of new company (for balance of amounts not absorbed in payment of preference shares) for say five years from their respective due dates for payment and carrying interest thereon at rate of 44 per cent per annum payable half-yearly; the new company to have the option however to pay off any such deposit before its maturity on giving the depositor three months' notice of its intention so to do. Payments of all deposits to be made at the places where they are now payable.  X. That the assets in globo of the old company be constituted an assets realization  account in the books of the new company and that same be credited with such items as are taken over by the new company and debited with interest half- yearly at 44 per cent per annum.  XI. That if the assets of the old company when realized do not produce sufficient to pay the liabilities of the old company paid by new company as purchase money and provide the capital for shares issued to creditors and shareholders of old company (except those paid for in cash) the dividends of ordinary shareholders or such portion thereof as the directors of new company may from time to time decide shall be retained and applied until the resulting deficiency is made up and the directors may exercise this power before realisation if a deficiency is anticipated by them should the realisation result in a surplus same to go to a new reserve fund in new company. [302]  XII. That in the before-mentioned "assets realisation account" the bank premises be treated as if realised and be taken over at actual amount now standing in the books of the old company but nothing to be charged for "goodwill" furniture &c.  LABOR CONFERENCE  We have been asked to publish the following extracts from the manifesto of the Labor Conference held in November: - It was arranged that a fighting platform of six points chosen from the old Labor platform should be adopted to make the line of demarcation between those who are struggling for the masses and those who are against them clear and distinct and recognised by all. [591] The remaining planks of the platform are in no way abandoned nor is their consideration postponed but these six are to be the rallying cries of the Labor Party during the forthcoming electoral fight. These six are:  1. Land Value Taxation - Cessation of alienation of Crown lands; tenant right to Crown lessees.  2. Mining on Private Property - No royalties to private owners nor compensation except for damage done.  3. Abolition of the Upper House - Introduction of the Referendum.  4. Local Government on a Democratic basis.  5. National Bank - to secure State control of the National currency; to transact all ordinary banking business.  6. Legislative Limitation of the Working Day to Eight hours. It was also determined by the. Conference that the Labor Party in Parliament should use every means to enforce the full citizen rights of State and municipal employees.  The next Labor Party in Parliament must be active and united. To achieve this it must have singleness of purpose and distinctness of aim. To gain these the Conference has decided (a) That a Parliamentary Labor Party to be of any weight must give a solid vote in the House upon all questions affecting the Labor Platform the fate of the Ministry or calculated to establish a monopoly or confer further privileges on the already privileged classes as they arise and (b) that accordingly every candidate who runs in the Labor interest should be required to pledge himself not only to the fighting platform but also to vote on every occasion specified in Clause A as the majority of the Parliamentary Labor Party may in caucus decide.  This means that only those men will be accepted as Labor candidates who can conscientiously pledge themselves to put the Labor platform before everything else. On all minor questions Labor candidates will be left unbound. Those Labor candidates who are elected on such conditions will form the Parliamentary Labor Party. It will be their business to offer a determined and united opposition to every kind of injurious legislation and Parliamentary trickery and to struggle for the various reforms included in the Labor platform and essential to the welfare of the whole people.  Whenever question affecting the life of a Government arises the Labor Party will vote unitedly upon it. They will be guided in such voting entirely by a consideration of how the support or the defeat of the Ministry of the day will affect the passage of the Labor platform into law. The fact that by turning one Ministry out and bringing another in they may be changing the policy of the country (from so-called Protection to so-called Freetrade or vice versa) they will disregard. [592] This is what is meant by sinking the fiscal question. They will not sink the question of revenue. They will strive to obtain revenue for State and local purposes by a tax on unimproved land values and thus bring into use the bulk of the hand now held by monopolists for speculative purposes. In all other questions of revenue the Party has a free hand to act in the best interest of the country.  Any man turning from the straight path thus laid down can find no place in the ranks or councils of the Party. He will be distinctly repudiated by all Labor bodies.  These are the programme platform and policy of the Labor Party. Electors will you support the Party? Sink all petty jealousies and unimportant issues. Vote for the Labor League candidate in your electorate so that Parliament and law may be controlled in the interests not of a class but of all.  PREFACE  Daily as the various and widespread sections of the human family are being insensibly drawn into closer touch with each other it becomes clearer that men should become co-operators - mates - instead of antagonists. "No man liveth to himself." We are all mutually dependent one upon another. Under the existing order of things however each is forced into warfare with his fellow and life is made a struggle in which the success of the winner means that those whom unjust conditions have forced into a fight are crushed back into hopeless misery. So long as man depends upon his fellow man for leave to toil so long will the lives of the great mass be one continuous struggle rendered more keen and uncertain by every scientific and mechanical appliance brought in to facilitate wealth-production. Nature's storehouse - holds ample supplies to gratify the needs of all; but so long as the few are allowed to hold possession the many must starve. The doors of the storehouse must be thrown open to all and the toll-bar of monopoly broken down ere justice can be done. Production must be for use and not for profit before robbery of labor will cease and the fear of poverty be for ever banished. With the disappearance of enforced poverty crime will gradually cease. With machinery put to its proper use that of contributing to the happiness of mankind - the increased leisure will give opportunities for the cultivation of all those higher faculties latent in man but now repressed by the pressure of a social system which makes the satisfaction of mere material wants an all-absorbing struggle.  It is evident that the changes so essential to the true progress and development of all that is best in humanity can only be effected by setting up its accomplishment as our aim and working towards its realization. Experience has taught us that no great reform can be secured otherwise than by systematic organized effort. Alone we can agitate. Organized we can compel. It is by the organization of Unions that the conditions of life for all have been prevented from becoming worse than they are. To continue however upon the lines of old Trades Unionism alone will but stave off the crash that now stares our civilization in the face. To narrow the fight to a mere question of employers and workmen is but a waste of energy and can never secure that social reconstruction which will leave one no longer dependent upon another but under which all shall have equal opportunities. [744]  Realizing then that we must attack a system and change it so that there will no longer be room for conflict between interests-no room for narrow selfishness to govern men's actions the Australian Workers' Union Starts with new aims. Realizing that all workers no matter what their occupation or sex may be have a common interest the A.W.U. aims at embracing all in its ranks. Whilst it of necessity uses that power which combination and that alone gives for protection of present material interest the A.W.U. looks to education and such social and political reform as strike at the root of the injustice from which the masses now suffer. By loyalty to principle unity of purpose aim and method alone can we succeed. Rules are but a means to secure unity of action nevertheless their observance and recognition is essential to success. We trust therefore that each member of the A.W.U. will strive to understand the high and noble aim this Union has in view and become an active unit in the great army of reform. Active as an agitator and true to his comrades as a Unionist always is and success is certain.  RULES OF THE AUSTRALIAN WORKERS' UNION  NAME  1. The name of this Society shall be the "Australian Workers'. Union" and it shall Consist of as many branches and sections as may conform to the following Rules: - Objects  2. The objects of the Union shall be as follows: -  (a) to defend the rights of the workers by combining together for mutual aid and protection.  (b) to secure and maintain a fair rate of remuneration for shearing and other classes of labor.  (c) to secure the adoption and enforcement of just and equitable agreements between employers and employees.  (d) to protect members against exorbitant charges for rations requisites or accommodation.  (e) to provide legal assistance in defence of members' rights where deemed necessary.  (f) To improve the relations between employers and employees and to settle disputes by means of conciliation and arbitration.  (g) To establish a fund for relief of members in case of accident. [745]  (h) to provide employment for members and other Unionists by establishing co-operative enterprises and works of various kinds.  (i) to secure such political reform as will give justice to the workers by assisting to return men to Parliament pledged to legislate in that direction.  (j) to establish and maintain Labor journals.  (k) to assist kindred organizations in upholding the rights and privileges of workers and generally to assist in the emancipation of Labor.  (1) to provide funds for the accomplishment of these objects by contributions levies fines donations &c. from members and others.  MANAGEMENT  4. The management of the affairs of the A.W.U. as a whole shall be vested in the Executive officers who are the President two Vice-Presidents Treasurer and General Secretary who shall act in concert with one representative from each branch of the A.W.U. and shall form the Executive Council any five of whom shall form a quorum. Such Council shall meet to transact the business of the Union when required. Each officer shall remain in office until the ensuing annual election unless he misconducts himself or becomes unfinancial. In either of such cases he shall cease to be an officer of the Union and the officer next in rank shall take his place. The lowest vacancy thus caused shall be filled at the next ensuing meeting of the Executive Council. No officer shall be compelled to fill any vacancy. The Executive officers shall have power to call a Council meeting at any time.  5. Each recognized local branch shall elect and pay its own council representative but under no circumstances shall a local branch be allowed to send more than one representative to the council meeting. Each branch shall elect its representative to Executive Council when electing its officers and delegates.  6. Two members shall be elected from the Council who together with the President Vice-Presidents Secretary and Treasurer shall form an Executive Committee which shall act in all cases of emergency; but before so acting the committee shall make known to all members of the Executive Council either by circular from the President or if necessary by committee meeting the particulars of such emergent cases as' may arise between the regular meeting of the council and the Annual Conference. The said committee if called upon to be paid out of the General Fund of the A.W.U. [746]  7. The highest deliberative authority of the Union is the Conference meeting which shall be held annually in the month of February to deal with all proposals affecting the General Rules and general interests of the Union that may be laid before it. The Conference shall be constituted of representatives from the various local branches belonging to the A.W.U. who shall be duly elected and paid by their respective branches. The names and addresses of the representatives to be forwarded to the Secretary of the A.W.U. at least 14 days previous to the Conference taking place. Each local branch shall be allowed to send representatives on the following scale: - 1 to 1000 Members - One Representative.  Over 1000 Members - Two Representatives.  No branch to be allowed to send more than two representatives. The representation at Conference shall be according to the number financial on the branch books for the year in which Conference is held. The Conference shall be subject to removal to such places as the majority of representatives assembled at such Conference may deem suitable.  8. The President Vice-Presidents Secretary Treasurer or any of them shall not be allowed to represent any local branch as delegates to Conference Council or Committee Meetings so long as they hold office but at all such meetings shall be allowed a vote.  9. The Council and Committee meetings shall be held in the most central places which shall be determined by the officers.  ALL IMPORTANT QUESTIONS to BE DECIDED BY PLEBISCITE  22. All important questions affecting the general interests of the Union shall be decided by a plebiscite of the whole of the members. The Executive Council to decide what are important questions. In regard to the method of taking plebiscites the Rule dealing with the method of electing officers and delegates shall be taken as a guide. In every case the arrangements for the taking of the plebiscite shall be such as to secure as large a vote as circumstances will possibly admit.  23. All important questions affecting the interests of any particular branch shall be decided by plebiscite of the members of such branch - the Branch General Committee to decide what are important questions. The arrangements as to manner etc. of taking such plebiscite shall be decided upon by the General Committee of the branch. The arrangements shall be such as to secure as large a vote as circumstances will permit.  STRIKES  24. No general strike of the members of the A.W.U. shall be entered upon until the whole question in dispute has been submitted to a plebiscite of the whole membership of the Union and a majority of those voting decide in favor of such strike - except in the case of EXTREME emergency. [747] In such case the Executive Council of the Union shall have power to deal with the matter; but no serious action shall be taken unless two-thirds at least of the Council approve of same.  BRANCHES to HAVE CONTROL OF AFFAIRS IN THEIR OWN DISTRICT  25. Each branch shall have control of affairs in its own district subject to general rules and resolutions of Conference and other branches shall not interfere in any way. Any Secretary Agent or Shed Representative of a branch interfering with the collecting of Union monies in another branch without the consent of the Secretary of such branch shall be fined Five Pounds for each offence.  MANUAL: SHEARERS' DISTURBANCES 1894  Workmen whether unionist or non-unionist should in all cases be protected by officers of the law from anything approaching violence or forcible obstruction.  The present strike is connected with a state of things not necessarily unlawful in itself and not necessarily tending to breaches of the peace or specific offences against persons or property but in fact it has this tendency and is accompanied by incidents of this kind.  To secure to every man the liberty which is dear to him to provide against the consequences of the present strike before more serious crimes take place and to bring to justice all those who have already offended against the criminal law this manual is prepared for general instruction. Justices of the Peace Police special constables and other officers of the law should carefully study the information given them with a view to repressing crime with firmness and discretion.  The primary offences embrace:  (1) Sureties of the Peace [248]  (2) Sureties for good behaviour  (3) Intimidation  (4) Unlawful assembly  (5) Going armed so as to cause fear.  (1) Sureties of the Peace  If any person complains in writing that he is in fear of some present or future danger to himself or to his property and that the public peace is likely to be endangered any Justice has a discretion and duty to require sureties and may issue a Warrant in the first instance and unless satisfactory sureties are forthcoming may commit to gaol for any period not exceeding six months.  (3) Intimidation  This is at present the most common offence for which the measure of punishment is imprisonment with hard labour not exceeding three months. The law justifies a reasonable degree of moral persuasion or pressure and therefore would not punish a man who did not exceed the bounds of information and peaceable conversation but in its desire to protect persons and property of and to secure liberty to those who dissent even from a majority of their fellow workers it does not permit any person to use or threaten to use violence to another or to injure his property. It is the practice for numbers of persons to specially attend at roll calls having in some instances recently ridden from other sheds and either to beset the place of operations in a threatening manner or to use such language as coupled with the number of the picketing party is calculated to deter persons desirous of working from commencing operations. In such cases all concerned are guilty of intimidation and it would be right to then and there arrest the ringleaders in this collective and organized intimidation and convey them to the nearest lockup.  (4) Unlawful assembly  The definition of this offence is:  If 3 or more persons assemble together (1) with intent to commit a crime by open force or (2) with intent to carry out any common purpose lawful or unlawful in such a manner as to give firm and courageous persons in the neighbourhood reasonable ground to apprehend a breach of the peace in consequence of it this constitutes an unlawful assembly. Instead of the shearers and others on strike going into camp and remaining peacefully there it is the practice on this occasion for men to congregate together in a number of camps with the object of sallying forth some to intimidate at the various roll calls others to picket the roads and avenues to employment and more to commit felonies of a more or less serious character.  These assemblies sometimes develop into Riots. ... If any Justice finds 12 or more persons assembled together and acting in a riotous or tumultuous manner he should read the [riot] proclamation. ... and if further tumult continues should at once direct the Police to arrest the ringleaders. In case the circumstances call for it the Police will then act as an armed body and if called upon by the Justice it is their duty to obey. ... If rioters remain for one hour after the proclamation has been read they then become felons and should be dealt with as such.  In all the above offences constables should in endeavouring to arrest avoid as much as possible the use of firearms or other weapons but if in using the proper means for arresting or imprisoning they are resisted they may repel force by force and if death ensues in the struggle will be held harmless. [249]  So far these observations have only dealt with what may be considered primary offences or misdemeanours. It is a matter of common knowledge that felonies have followed on the above offences such as  (1) Assault and battery  (2) Malicious injuries to property  (3) Sheep and cattle stealing  (4) Unlawfully wounding  (5) Shooting with intent  (6) Arson of buildings or grass  (7) Murder  In these cases the Police have greater powers and may arrest without warrant. .. . In these cases they are armed to enable them successfully to overcome opposition to lawful arrests and to protect themselves against armed interference. It is their duty to arrest the felon as soon as they see him and if they cannot otherwise or secure him they must perform this duty even though they kill him and the law will protect them.  15. (1) In order to determine the lowest price or rate which may be paid to any person for wholly or partly preparing or manufacturing either inside or outside a factory or work-room any particular articles of clothing or wearing apparel or furniture or for bread making or baking the Governor in Council may if he think fit from time to time appoint a special Board consisting of not less than four or more than ten members elected as may be prescribed and a chairman and may at any time remove any member of the special Board and may appoint any person so elected to fill any vacancy occurring in such special Board in the Same way as on the original appointment. In fixing such lowest price or rate the special Board shall take into consideration the nature kind and' class of the work and the mode and manner in which the work is to be done and any matter which may from time to time be prescribed.  (2) Of such members one-half shall be appointed as representatives of occupiers of factories or work-rooms in which such articles are prepared or manufactured and one-half as representatives of persons employed in wholly or partly preparing or manufacturing such articles. Such members shall within fourteen days after their appointment nominate in writing some person (not being one of such members) to be the chairman of such special Board and such person shall be appointed by the Governor in Council to such office. [620] In the event of the Minister riot receiving such nomination within fourteen days after the appointment of the said members then the Governor in Council may appoint the chairman on the recommendation of the Minister.  (3) All powers of any special Board may be exercised by a majority of the members thereof.  (4) So far as regards any articles in respect to which any special Board is appointed every such special Board shall determine the lowest price or rate of payment payable to any person for wholly or partly preparing or manufacturing any such articles specified by such special Board; and there shall be kept printed painted or affixed in legible Roman characters in some conspicuous place at or near the entrance of each and every factory or work-room to which the determination of such special Board applies in such a position as to be easily read by the persons employed therein a true copy of the determination of the special Board as to such lowest prices or rates or payment. A true copy of such determination shall also be given to every person who at any time after such determination is in force prepares or manufactures any such articles outside a factory or work-room by the person who directly or indirectly issues or gives out or authorizes or permits to be issued or given out any material for the purpose of being prepared or manufactured outside a factory or work-room.  (5) Such price or rate of payment shall in the case of work to be done outside a factory or work-room be fixed at a piece-work price or rate only; but in the case of work done within any factory or work-room it may be fixed at a piece-work price or rate or a wages price or rate or both as the special Board thinks fit. Provided that the Board shall on request of any occupier of a factory or workroom fix a wages rate for any work done by persons operating at a machine used in such factory or work-room.  (6) Any such price or rate as so determined by any special Board shall from such date not being within fourteen days of such determination as shall be fixed by such special Board be and remain in force until altered by the determination of any special Board appointed to revise or consider such price or rate of payment.  (7) When determining any price or rate of payment pursuant to this section every special Board shall also determine the number or proportionate number of apprentices and improvers under the age of eighteen years who may be employed within any factory or workroom and the lowest price or rate of pay payable to such apprentices or improvers when wholly or partly preparing or manufacturing any articles as to which any special Board has made a determination under this section.  (8) Where a price or rate of payment for wholly or partly preparing or manufacturing any articles as aforesaid has been determined by a special Board and is in force then any person who either directly or indirectly or under any pretence or device emplys or authorizes to be employed any person apprentice or improver in so preparing or manufacturing any such articles at a lower price or rate of wages or piece-work (as the case may be) than the price or rate so determined or who employs any apprentices or improvers in excess of the number or proportionate number as determined pursuant to this section or who is guilty of a contravention of any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall on conviction be liable to a penalty for the first offence of not more than Ten pounds and for the second offence of not less than Five pounds nor more than Twenty-five pounds and for a third or any subsequent offence of not less than Fifty pounds nor more than One hundred pounds; and the registration of the factory or work-room of any person who is convicted under this section of a third offence shall without further or other authority than this Act be forthwith cancelled by the Chief Inspector. [621]  (9) In this section the expression "clothing or wearing apparel" includes boots and shoes.  (10) The determination of any special Board shall be signed by the chairman thereof and published in the Government Gazette and shall apply to every city and town and also to any borough or shire or part of a shire to which the determination may be expressly applied by the Governor in Council by a notification published in the Government Gazelle.  (11) In the event of any failure or neglect to elect a sufficient number of persons to be appointed as members of any special Board the Governor in Council may appoint a sufficient number of persons as representatives of occupiers of factories or work-rooms or of persons employed as the case may require and the persons so appointed shall for all purposes be deemed to have been elected by such occupiers or persons employed (as the case may be) and any reference to an elected member or person shall equally apply to any member or person appointed as aforesaid.  (12) The production before any court judge or justices of a copy of the Government Gazelle containing the determination of any special Board shall be evidence until the contrary be proved of the due making and existence of such determination and of the due appointment of such Board and of all preliminary steps necessary to the making of such determination.  (16) No person whosoever unless in receipt of a weekly wage of at least Two shillings and sixpence shall be employed in any factory or work-room.  8. The Governor in Council is hereby empowered from time to time to appoint courts to be held before a commissioner at such places and times as the Governor in Council thinks fit for the recovery of debts and demands under this Act to such an amount not exceeding fifty pounds as the Governor in Council thinks fit; and also for hearing and determining actions of ejectment in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  9. Every court held under this Act before a commissioner shall be called a Court of Requests.  10. The Governor in Council is hereby empowered from time to time to appoint as many fit persons as are needed to be commissioners of such courts; and from time to time to remove any such commissioner; and the same person may be appointed commissioner of two or more such courts.  11. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time as occasion may in his opinion require to nominate and appoint a fit person as a substitute to do and execute the duty of any commissioner under this Act for such time as the Governor may deem necessary; and such substitute shall during the continuance of his appointment and notwithstanding the death of the commissioner for whom he was appointed substitute have all the powers and jurisdiction of the commissioner for whom he is appointed substitute.  12. The Governor in Council is also hereby empowered to appoint any Court of General Sessions of the Peace now or hereafter established to be a court for the recovery of debts and demands under this Act to such an amount not exceeding fifty pounds as the Governor in Council thinks fit and for hearing and determining actions of ejectment in accordance with the provisions of this Act; and upon the publication of any such appointment in the Gazette the Court of General Sessions so appointed shall he held as a court for the recovery of such debts and demands and for hearing and determining actions of ejectment in accordance with the provisions of this Act and for that purpose shall have the jurisdiction of and be deemed to be a court held under this Act. [130]  13. The Governor in Council may from time to time by notice published in the Gazette increase the amount to which the jurisdiction of any Court of Requests or any Court of General Sessions of the Peace appointed as a court under this Act for the purposes aforesaid may have been limited to an amount not exceeding fifty pounds or if held before a commissioner who is a practitioner to an amount not exceeding one hundred pounds and may reduce the amount to which the jurisdiction of any such court may extend to any sum not less than ten pounds.  14. Every court held under this Act shall be a Court of Record.  15. The Governor in Council is hereby empowered from time to time to alter the time and place of holding any Court of Requests or any Court of General Sessions of the Peace appointed as a court under this Act for the purposes aforesaid and to discontinue the holding of any such court.  16. Upon the discontinuance by the Governor in Council of any Court of Requests or any Court of General Sessions of the Peace appointed as a court under this Act for the purposes aforesaid any case or proceeding depending or judgment recovered in such court may be continued or enforced in and by the court having competent jurisdiction held under this Act which is nearest to the place where the court so discontinued was held.  17. Sittings of the Supreme Court shall be held at such times and places as the Governor in Council may from time to time appoint before a judge of such court for hearing and determining actions and proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this Act for the recovery of debts and demands to an amount exceeding ten pounds and not exceeding one hundred pounds and for hearing and determining actions of ejectment in accordance with the provisions of this Act; and sittings of the Supreme Court shall be held at Hobart and Launceston respectively for the purposes aforesaid not less than eight times in every year.  Whenever sittings of the Supreme Court under this Act shall be discontinued at any place any case or proceeding depending or any judgment recovered in that court at such place under this Act may be continued and enforced in and by the court having competent jurisdiction held under this Act nearest to such place as aforesaid.  From His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales.  Government House Sydney Nov. 4th 1896.   Sir - I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of October 31st informing me that it is intended to hold a convention of the people at Bathurst this month for the purpose of discussing "the principles and details of Federation."  You ask me for an expression of opinion and in reply I have no hesitation in saying that the promoters of the Bathurst Convention are doing a loyal work in their endeavour to impress the public mind with true conceptions of the magnitude of the problems involved in the creation of a federal authority and of the great importance of defining clearly at the outset the division to be made between the sovereign powers to be surrendered to the federal authority and those to be retained by the federating States.  I assume that there is a general agreement that for purposes of foreign policy internal commerce and defence the federal is the only form of government which will provide Australia with efficient legislative and executive authorities so that the question for solution is whether and by what methods Australia can be converted into one powerful State without any undue sacrifice of the autonomy of the colonies as they at present exist. My belief is that this problem is one which is capable of satisfactory settlement and that to this end the Convention to be held at Bathurst will be doing work of inestimable value in promoting discussion on the question of Federation.  The present is a time of peace and so it is the accepted time. The work can be done now with careful thought and by prudent action. If however the present opportunity is neglected it may be that the call for united action will come upon the country in a time of stress and danger when the want of a Federal Executive will paralyse the best efforts of the people in their self-defence.   I am Sir  Your obedient Servant  HAMPDEN.  Government House Sydney Nov. 27th 1896.  Sir   I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 23rd inst. enclosing an address to myself from the People's Federal Convention at Bathurst. I have further to request you to convey my thanks to Dr. Machattie the President as the official representative of the Convention for the above mentioned Address and for the expressions of loyalty to the person and throne of Her Majesty contained in it. I hope and believe that the work that has been done by the Convention will help to throw light on some of the difficult problems that must be solved before the Federation of the Australian colonies can be brought to a successful issue.  I have the honour to be Sir  Your most obedient Servant  HAMPDEN.  (The Rev. Arthur J. Webb Secretary to the People's Federal Convention Bathurst.)  From His Excellency the Governor of Victoria.  Melbourne 17th November 1896.   Dear Dr. Machattie -   A press of engagements has prevented me from sending an early reply to the letter which you addressed to me as President of the Bathurst Federation League.  I have much pleasure in assuring you that I take the deepest interest in the cause of Australian Federation. The recent course of foreign affairs should impress all thinking men with the necessity of Federation for the purposes of defence. By concerted action defensive preparation will be at once more efficient and less costly. There are no difficulties in the way of common action.   Already Ministers are meeting for consultation. I regard these meetings as the prelude to more formal deliberations and more precise and positive engagements for mutual help when danger threatens.  There are many other purposes for which Federation is desirable and in relation to which there are no difficulties. Such are the postal service the opening up of markets the coinage of money the admission of aliens and other similar questions.  A customs union is most desirable but these colonies must first come to some common accord on the question of tariffs. Let us confidently hope that sooner or later a compromise will be found.   The way to a wise conclusion lies not in heated argument but in close [110] observation of practical results elsewhere. In the present stage it is perhaps fortunate that neighbouring colonies under conditions very similar to those which obtain in Victoria as to climate products and cost of labour are making trial of opposing fiscal systems. They will give in the course of time an object lesson which will greatly help to a sound conclusion as to what is best for the local and the general interest.  The Federation which was proposed at the last Convention at Sydney embraced other matters of difficulty. It was proposed to provide the Federal Government with a revenue by the surrender of the customs duties. The Federal expenditure at the outset is estimated by Sir Samuel Griffith at £250000. The assigned revenues would aggregate £9000000. It was proposed to repay the surplus revenue to the States in which it was raised. All experience shows how hard it is to resist the temptation to bring expenditure to the level of income.  Sir Samuel Griffith suggests a further investigation of this part of the subject. That will probably be the view of the Convention when it meets. Investigation involves delay. In the interval immediate action should be taken on such matters as are ripe.   Federation for defence is first in order of importance. It is admitted on all hands to be within the range of practical politics.  On one other subject of difficulty I venture to throw out a suggestion. I refer to the selection of a Federal capital. It is not possible that a solution may be found by the assembling of the Federal Parliament from year to year in the capitals of each of the Federal States. The first meeting would be held in the capital of the parent colony; the succeeding meetings would be held in other colonies in the order in which they were severally erected into independent colonies.  It is evident that the task of federating Australia is not unattended with difficulties. It must be admitted that we have no precedent in history for a federation under no pressure from without between States so widely separated as are the Australian colonies by distance and so far advanced in independent local self-government. On the other hand there are great advantages to be gained. Local jealousies will be removed. The dignity of Australian citizenship will be raised. The strength which consists in union will be immeasurably greater. The influence of Australia at the heart of the Empire and throughout the world will be more felt when its people speak not as members of small rival States but with one clear voice.  With the most sincere wishes for a most successful meeting at Bathurst  I have the honour to be  Yours most obediently  Brassey  Government House  Melbourne Dec. 8th 1896.  Dear Sir   I am desired by His Excellency Lord Brassey to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28rd and to ask you to convey his thanks to the members of the People's Federal Convention for the Address which they have so kindly forwarded to him. His Excellency is much gratified to hear that the letter which he addressed to the Convention was so much appreciated.  I have the honour to be  Your obedient Servant  RICHARD NEVILL   From His Excellency The Governor of Western Australia.  Government House  Sydney Nov. 14th 1896.  Dear Sir   Your letter and enclosures of the 31st ultimo relating to the Bathurst Convention have been forwarded to me during my absence from Perth and I think your attention may have been drawn to some remarks on the subject of Federation made by me at the Mayoral banquet at Melbourne on the 9th inst.  If this is so I need only now add that the published report of my speech is substantially correct and that you are at liberty to accept it as the expression of my views on this important question.   There is but one way of bringing home to the people the advantages of Federation viz. by the holding of meetings or Conventions such as you have in prospect by the formation of branch associations in every important district and by the dissemination of sound and wholesome literature on this subject.  It is only thus that a fatal and demoralising apathy can be made to give way to the enthusiasm which will confer that mandate upon the respective Colonial Governments which alone they wait for and which when presented by the popular voice and vote it will be neither their interest nor desire to disregard.   I am yours   faithfully  GERARD SMITH.  T. A. Machattie Esq. M.B. etc.  December 23rd 1896.  Dear Sir - My absence from the colony has alone been the cause of my failing sooner to acknowledge the receipt of the Address transmitted by you presented to me by the People's Federal Convention at Bathurst.  [112] You will be aware from my letter that my sympathies have been in accord with the object the Convention had in view.  I have therefore only to add the expression of my hope that the proceedings of the Convention from an educational standpoint may have a marked effect in the direction of Federation and that such a result would be more effectually secured by publishing for information the proceedings of the Convention and the more important speeches delivered thereat.  I am yours very faithfully  GERARD SMITH.  The Secretary Bathurst Convention.  From His Excellency the Governor of Queensland.  Government House Brisbane Nov. 10th 1896.  Sir -   I am much obliged for your letter and I shall be happy if by sending you these few lines I am able to give encouragement to the discussion as to the best means of bringing about a Federal Union of the Australian Colonies and one that is likely to be acceptable to the great majority of the people.  I regret I am unable to find the papers you state you were good enough to send me by which I should have learnt in greater detail as to your immediate objects and proposed procedure.  I need not dwell on the benefits likely to arise from Federation but I strongly feel that even if there is not at the present moment a sufficiently strong feeling for the construction of the complete machinery of a Federal Government yet there is already in existence a framework which clothed with the necessary authority might be enabled to deal with matters of common interest to the different colonies. I refer to such subjects as defence coast-lights and others which duly enumerated might be more advantageously worked by a central system.  There being no outside pressure to render Federation immediately essential it would seem to be safer to evolve a Federal Constitution by a gradual process than to attempt to create one by a single act.  Whatever course may find favour at your gathering every welcome ought to be extended to those who seek to remove what may be termed unnatural and artificial barriers to the trade intercourse and general development of Australia.  The history of Great Britain and the marvellous expansion of the greatness and wealth of our kinsmen in the United States are examples of what a liberal and freedom loving policy can effect.  Hoping that the meeting of the Bathurst Federation Convention may bear good fruit in the future   I am Sir your obedient Servant  LAMINGTON.  The President Bathurst Federation League.  Government House  Brisbane Nov. 30th 1896.  Sir - I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 23rd inst. enclosing me an Address for which I beg to thank the President and members of the Convention.  I am glad to know the deliberations of the meeting were carried on with such thorough purpose.  I shall be glad to see the breaking down of those artificial barriers which are so prejudicial to the growth and development of the Australian colonies.  I remain dear Sir yours truly  LAMINGTON.  The Rev. Arthur J. Webb Secretary People's Federal Convention.  From His Excellency the Governor of South Australia.  Government House  Adelaide 5th Nov. 1896.  Dear Sir -   I am directed by His Excellency Sir T. Fowell Buxton to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 31st October and to express a hope that the efforts of the Bathurst Federation League at the Convention to be held at Bathurst this month for the purpose of discussing the principles and details of Federalism may tend to further and promote the cause of the Federal Union of these colonies.  I am your's faithfully  E. W. WALLINGTON  Private Secretary.  Thos. A. Machattie Esq.  From His Excellency the Governor of Tasmania.  Government House  Hobart Tasmania  16th Nov. 1896.  Sir   I am desired by His Excellency Viscount Gormanston to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 31st ultimo inviting the expression of his sentiments in regard to the People's Federal Convention to be held this month at Bathurst. Whilst viewing with satisfaction and sympathy any scheme having for its object the promotion of the Federation of the Australian colonies His Excellency desires me to say that he must leave any further expression of the views entertained by this colony to the delegates who he understands have been invited to represent Tasmania at the forthcoming Convention.  I have the honor to be Sir  Your most obedient Servant  J. F. ALEXANDER RAWLINSON  Thos. A. Machattie President Bathurst Federation League.  Government House  Hobart Tasmania 4th December 1896.  Sir  I am desired by His Excellency Viscount Gormanston to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated 23rd November enclosing an Address presented by the People's Federal Convention for which His Excellency has directed me to convey through you the expression of his sincere thanks.  I am Sir  Your obedient Servant  J. F. ALEX. RAWLINSON.  The Rev. Arthur J. Webb Secretary People's Federal Convention Bathurst.  From Sir John Madden Chief Justice Victoria.  Supreme Court Victoria  5th November 1896.  Thos. A. Machattie Esq.  Dear Sir   I received your kind letter of date October intimating to me the intention to hold at Bathurst a Convention of the people with a view to advance the achievement of the Federation of the Australian colonies and expressing the belief that if I should deem it proper to express my concurrence in and sympathy with the movement my doing so would be of some assistance to it. I cannot but feel much honoured that you and those associated with you should think that my opinion could thus weigh with your people and I thank you for the expression of that belief.  I have no difficulty in complying with your request both because I have the to me very gratifying honour to hold the office of President of the Federation League of Victoria and because in my opinion the Federation of these colonies is the greatest consummation which patriotic feeling can dictate or statesmanship contrive for the material interests of our Australian people and for the elevation and advancement of them. It is moreover a matter so broad and obvious in its utility as to be practically above the mere contests of partisan politics and therefore one can be sure that the judicial office will not be hurt by even much earnestness in supporting this great movement.  For these reasons I do most heartily commend the well conceived effort which your people are making to aid it because when the body of the people see its undoubted value it will be as good as accomplished. [115] Meanwhile and until they do so the efforts of the rest cannot effect much.   I wish your Convention every success and if anything which I could say will aid it count me whole-souled and unreservedly with you.   I have the honour to be dear Sir   JOHN MADDEN C.J. Victoria.   Sir Samuel Griffith C.J. Queensland.  Judge's Chambers  Brisbane Oct. 21st 1896.  Sir -   I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of Oct. 3rd inviting me to attend the proposed People's Federal Convention to be held at Bathurst on Nov. 16th as the guest of the Committee and to take part in the proceedings of the Convention.  It affords me much regret to be unable to accept the invitation which I regard as a very great honour but although I cannot be personally present I shall hope to be favoured with detailed reports of the proceedings which I shall watch with the greatest interest.  I am very glad to observe that there is every prospect of the Convention being largely attended and by persons who take an enthusiastic and intelligent interest in the matters of Federation.  I am satisfied that as soon as the people of Australia have a clear and intelligent grasp of the subject the establishment of a Federal Government will not long be delayed and I look to the coming Convention to do good work in the direction of educating them to this end.  I have the honour to be Sir Your most obedient Servant  S. W. GRIFFITH.  T. A. Machattie Esq. M.B. President People's Federal Convention.  Judge's Chambers  Brisbane Nov. 30th 1896.  Sir -   I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of 22nd October forwarding a confidential memorandum with respect to the Bathurst Federation movement which in consequence of my absence in New Guinea I have only just received. I have noticed with great pleasure the success of the late Convention which so far as I have been able to form an opinion is likely to prove a valuable aid to the cause of Australian Federation.  May I be allowed to offer my congratulations to the Bathurst League upon the success that has attended their efforts.  I am Sir your obedient Servant  S. W. GRIFFITH.  W. Astley Esq. Corresponding Secretary. [116]   Mr. Chief Justice Way of South Australia also wrote regretting exceedingly his inability to be present at the Convention which he looked upon as a gathering of national importance. It could not fail to attract public attention throughout Australia to the Federal question and to throw light upon the aspects of it which require to be dealt with.   Mr. Justice Stephen.  Judge's Chambers  Supreme Court Sydney  6th Nov. 1896.  Sir -   I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 26th ultimo inviting the expression of my interest in the undertaking of the Bathurst Federation League in advancement of the cause of Federation. This at your request I most readily give.  I should be sorry by losing the opportunity thus given me to appear indifferent to a movement which should be regarded with the highest interest by every member of the community. I cannot assume as you would appear to do that any such expression can have influence upon the actions and opinions of others. But if each unit in the community holds and expresses the view that I myself hold then the desired end is accomplished so that I thus do my part.  May I mention that years ago I presided at a banquet given on its return to one of the first united cricketing teams that visited England. It fell to my lot to propose the toast of the evening. My speech was reported almost verbatim except the concluding sentence expressing the hope that this union of the colonies was but a foretaste and emblem of a higher union in the future. Federation was not then "in the air." But I have never since ceased to watch with interest and hope every step that has been taken to promote the union of the colonies into a nation. I long for a national sentiment to supersede a provincial one that the inhabitants of each colony may see "Advance Australia" in its widest sense.  Apart from the material advantages of union it must tend to the elevation of the people into a higher place of patriotism and conception of their importance and responsibilities. The term "colony" may be abolished but still as a nation we may remain as I trust we shall at least for many years a part and parcel of and one in interest with the British Empire.   I have the honour to be Your obedient Servant   M. H. STEPHEN. Dr. Machattie President.   Mr. Justice Owen N.S.W.  6th November 1896.  Dear Sir -   I regret that my judicial duties will not enable me to accept your very courteous invitation to take part in the People's Federal Convention at Bathurst. The cause is one which has my warmest sympathy and as it is apart from and above all party politics I see no reason why a Judge should not assist in the movement.  I trust your efforts may be crowned with success for it appears to me that Federation must come and the longer it is delayed the greater the difficulties will be in carrying it out.  The troubled state of affairs in Europe and the Far East and England's apparent isolation seem to point to the necessity for Australia to present a united front to any dangers that may arise.  Yours faithfully   Wm. OWEN.  T. A. Machattie Esq. President Bathurst Federation League.  Judge's Chambers  Supreme Court Sydney  November 16th 1896.  Sir - I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter in which you state that the Bathurst Federation League contemplate holding a Convention for the purpose of discussing the principle of Federation and regret that owing to stress of work my reply has been somewhat delayed. I wish to express my entire sympathy with the objects which your League has in view and shall be glad to do anything in my power to promote so worthy a cause. I shall watch with much interest the progress of the Convention at Bathurst and hope that some means may ultimately be devised for securing the desired end as to the expediency of which I think all parties are agreed however much they may differ as to the details of the scheme to be adopted. The colonies have now reached a stage of development which renders the adoption of some form of Federal Government essential to their true progress and I trust that mere provincialism will not prevent a union from which I think all classes in the community would derive benefit.  I have the honour to be Sir  Your obedient Servant  G. B. Simpson J.  T. A. Machattie Esq. President Bathurst Federation League.  Hr. Justice Holroyd Victoria.  East St. Kilda  Nov. 10th 1896.  Sir -   I have to thank you for your letter of 26th of October which however reached me only a few days ago notifying that a Convention will be held during this month at Bathurst under the auspices of the Federation League of that city for the purpose of discussing the principles and details of Federalism as an aid to the education of the people. Although unable to take part in your proceedings I can assure you that your undertaking has my hearty sympathy.  Towards establishing a permanent basis of union between the several Australasian colonies nothing it seems to me could more effectively conduce than knowledge generally diffused concerning the experiences of other and especially kindred nations which have already adopted a Federal system. Yet how few persons comparatively have made themselves intimately acquainted with the constitution of the United States and its practical working or with the history even of the Dominion of Canada. The bulk of the population whose intelligent adherence should be the mainstay of Australian Union are I fear very ill-informed on such subjects. I shall rejoice if as an outcome of your discussions a series of pamphlets written by impartial and competent students were extensively circulated throughout the colonies explaining and comparing the two most modern systems of Federation and pointing out the lessons which their history affords for us. Facts are what the people want; facts over which they can think without any political prejudice before they are called upon to act.   I have the honor to remain Sir Your very obedient Servant   E. D. HOLROYD.   Thos. A. Machattie Esq. President Bathurst Federation League.  The Speaker N.S.W. Parliament.  (TELEGRAM.)  Dr. Machattie. Nov. 19 1896.  I am very sorry circumstances which were unforeseen up to yesterday prevent me from being present. I am watching with great interest the work of the Convention.  J. P. ABBOTT.   Mr. J. H. Symon Q.C.  Selbourne Chambers  Pirie Street Adelaide  October 23rd 1896.  Sir -   I have the honor to acknowledge the courteous invitation of the Bathurst Federation League to be present at the People's Federal Convention to be held in your city on the 16th November next and to be the guest of the Committee of your League whilst there and I beg that you will convey to your League my grateful appreciation of the honor done me and my deep regret that I am unable to accept the invitation.  May I however be allowed to add my warmest wishes for the success of the gathering and my earnest hope that not only as an educational but also as a stimulating force it may more than satisfy the anticipation of the League under whose auspices it has been organised. The Federal question must be kept in the public eye as well as the public mind. Demonstrations such as yours will do both. Agitation is as needed for Federation as for any other people's question. It is in that respect and within that limit that your gathering will attract universal attention and be watched with keen and widespread interest. [120] And I trust when it disperses it will leave such a record of judicious and salutary work as may induce wise and earnest Federalists elsewhere to consider whether the footsteps of Bathurst may not be followed with advantage. Permit me to remain Very faithfully yours  J. H. SYMON  President of the Federation League of South Australia.  P.S. - May I say that if later on I find my engagements for November will enable me to be present at your Conference I shall not hesitate to take the liberty still regarding your invitation as open to me.  The Organising Secretary People's Federal Convention Bathurst N.S.W.  The Primate.  Bishopscourt Sydney 7th November 1896.  Dear Sir -   I regret to say that official engagements extending over the whole of the week after next prevent me from having the pleasure of accepting your invitation to be present at the People's Federal Convention at Bathurst.  I trust that the Convention may prove to be (as you hope) of practical and historic importance and a step zealously and intelligently taken on the path towards those social and political advantages which Federal Government is likely to secure.  Yours faithfully  WM. S. SYDNEY.  The President  Bathurst Federation League.  Bishop of Tasmania.  Bishopscourt Hobart October 19th 1896.  My Dear Sir -   I wish your Convention every success but I fear I have no time or opportunity to give you any aid except good wishes.  Yours faithfully  H. H. TASMANIA.  Dr. Machattie M.B.  The Congregational Union.  Congregational Union Office  264 Pitt Street Sydney 13th November 1896.  The President People's Federal Convention.  Dear Sir -   Your letter was placed before the meeting of our Union and we are instructed to thank you for the courtesy which dictated it.  The members of our churches will hail with satisfaction your effort to bring together the people of these colonies and to strengthen the bonds which already unite us in heart.  We pray that the King of Kings will guide your deliberations for the good of the Australasian peoples.  We are dear Sir  Yours faithfully  E. T. DUNSTAW Chairman.  JAMES BUCHAN Secretary.   Mr. B. R. Wise.  Wigram Chambers Sydney  November 19th 1896.  Dear Dr. Machattie -   I very much regret that a professional engagement at Newcastle will prevent me attending the Federal Convention; but I shall none the less watch its proceedings with deep interest. You are to be congratulated upon having given fresh vitality to a great movement and no carping demand for "practical results" can weaken the good effect which your Convention has already produced by the proof which it affords that it is not the people of Australia who are indifferent about Federation but the politicians. Any appearance there may be of popular indifference has always seemed to me to be due to a recognition of the fact that the next step forward must be taken by those who are in authority rather than to any failure to appreciate the magnitude and urgency of the question of national unity. The Bathurst Convention must remove the doubts of the timid and compel the secret enemies of union to declare themselves. Nothing I believe would do more to hasten Union than an open declaration of hostility by those who are opposed to it. Your Convention and its proceedings should force men to take their stand upon one side or the other.  To my mind there is no other cause worth fighting for in public life when put beside the cause of Australian unity; not only on account of the obvious material advantages which union must bring with it (these to my mind are among the least important benefits) but because union will enlarge our horizon in all directions by giving us new standards of criticism in every walk of life. [122]  All that is done in Australia will be upon a different scale and inspired by a higher ideal. Men will write speak and work as members of a nation and not as provincials; and the importance of this fact as a means of elevating civic life no student of history can ignore. Some may consider that these are sentimental considerations which need not be regarded by "practical men"; but the impetus to all great movements is given by sentiment rather than reason and no statesman who ignores the sentiment of nationality can be regarded as "practical." The most vivid imagination could not describe the improvement which union will give to Australian modes of life and thought. To effect union should I venture to think be the first object of every Australian and his efforts to effect it ought to be unceasing.  I remain with hearty good wishes  Yours very faithfully  B. R. Wise  The President Bathurst Federal Convention.  Commandant South Australia.  Military Staff Office  Adelaide 2nd Nov. 1896.  From Col. J. M. Gordon  Late Royal Artillery Commandant S.A. Military Forces.  To the Organising Secretary  People's Federal Convention Bathurst.  Sir -   I have just received the kind invitation of the President of the Bathurst Federation League to be present at the Federal Convention on my return from Sydney. Much as I would like to be present thereat I regret that my official duties in connection with the re-organisation of the South Australian Military Forces under my command prevents my being able to spare the time to avail myself of the very kind invitation extended to me. Putting aside the political aspects of Federation upon which it is not in my province to touch I need hardly say that no one is more alive than myself to the necessity for Federal action in defence matters and I trust that this important point may be given a most conspicuous place in your deliberations.  Wishing the Bathurst Federation League all success in their undertaking  I have the honor to be  Yours faithfully  JOSEPH M. GORDON  Col. Commandant S.A. Military Forces.   Petition to Her Majesty the Queen from Persons residing on the Eastern Goldfields.  To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty.  We Your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects inhabitants of that portion of the Colony of Western Australia lying to the South of the 24th parallel of latitude and East of the 119th meridian of East longitude and known as the Eastern Goldfields humbly approach Your Majesty with every assurance of our loyalty and devotion to Your Majesty's Crown and Person and humbly entreating Your Majesty's gracious consideration to this our Petition.  1. At the time of the establishment of the present constitution of the Colony of Western Australia it was contemplated and declared that circumstances might arise and render expedient the division of the Colony by separating any portion thereof and erecting the same into a separate Colony. The probability of such division was expressly reconsidered by Sections 61 and 62 of the Western Australian Constitution Act 1889 (assented to by Your Majesty on 21st October 1890) which specially reserved powers on that behalf. We humbly submit that as regards the Eastern Goldfields circumstances calling for Separation have now arisen for the following among other reasons: -   2. Since the establishment of Responsible Government in Western Australia many of Your Majesty's subjects have come from outside the Colony to reside on the Eastern Goldfields. They now compose almost the entire population of that district which was previously uninhabited and unproductive. By their energy enterprise and capital mines have been discovered and developed and industries built up and established; and what was previously regarded as a desert has been converted into a populous and prosperous district. The inhabitants of the remaining portion of Western Australia who are chiefly the settlers before Responsible Government possess representation in both Houses of Parliament greatly in excess of what they are entitled! to and have thus acquired a power which they have used and continue to use towards the inhabitants of the Eastern Goldfields harshly arbitrarily and unjustly and not in accordance with the spirit of the Constitution. They have passed laws and applied public moneys for their own especial benefit and to our detriment; and have otherwise by unfair and wrongful legislation and administration oppressed the inhabitants of the Eastern Goldfields. [519] In particular: -   3. (1.) They have denied and continue to deny to the inhabitants of the Eastern Goldfields that fair and reasonable representation in Parliament to which such inhabitants are entitled by their number wealth and resources through the power of domination thus secured to and retained by themselves.  (2.) They have imposed unfair and unequal burdens on the inhabitants of the Eastern Goldfields of which the following are instances: -   (a) Heavy Customs taxation on food and other commodities so devised as to place the burden chiefly on us and to oppress US for the advantage of their monopolies.  (b) Preferential railway rates imposing special and unequal taxation intended to establish and support at our expense monopolies for their special advantage.  (c) Special taxes on the gold mining industry.  (d) Refusal of railway communication with our natural port on the Southern Coast in order to force our trade into their portion of the Colony and to distant ports.  (e) The expenditure of a large portion of public moneys in their district while our larger and more pressing needs are comparatively neglected and ignored.  4. The inhabitants of the Eastern Goldfields are unanimously in favour of joining the Federal Union of the Australian Colonies and of accepting for that purpose the Bill for the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia recently adopted by the Parliaments and people of five other Colonies. That Bill was drafted by an Australian Convention in which Western Australia was represented equally with the other Colonies. It was finally settled at a Conference of the Premiers of six Australian Colonies at which this Colony was represented by its Premier who accepted the Bill in its final form and promised to endeavour to procure the passing of an Act submitting it to the electors of Western Australia for acceptance or rejection. Instead of this the Bill was referred by the Parliament of Western Australia to a Joint Committee of both Houses who suggested amendments. A petition signed by 18000 adult males; resident on the Eastern Goldfields and 5000 adult male residents of the Western Districts was presented to both Houses of Parliament asking that the Bill might be submitted for acceptance or rejection by the people of the Colony but the Houses of Parliament nevertheless refused by large majorities to grant the prayer of the petition and the Upper House refused to submit the Bill as adopted by the other Colonies. We are thus prevented by the arbitrary action of the dominant party in the Parliament of Western Australia comprised as aforesaid from realising our intense desire to join the Federal Union and participate in the moral and material advantages of Australian National life. [520]  When the Western Australian Constitution Act of 1889 was passed the population was 43000. Queensland obtained responsible Government when its population was 28000. The population of the Eastern Goldfields on whose behalf we humbly address Your Majesty now numbers 80000 and is rapidly increasing. The district contains by far the greater portion of the wealth and contributes most of the revenue of the Colony. The area of the Colony which is 975920 square miles or about one-third of Australia owing to growth of population and diversity of interests is too large to be properly governed as one Colony. We therefore humbly pray Your Majesty that the Colony of Western Australia may be divided by separating the Eastern Goldfields therefrom according to the boundaries hereinbefore defined and by erecting the same into a separate Colony with a full measure of representative and responsible Government and we Your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects will as in duty bound ever pray.  THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA CONSTITUTION ACT.  63 & 64 VICT.  CHAPTER 12.  An Act to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.  (9th July 1900)  [262] (Preamble) whereas the people of New South Wales Victoria South Australia Queensland and Tasmania humbly relying on the blessing of Almighty God have agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and under the Constitution hereby established:   And whereas it is expedient to provide for the admission into the Commonwealth of other Australasian Colonies and possessions of the Queen:   Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows: -   Short Title  1. This Act may be cited as The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act.   Act to extend to the Queen's successors.  2. The provisions of this Act referring to the Queen shall extend to Her Majesty's heirs and successors in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom.   Proclamation of Commonwealth.  3. It shall be lawful for the Queen with the advice of the Privy Council to declare by proclamation that on and after a day therein appointed not being later than one year after the passing of this Act the people of New South Wales Victoria South Australia Queensland and Tasmania and also if Her Majesty is satisfied that the people of Western Australia have agreed thereto of Western Australia shall be united in a Federal Commonwealth under the name of the Commonwealth of Australia. But the Queen may at any time after the proclamation appoint a Governor-General for the Commonwealth.   Commencement Act.  4. The Commonwealth shall be established and the Constitution of the Commonwealth shall take effect on and after the day so appointed. But the Parliaments of the several colonies may at any time after the passing of this Act make any such laws to come into operation on the day so appointed as they might have made if the Constitution had taken effect at the passing of this Act.   Operation of the constitution and laws.  5. This Act and all laws made by the Parliament of the Commonwealth under the Constitution shall be binding on the courts judges and people of every State and of every part of the Commonwealth notwithstanding anything in the laws of any State; and the laws of the Commonwealth shall be in force on all British ships the Queen's ships of war excepted whose first port of clearance and whose port of destination are in the Commonwealth.   Definitions.  6. "The Commonwealth" shall mean the Commonwealth of Australia as established under this Act.   "The States" shall mean such of the colonies of New South Wales New Zealand Queensland Tasmania Victoria Western Australia and South Australia including the northern territory of South Australia as for the time being are parts of the Commonwealth and such colonies or territories as may be admitted into or established by the Commonwealth as States; and each of such parts of the Commonwealth shall be called "a State".   [263] "Original States"shall mean such States as are parts of the Commonwealth at its establishment.   Repeal of Federal Council Act. 48 and 49 Vict. c.60.  7. The Federal Council of Australasia Act 1885 is hereby repealed but so as not to affect any laws passed by the Federal Council of Australasia and in force at the establishment of the Commonwealth.   Any such law may be repealed as to any State by the Parliament of the Commonwealth or as to any colony not being a State by the Parliament thereof.   Application of Colonial Boundaries Act. 58 and 59 Vict. c.34.  8. After the passing of this Act the Colonial Boundaries Act 1895 shall not apply to any colony which becomes a State of the Commonwealth; but the Commonwealth shall be taken to be a self-governing colony for the purposes of that Act.   Constitution.  9. The Constitution of the Commonwealth shall be as follows: -   THE CONSTITUTION.   This Constitution is divided as follows -   · CHAPTER I. - THE PARLIAMENT:   · PART I. - General:   · PART II. - The Senate:   · PART III.- The House of Representatives:   · PART IV. - Both Houses of the Parliament:   · PART V. - Powers of the Parliament :   · CHAPTER II. - THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT:   · CHAPTER III. - THE JUDICATURE:   · CHAPTER IV. - FINANCE AND TRADE:   · CHAPTER V. - THE STATES:   · CHAPTER VI. - NEW STATES:   · CHAPTER VII. - MISCELLANEOUS:   · CHAPTER VIII. - ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION   · THE SCHEDULE.     CHAPTER I. The Parliament. PART I. - GENERAL.  Legislative Power.  1. The legislative power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in a Federal Parliament which shall consist of the Queen a Senate and a House of Representatives and which is herein-after called "The Parliament" or "The Parliament of the Commonwealth."   Governor-General.  2. A Governor-General appointed by the Queen shall be Her Majesty's representative in the Commonwealth and shall have and may exercise in the Commonwealth during the Queen's pleasure but subject to this Constitution such powers and functions of the Queen as Her Majesty may be pleased to assign to him.   Salary of Governor-General.  3. There shall be payable to the Queen out of the Consolidated Revenue fund of the Commonwealth for the salary of the Governor-General an annual sum which until the Parliament otherwise provides shall be ten thousand pounds.   The salary of a Governor-General shall not be altered during his continuance in office.   Provisions relating to Governor-General.  4. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor-General extend and apply to the Governor-General for the time being or such person as the Queen may appoint to administer the Government of the Commonwealth; but no such person shall be entitled to receive any salary from the Commonwealth in respect of any other office during his administration of the Government of the Commonwealth.   Sessions of Parliament. Prorogation and dissolution.  5. The Governor-General may appoint such times for holding the sessions of the Parliament as he thinks fit and may also from time to time by Proclamation or otherwise prorogue the Parliament and may in like manner dissolve the House of Representatives.   [264] Summoning Parliament.  After any general election the Parliament shall be summoned to meet not later than thirty days after the day appointed for the return of the writs.   First session.  The Parliament shall be summoned to meet not later than six months after the establishment of the Commonwealth.   Yearly session of Parliament.  6. There shall be a session of the Parliament once at least in every year so that twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of the Parliament in one session and its first sitting in the next session.     PART II. - THE SENATE.  The Senate.  7. The Senate shall be composed of senators for each State directly chosen by the people of the State voting until the Parliament otherwise provides as one electorate.   But until the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provides the Parliament of the State of Queensland if that State be an Original State may make laws dividing the State into divisions and determining the number of senators to be chosen for each division and in the absence of such provision the State shall be one electorate.   Until the Parliament otherwise provides there shall be six senators for each Original State. The Parliament may make laws increasing or diminishing the number of senators for each State but so that equal representation of the several Original States shall be maintained and that no Original State shall have less than six senators.   The senators shall be chosen for a term of six years and the names of the senators chosen for each State shall be certified by the Governor to the Governor-General.   Qualification of electors.  8. The qualification of electors of senators shall be in each State that which is prescribed by this Constitution or by the Parliament as the qualification for electors of members of the House of Representatives; but in the choosing of senators each elector shall vote only once.   Method of election of senators.  9. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may make laws prescribing the method of choosing senators but so that the method shall be uniform for all the States. Subject to any such law the Parliament of each State may make laws prescribing the method of choosing the senators for that State.   Times and places.  The Parliament of a State may make laws for determining the times and places of elections of senators for the State.   Application of State Laws.  10. Until the Parliament otherwise provides but subject to this Constitution the laws in force in each State for the time being relating to elections for the more numerous House of the Parliament of the State shall as nearly as practicable apply to elections of Senators for the State.   Failure to choose senators.  11. The Senate may proceed to the despatch of business notwithstanding the failure of any State to provide for its representation in the Senate.   Issue of writs.  12. The Governor of any State may cause writs to be issued for elections of senators for the State. In case of the dissolution of the Senate the writs shall be issued within ten days from the proclamation of such dissolution.   Rotation of senators.  13. As soon as may be after the Senate first meets and after each first meeting of the Senate following a dissolution thereof the Senate shall divide the senators chosen for each State into two classes as nearly equal in number as practicable; and the places of the senators of the first class shall become vacant at the expiration of the third year and the places of those of the second class at the expiration of the sixth year from the beginning of their term of service; and afterwards the places of senators shall become vacant at the expiration of six years from the beginning of their term of service.   The election to fill vacant places shall be made in the year at the expiration of which the places are to become vacant.   For the purposes of this section the term of service of a senator shall be taken to begin on the first day of January following the day of his election except in the cases of the first election and of the election next after any dissolution of the Senate when it shall be taken to begin on the first day of January preceding the day of his election.   Further provision for rotation.  14. Whenever the number of senators for a State is increased or diminished the Parliament of the Commonwealth may make such provision for the vacating of the places of senators for the State as it deems necessary to maintain regularity in the rotation.   Casual vacancies.  15. If the place of a senator becomes vacant before the expiration of his term of service the Houses of Parliament of the State for which he was chosen shall sitting and voting together choose a person to hold the place until the expiration of the term or until the election of a successor as hereinafter provided whichever first happens. [265] But if the Houses of Parliament of the State are not in session at the time when the vacancy is notified the Governor of the State with the advice of the Executive Council thereof may appoint a person to hold the place until the expiration of fourteen days after the beginning of the next session of the Parliament of the State or until the election of a successor whichever first happens.   At the next general election of members of the House of Representatives or at the next election of senators for the State whichever first happens a successor shall if the term has not then expired be chosen to hold the place from the date of his election until the expiration of the term.   The name of any senator so chosen or appointed shall be certified by the Governor of the State to the Governor-General.   Qualifications of senator.  16. The qualifications of a senator shall be the same as those of a member of the House of Representatives.   Election of President.  17. The Senate shall before proceeding to the despatch of any other business choose a senator to be the President of the Senate; and as often as the office of President becomes vacant the Senate shall again choose a senator to be the President.   The President shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a senator. He may be removed from office by a vote of the Senate or he may resign his office or his seat by writing addressed to the Governor-General.   Absence of President.  18. Before or during any absence of the President the Senate may choose a senator to perform his duties in his absence.   Resignation of senator.  19. A senator may by writing addressed to the President or to the Governor-General if there is no President or if the President is absent from the Commonwealth resign his place which thereupon shall become vacant.   Vacancy by absence.  20. The place of a senator shall become vacant if for two consecutive months of any session of the Parliament he without the permission of the Senate fails to attend the Senate.   Vacancy to be notified.  21. Whenever a vacancy happens in the Senate the President or if there is no President or if the President is absent from the Commonwealth the Governor-General shall notify the same to the Governor of the State in the representation of which the vacancy has happened.   Quorum.  22. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the presence of at least one-third of the whole number of the senators shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Senate for the exercise of its powers.   Voting in the Senate.  23. Questions arising in the Senate shall be determined by a majority of votes and each senator shall have one vote. The President shall in all cases be entitled to a vote and when the votes are equal the question shall pass in the negative.     PART III. - THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.  Constitution of House of Representatives.  24. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members directly chosen by the people of the Commonwealth and the number of such members shall be as nearly as practicable twice the number of the senators.   The number of members chosen in the several States shall be in proportion to the respective numbers of their people and shall until the Parliament otherwise provides be determined whenever necessary in the following manner:   · (i.) A quota shall be ascertained by dividing the number of the people of the Commonwealth as shown by the latest statistics of the Commonwealth by twice the number of the senators:   · (ii.) The number of members to be chosen in each State shall be determined by dividing the number of the people of the State as shown by the latest statistics of the Commonwealth by the quota; and if on such division there is a remainder greater than one-half of the quota one more member shall be chosen in the State.   But notwithstanding anything in this section five members at least shall be chosen in each Original State.   Provision as to races disqualified from voting.  25. For the purposes of the last section if by the law of any State all persons of any race are disqualified from voting at elections for the more numerous House of the Parliament of the State then in reckoning the number of the people of the State or of the Commonwealth persons of that race resident in that State shall not be counted.   [266] Representatives in first Parliament.  26. Notwithstanding anything in section twenty-four the number of members to be chosen in each State at the first election shall be as follows:   · New South Wales......twenty-three;   · Victoria ........twenty;   · Queensland .......eight;   · South Australia.........six;   · Tasmania .......five;   Provided that if Western Australia is an Original State the numbers shall be as follows:   · New South Wales.........twenty-six;   · Victoria ...............twenty-three;   · Queensland .............nine;   · South Australia ........seven;   · Western Australia..........five;   · Tasmania .............five.   Alteration of number of members.  27. Subject to this Constitution the Parliament may make laws for increasing or diminishing the number of the members of the House of Representatives.   Duration of House of Representatives.  28. Every House of Representatives shall continue for three years from the first meeting of the House and no longer but may be sooner dissolved by the Governor-General.   Electoral divisions.  29. Until the Parliament of tile Commonwealth otherwise provides the Parliament of any State may make laws for determining the divisions in each State for which members of the House of Representatives may be chosen and the number of members to be chosen for each division. A division shall not be formed out of parts of different States.   In the absence of other provision each State shall be one electorate.   Qualification of electors.  30. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the qualification of electors of members of the House of Representatives shall be in each State that which is prescribed by the law of the State as the qualification of electors of the more numerous House of Parliament of the State; but in the choosing of members each elector shall vote only once.   Application of State Laws.  31. Until the Parliament otherwise provides but subject to this Constitution the laws in force in each State for the time being relating to elections for the more numerous House of the Parliament of the State shall as nearly as practicable apply to elections in the State of members of the House of Representatives.   Writs for general election.  32. The Governor-General in Council may cause writs to be issued for general elections of members of the House of Representatives.   After the first general election the writs shall be issued within ten days from the expiry of a House of Representatives or from the proclamation of a dissolution thereof.   Writs for vacancies.  33. Whenever a vacancy happens in the House of Representatives the Speaker shall issue his writ for the election of a new member or if there is no Speaker or if he is absent from the Commonwealth the Governor-General in Council may issue the writ.   Qualifications of members.  34.Until the Parliament otherwise provides the qualifications of a member of the House of Representatives shall be as follows: -   · (i.) He must be of the full age of twenty-one years and must be an elector entitled to vote at the election of members of the House of Representatives or a person qualified to become such elector and must have been for three years at the least a resident within the limits of the Commonwealth as existing at the time when he is chosen:   · (ii.) He must be a subject of the Queen either natural-born or for at least five years naturalized under a law of the United Kingdom or of a Colony which has become or becomes a State or of the Commonwealth or of a State.   Election of Speaker.  35. The House of Representatives shall before proceeding to the despatch of any other business choose a member to be the Speaker of the House and as often as the office of Speaker becomes vacant the House shall again choose a member to be the Speaker.   The Speaker shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a member. He may be removed from office by a vote of the House or he may resign his office or his seat by writing addressed to the Governor-General.   [267] Absence of Speaker.  36. Before or during any absence of the Speaker the House of Representatives may choose a member to perform his duties in his absence.   Resignation of member.  37. A member may by writing addressed to the Speaker or to the Governor-General if there is no Speaker or if the Speaker is absent from the Commonwealth resign his place which thereupon shall become vacant.   Vacancy by absence.  38. The place of a member shall become vacant if for two consecutive months of any session of the Parliament he without the permission of the House fails to attend the House.   Quorum.  39. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the presence of at least one-third of the whole number of the members of the House of Representatives shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the House for the exercise of its powers.   Voting in House of Representatives.  40. Questions arising in the House of Representatives shall be determined by a majority of votes other than that of the Speaker. The Speaker shall not vote unless the numbers are equal and then he shall have a casting vote.     PART IV. - BOTH HOUSES OF THE PARLIAMENT.  Right of electors of States.  41. No adult person who has or acquires a right to vote at elections for the more numerous House of the Parliament of a State shall while the right continues be prevented by any law of the Commonwealth from voting at elections for either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth.   Oath or affirmation of allegiance.  42. Every senator and every member of the House of Representatives shall before taking his seat make and subscribe before the Governor-General or some person authorised by him an oath or affirmation of allegiance in the form set forth in the schedule to this Constitution.   Member of one House ineligible for other.  43. A member of either House of the Parliament shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a member of the other house.   Disqualification.  44. Any person who -   · (i.) Is under any acknowledgment of allegiance obedience or adherence to a foreign power or is a subject or a citizen or entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject or a citizen of a foreign power: or   · (ii.) Is attainted of treason or has been convicted and is under sentence or subject to be sentenced for any offence punishable under the law of the Commonwealth or of a State by imprisonment for one year or longer: or   · (iii.) Is an undischarged bankrupt or insolvent: or   · (iv.) Holds any office of profit under the Crown or any pension payable during the pleasure of the Crown out of any of the revenues of the Commonwealth: or   · (v.) Has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any agreement with the Public Service of the Commonwealth otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company consisting of more than twenty-five persons:   shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a senator or a member of the House of Representatives.   But sub-section iv. does not apply to the office of any of the Queen's Ministers of State for the Commonwealth or of any of the Queen's Ministers for a State or to the receipt of pay half pay or a pension by any person as an officer or member of the Queen's navy or army or to the receipt of pay as air officer or member of the naval or military forces of the Commonwealth by any person whose services are not wholly employed by the Commonwealth.   Vacancy on happening of disqualification.  45. If a senator or member of the House of Representatives -   · (i.) Becomes subject to any of the disabilities mentioned in the last preceding section: or   · (ii.) Takes the benefit whether by assignment composition or otherwise of any law relating to bankrupt or insolvent debtors: or   · (iii.) Directly or indirectly takes or agrees to take any fee or honorarium for services rendered to the Commonwealth or for services rendered in the Parliament to any person or State:   his place shall thereupon become vacant.   [268] Penalty for sitting when disqualified.  46. Until the Parliament otherwise provides any person declared by this Constitution to be incapable of sitting as a senator or as a member of the House of Representatives shall for every day on which he so sits be liable to pay the sum of one hundred pounds to any person who sues for it in any court of competent jurisdiction.   Disputed elections.  47. Until the Parliament otherwise provides any question respecting the qualification of a senator or of a member of the House of Representatives or respecting a vacancy in either House of the Parliament and any question of a disputed election to either House shall be determined by the House in which the question arises.   Allowance to members.  48. Until the Parliament otherwise provides each senator and each member of the House of Representatives shall receive an allowance of four hundred pounds a year to be reckoned from the day on which he takes his seat.   Privileges &c. of Houses.  49. The powers privileges and immunities of the Senate and of the House of Representatives and of the members and the committees of each House shall be such as are declared by the Parliament and until declared shall be those of the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom and of its members and committees at the establishment of the Commonwealth.   Rules and orders.  50. Each House of the Parliament may make rules and orders with respect to -   · (i.) The mode in which its powers privileges and immunities may be exercised and upheld:   · (ii.) The order and conduct of its business and proceedings either separately or jointly with the other House.     PART V. - POWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT.  Legislative powers of the Parliament.  51. The Parliament shall subject to this Constitution have power to make laws for the peace order and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to: -   · (i.) Trade and commerce with other countries and among the States:   · (ii.) Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or parts of States:   · (iii.) Bounties on the production or export of goods but so that such bounties shall be uniform throughout the Commonwealth:   · (iv.) Borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth:   · (v.) Postal telegraphic telephonic and other like services:   · (vi.) The naval and military defence of the Commonwealth and of the several States and the control of the forces to execute and maintain the laws of the Commonwealth:   · (vii.) Lighthouses lightships beacons and buoys:   · (viii.) Astronomical and meteorological observations:   · (ix.) Quarantine:   · (x.) Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial limits:   · (xi.) Census and statistics :   · (xii.) Currency coinage and legal tender:   · (xiii.) Banking other than State banking; also State banking extending beyond the limits of the State concerned the incorporation of banks and the issue of paper money:   · (xiv.) Insurance other than State insurance; also State insurance extending beyond the limits of the State concerned:   · (xv.) Weights and measures:   · (xvi.) Bills of exchange and promissory notes:   · (xvii.) Bankruptcy and insolvency:   · (xviii.) Copyrights patents of inventions and designs and trade marks:   · (xix.) Naturalization and aliens:   · (xx.) Foreign corporations and trading or financial corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth: [269]   · (xxi.) Marriage:   · (xxii.) Divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto parental rights and the custody and guardianship of infants:   · (xxiii.) Invalid and old-age pensions:   · (xxiv.) The service and execution throughout the Commonwealth of the civil and criminal process and the judgments of the courts of the States:   · (xxv.) The recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the laws the public Acts and records and the judicial proceedings of the States:   · (xxvi.) The people of any race other than the aboriginal race in any State for whom it is deemed necessary to make special laws:   · (xxvii.) Immigration and emigration:   · (xxviii.) The influx of criminals:   · (xxix.) External affairs:   · (xxx.) The relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of the Pacific:   · (xxxi.) The acquisition of property on just terms from any State or person for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws:   · (xxxii.) The control of railways with respect to transport for the naval and military purposes of the Commonwealth:   · (xxxiii.) The acquisition with the consent of a State of any railways of the State on terms arranged between the Commonwealth and the State:   · (xxxiv.) Railway construction and extension in any State with the consent of that State:   · (xxxv.) Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one State:   · (xxxvi.) Matters in respect of which this Constitution makes provision until the Parliament otherwise provides:   · (xxxvii.) Matters referred to the Parliament of the Commonwealth by the Parliament or Parliaments of any State or States but so that the law shall extend only to States by whose Parliaments the matter is referred or which afterwards adopt the law:   · (xxxviii.) The exercise within the Commonwealth at the request or with the concurrence of the Parliaments of all the States directly concerned of any power which can at the establishment of this Constitution be exercised only by the Parliament of the United Kingdom or by the Federal Council of Australasia:   · (xxxix.) Matters incidental to the execution of any power vested by this Constitution in the Parliament or in either House thereof or in the Government of the Commonwealth or in the Federal Judicature or in any department or officer of the Commonwealth.   Exclusive powers of the Parliament.  52. The Parliament shall subject to this Constitution have exclusive power to make laws for the peace order and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to -   · (i.) The seat of government of the Commonwealth and all places acquired by the Commonwealth for public purposes:   · (ii.) Matters relating to any department of the public service the control of which is by this Constitution transferred to the Executive Government of the Commonwealth:   · (iii.) Other matters declared by this Constitution to be within the exclusive power of the Parliament.   Powers of the Houses in respect of legislation.  53. Proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys or imposing taxation shall not originate in the Senate. But a proposed law shall not be taken to appropriate revenue or moneys or to impose taxation by reason only of its containing provisions for the imposition or appropriation of fines or other pecuniary penalties or for the demand or payment or appropriation of fees for licences or fees for services under the proposed law.   The Senate may not amend proposed laws imposing taxation or proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys for the ordinary annual services of the Government.   [270] The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people.   The Senate may at any stage return to the House of Representatives any proposed law which the Senate may not amend requesting by message the omission or amendment of any items or provisions therein. And the House of Representatives may if it thinks fit make any of such omissions or amendments with or without modifications.   Except as provided in this section the Senate shall have equal power with the House of Representatives in respect of all proposed laws.   Appropriation Bills.  54. The proposed law which appropriates revenue or moneys for the ordinary annual services of the Government shall deal only with such appropriation.   Tax Bills.  55. Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with the imposition of taxation and any provision therein dealing with any other matter shall be of no effect.   Laws imposing taxation except laws imposing duties of customs or of excise shall deal with one subject of taxation only; but laws imposing duties of customs shall deal with duties of customs only and laws imposing duties of excise shall deal with duties of excise only.   Recommendation of money votes.  56. A vote resolution or proposed law for the appropriation of revenue or moneys shall not be passed unless the purpose of the appropriation has in the same session been recommended by message of the Governor-General to the House in which the proposal originated.   Disagreement between the Houses.  57. If the House of Representatives passes any proposed law and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with amendments to which the House of Representatives will not agree and if after an interval of three months the House of Representatives in the same or the next session again passes the proposed law with or without any amendments which have been made suggested or agreed to by the Senate and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with amendments to which the House of Representatives will not agree the Governor-General may dissolve the Senate and the House of Representatives simultaneously. But such dissolution shall not take place within six months before the date of the expiry of the House of Representatives by effluxion of time.   If after such dissolution the House of Representatives again passes the proposed law with or without any amendments which have been made suggested or agreed to by the Senate and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with amendments to which the House of Representatives will not agree the Governor-General may convene a joint sitting of the members of the Senate and of the House of Representatives.   The members present at the joint sitting may deliberate and shall vote together upon the proposed law as last proposed by the House of Representatives and upon amendments if any which have been made therein by one House and not agreed to by the other and any such amendments which are affirmed by an absolute majority of the total number of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives shall be taken to have been carried and if the proposed law with the amendments if any so carried is affirmed by an absolute majority of the total number of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives it shall be taken to have been duly passed by both Houses of the Parliament and shall be presented to the Governor-General for the Queen's assent.   Royal assent to Bills.  58. When a proposed law passed by both Houses of the Parliament is presented to the Governor-General for the Queen's assent he shall declare according to his discretion but subject to this Constitution that he assents in the Queen's name or that he withholds assent or that he reserves the law for the Queen's pleasure.   Recommendations by Governor-General.  The Governor-General may return to the House in which it originated any proposed law so presented to him and may transmit therewith any amendments which he may recommend and the Houses may deal with the recommendation.   Disallowance by the Queen.  59. The Queen may disallow any law within one year from the Governor-General's assent and such disallowance on being made known by the Governor-General by speech or message to each of the Houses of the Parliament or by Proclamation shall annul the law from the day when the disallowance is so made known.   Signification of Queen's pleasure on Bills reserved.  60. A proposed law reserved for the Queen's pleasure shall not have any force unless and until within two years from the day on which it was presented to the Governor-General for the Queen's assent the Governor-General makes known by speech or message to each of the Houses of the Parliament or by Proclamation that it has received the Queen's assent.     [271] CHAPTER II. The Executive Government. Executive power.  61. The executive power of the Commonwealth is vested in the Queen and is exerciseable by the Governor-General as the Queen's representative and extends to the execution and maintenance of this Constitution and of the laws of the Commonwealth.   Federal Executive Council.  62. There shall be a Federal Executive Council to advise the Governor-General in the government of the Commonwealth and the members of the Council shall be chosen and summoned by the Governor-General and sworn as Executive Councillors and shall hold office during his pleasure.   Provisions referring to Governor-General.  63. The provisions of this Constitution referring to the Governor-General in Council shall be construed as referring to the Governor-General acting with the advice of the Federal Executive Council.   Ministers of State.  64. The Governor-General may appoint officers to administer such departments of State of the Commonwealth as the Governor-General in Council may establish.   Such officers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor-General. They shall be members of the Federal Executive Council and shall be the Queen's Ministers of State for the Commonwealth.   Ministers to sit in Parliament.  After the first general election no Minister of State shall hold office for a longer period than three months unless he is or becomes a senator or a member of the House of Representatives.   Number of Ministers.  65. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the Ministers of State shall not exceed seven in number and shall hold such offices as the Parliament prescribes or in the absence of provision as the Governor-General directs.   Salaries of Ministers.  66. There shall be payable to the Queen out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Commonwealth for the salaries of the Ministers of State an annual sum which until the Parliament otherwise provides shall not exceed twelve thousand pounds a year.   Appointment of civil servants.  67. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the appointment and removal of all other officers of the Executive Government of the Commonwealth shall be vested in the Governor-General in Council unless the appointment is delegated by the Governor-General in Council or by a law of the Commonwealth to some other authority.   Command of naval and military forces.  68. The command in chief of the naval and military forces of the Commonwealth is vested in the Governor-General as the Queen's representative.   Transfer of certain departments.  69. On a date or dates to be proclaimed by the Governor-General after the establishment of the Commonwealth the following departments of the public service in each State shall become transferred to the Commonwealth -   · Posts telegraphs and telephones:   · Naval and military defence:   · Lighthouses lightships beacons and buoys:   · Quarantine.   But the departments of customs and of excise in each State shall become transferred to the Commonwealth on its establishment.   Certain powers of Governors to vest in Governor-General.  70. In respect of matters which under this Constitution pass to the Executive Government of the Commonwealth all powers and functions which at the establishment of the Commonwealth are vested in the Governor of a Colony or in the Governor of a Colony with the advice of his Executive Council or in any authority of a Colony shall vest in the Governor-General or in the Governor-General in Council or in the authority exercising similar powers under the Commonwealth as the case requires.   [272] CHAPTER III. The Judicature. Judicial power and Courts.  71. The judicial power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in a Federal Supreme Court to be called the High Court of Australia and in such other federal courts as the Parliament creates and in such other courts as it invests with federal jurisdiction. The High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and so many other Justices not less than two as the Parliament prescribes.   Judges' appointment tenure and remuneration.  72. The Justices of the High Court and of the other courts created by the Parliament -   · (i.) Shall be appointed by the Governor-General in Council:   · (ii.) Shall not be removed except by the Governor-General in Council on an address from both Houses of the Parliament in the same session praying for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity:   · (iii.) Shall receive such remuneration as the Parliament may fix; but the remuneration shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.   Appellate jurisdiction of Hight Court.  73. The High Court shall have jurisdiction with such exceptions and subject to such regulations as the Parliament prescribes to hear and determine appeals from all judgments decrees orders and sentences -   · (i.) Of any Justice or Justices exercising the original jurisdiction of the High Court:   · (ii.) Of any other federal court or court exercising federal jurisdiction; or of the Supreme Court of any State or of any other court of any State from which at the establishment of the Commonwealth an appeal lies to the Queen in Council:   · (iii.) Of the Inter-State Commission but as to questions of law only: and the judgment of the High Court in all such cases shall be final and conclusive.   But no exception or regulation prescribed by the Parliament shall prevent the High Court from hearing and determining any appeal from the Supreme Court of a State in any matter in which at the establishment of the Commonwealth an appeal lies from such Supreme Court to the Queen in Council.   Until the Parliament otherwise provides the conditions of and restrictions on appeals to the Queen in Council from the Supreme Courts of the several States shall be applicable to appeals from them to the High Court.   Appeal to Queen in Council.  74. No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in Council from a decision of the High Court upon any question howsoever arising as to the limits inter se of the Constitutional powers of the Commonwealth and those of any State or States or as to the limits inter se of the Constitutional powers of any two or more States unless the High Court shall certify that the question is one which ought to be determined by Her Majesty in Council.   The High Court may so certify if satisfied that for any special reason the certificate should be granted and thereupon an appeal shall lie to Her Majesty in Council on the question without further leave.   Except as provided in this section this Constitution shall not impair any right which the Queen may be pleased to exercise by virtue of Her Royal prerogative to grant special leave of appeal from the High Court to Her Majesty in Council. The Parliament may make laws limiting the matters in which such leave may be asked but proposed laws containing any such limitation shall be reserved by the Governor-General for Her Majesty's pleasure.   Original jurisdiction of High Court.  75. In all matters -   · (i.) Arising under any treaty:   · (ii.) Affecting consuls or other representatives of other countries:   · (iii.) In which the Commonwealth or a person suing or being sued on behalf of the Commonwealth is a party:   · (iv.) Between States or between residents of different States or between a State and a resident of another State:   · (v.) In which a writ of Mandamus or prohibition or an injunction is sought against an officer of the Commonwealth: the High Court shall have original jurisdiction.   [273] Additional original jurisdiction.  76. The Parliament may make laws conferring original jurisdiction on the High Court in any matter -   · (i.) Arising under this Constitution or involving its interpretation:   · (ii.) Arising under any laws made by the Parliament:   · (iii.) Of Admiralty and maritime jurisdiction:   · (iv.) Relating to the same subject-matter claimed under the laws of different States.     Power to define jurisdiction.  77. With respect to any of the matters mentioned in the last two sections the Parliament may make laws -   · (i.) Defining the Jurisdiction of any federal court other than the High Court:   · (ii.) Defining the extent to which the jurisdiction of any federal court shall be exclusive of that which belongs to or is invested in the courts of the States:   · (iii.) Investing any court of a State with federal jurisdiction.   Proceedings against the Commonwealth or State.  78. The Parliament may make laws conferring rights to proceed against the Commonwealth or a State in respect of matters within the limits of the judicial power.   Number of judges.  79. The federal jurisdiction of any court may be exercised by such number of judges as the Parliament prescribes.   Trial by jury.  80. The trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth shall be by jury and every such trial shall be held in the State where the offence was committed and if the offence was not committed within any State the trial shall be held at such place or places as the Parliament prescribes.     CHAPTER IV. Finance and Trade. Consolidated Revenue Fund.  81. All revenues or moneys raised or received by the Executive Government of the Commonwealth shall form one Consolidated Revenue Fund to be appropriated for the purposes of the Commonwealth in the manner and subject to the charges and liabilities imposed by this Constitution.   Expenditure charged thereon.  82. The costs charges and expenses incident to the collection management and receipt of the Consolidated Revenue Fund shall form the first charge thereon ; and the revenue of the Commonwealth shall in the first instance be applied to the payment of the expenditure of the Commonwealth.   Money to be appropriated by law.  83. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the Commonwealth except under appropriation made by law.   But until the expiration of one month after the first meeting of the Parliament the Governor-General in Council may draw from the Treasury and expend such moneys as may be necessary for the maintenance of any department transferred to the Commonwealth and for the holding of the first elections for the Parliament.   Transfer of officers.  84. When any department of the public service of a State becomes transferred to the Commonwealth all officers of the department shall become subject to the control of the Executive Government of the Commonwealth.   Any such officer who is not retained in the service of the Commonwealth shall unless he is appointed to some other office of equal emolument in the public service of the State be entitled to receive from the State any pension gratuity or other compensation payable under the law of the State on the abolition of his office.   Any such officer who is retained in the service of the Commonwealth shall preserve all his existing and accruing rights and shall be entitled to retire from office at the time and on the pension or retiring allowance which would be permitted by the law of the State if his service with the Commonwealth were a continuation of his service with the State. Such pension or retiring allowance shall be paid to him by the Commonwealth; but the State shall pay to the Commonwealth a part thereof to be calculated on the proportion which his term of service with the State bears to his whole term of service and for the purpose of the calculation his salary shall be taken to be that paid to him by the State at the time of the transfer.   [274] Any officer who is at the establishment of the Commonwealth in the public service of a State and who is by consent of the Governor of the State with the advice of the Executive Council thereof transferred to the public service of the Commonwealth shall have the same rights as if he had been an officer of a department transferred to the Commonwealth and were retained in the service of the Commonwealth.   Transfer of property of State.  85. When any department of the public service of a State is transferred to the Commonwealth -   · (i.) All property of the State of any kind used exclusively in connexion with the department shall become vested in the Commonwealth; but in the case of the departments controlling customs and excise and bounties for such time only as the Governor-General in Council may declare to be necessary:   · (ii.) TheCommonwealth may acquire any property of the State of any kind used but not exclusively used in connexion with the department; the value thereof shall if no agreement can be made be ascertained in as nearly as may be the manner in which the value of land or of an interest in land taken by the State for public purposes is ascertained under the law of the State in force at the establishment of the Commonwealth:   · (iii.) The Commonwealth shall compensate the State for the value of any property passing to the Commonwealth under this section; if no agreement can be made as to the mode of compensation it shall be determined under laws to be made by the Parliament:   · (iv.) The Commonwealth shall at the date of the transfer assume the current obligations of the State in respect of the department transferred.   86. On the establishment of the Commonwealth the collection and control of duties of customs and of excise and the control of the payment of bounties shall pass to the Executive Government of the Commonwealth.   87. During a period of ten years after the establishment of the Commonwealth and thereafter until the Parliament otherwise provides of the net revenue of the Commonwealth from duties of customs and of excise not more than one-fourth shall be applied annually by the Commonwealth towards its expenditure.   The balance shall in accordance with this Constitution be paid to the several States or applied towards the payment of interest on debts of the several States taken over by the Commonwealth.   Uniform duties of customs.  88. Uniform duties of customs shall be imposed within two years after the establishment of the Commonwealth.   Payment to the States before uniform duties.  89. Until the imposition of uniform duties of customs -   · (i.) The Commonwealth shall credit to each State the revenues collected therein by the Commonwealth.   · (ii.) The Commonwealth shall debit to each State -   · (a) the expenditure therein of the Commonwealth incurred solely for the maintenance or continuance as at the time of transfer of any department transferred from the State to the Commonwealth;   · (b) the proportion of the State according to the number of its people in the other expenditure of the Commonwealth.   · (iii.) The Commonwealth shall pay to each State month by month the balance (if any) in favour of the State.   Exclusive power over customs excise and bounties.  90. On the imposition of uniform duties of customs the power of the Parliament to impose duties of customs and of excise and to grant bounties on the production or export of goods shall become exclusive.   On the imposition of uniform duties of customs all laws of the several States imposing duties of customs or of excise or offering bounties on the production or export of goods shall cease to have effect but any grant of or agreement for any such bounty lawfully made by or under the authority of the Government of any State shall be taken to be good if made before the thirtieth day of June one thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight and not otherwise.   Exceptions as to bounties.  91. Nothing in this Constitution prohibits a State from granting any aid to or bounty on mining for gold silver or other metals nor from granting with the consent of both Houses of the Parliament of the Commonwealth expressed by resolution any aid to or bounty on the production or export of goods.   [275] Trade within the Commonwealth to be free.  92. On the imposition of uniform duties of customs trade commerce and intercourse among the States whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation shall he absolutely free.   But notwithstanding anything in this Constitution goods imported before the imposition of uniform duties of customs into any State or into any Colony which whilst the goods remain therein becomes a State shall on thence passing into another State within two years after the imposition of such duties be liable to any duty chargeable on the importation of such goods into the Commonwealth less any duty paid in respect of the goods on their importation.   Payment to States for five years after uniform tariffs.  93. During the first five years after the imposition of uniform duties of customs and thereafter until the Parliament otherwise provides -   · (i.) The duties of customs chargeable on goods imported into a State and afterwards passing into another State for consumption and the duties of excise paid on goods produced or manufactured in a State and afterwards passing into another State for consumption shall be taken to have been collected not in the former but in the latter State:   · (ii.) Subject to the last subsection the Commonwealth shall credit revenue debit expenditure and pay balances to the several States as prescribed for the period preceding the imposition of uniform duties of customs.   Distribution of surplus.  94. After five years from the imposition of uniform duties of customs the Parliament may provide on such basis as it deems fair for the monthly payment to the several States of all surplus revenue of the Commonwealth.   Customs duties of Western Australia.  95. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution the Parliament of the State of Western Australia if that State be an Original State may during the first five years after the imposition of uniform duties of customs impose duties of customs on goods passing into that State and not originally imported from beyond the limits of the Commonwealth; and such duties shall be collected by the Commonwealth.   But any duty so imposed on any goods shall not exceed during the first of such years the duty chargeable on the goods under the law of Western Australia in force at the imposition of uniform duties and shall not exceed during the second third fourth and fifth of such years respectively four-fifths three-fifths two-fifths and one-fifth of such latter duty and all duties imposed under this section shall cease at the expiration of the fifth year after the imposition of uniform duties.   If at any time during the five years the duty on any goods under this section is higher than the duty imposed by the Commonwealth on the importation of the like goods then such higher duty shall be collected on the goods when imported into Western Australia from beyond the limits of the Commonwealth.   Financial assistance to States.  96. During a period of ten years after the establishment of the Commonwealth and thereafter until the Parliament otherwise provides the Parliament may grant financial assistance to any State on such terms and conditions as the Parliament thinks fit.   Audit.  97. Until the Parliament otherwise provides the laws in force in any Colony which has become or becomes a State with respect to the receipt of revenue and the expenditure of money on account of the Government of the Colony and the review and audit of such receipt and expenditure shall apply to the receipt of revenue and the expenditure of money on account of the Commonwealth in the State in the same manner as if the Commonwealth or the Government or an officer of the Commonwealth were mentioned whenever the Colony or the Government or an officer of the Colony is mentioned.   Trade and commerce includes navigation and State railways.  98. The power of the Parliament to make laws with respect to trade and commerce extends to navigation and shipping and to railways the property of any State.   Commonwealth not to give preference.  99. The Commonwealth shall not by any law or regulation of trade commerce or revenue give preference to one State or any part thereof over another State or any part thereof.   Nor abridge right to use water.  100. The Commonwealth shall not by any law or regulation of trade or commerce abridge the right of a State or of the residents therein to the reasonable use of the waters of rivers for conservation or irrigation.   Inter-state Commission.  101. There shall be an Inter-State Commission with such powers of adjudication and administration as the Parliament deems necessary for the execution and maintenance within the Commonwealth of the provisions of this Constitution relating to trade and commerce and of all laws made thereunder.   Parliament may forbid preferences by State.  102. The Parliament may by any law with respect to trade or commerce forbid as to railways any preference or discrimination by any State or by any authority constituted under a State if such preference or discrimination is undue and unreasonable or [276] unjust to any State; due regard being had to the financial responsibilities incurred by any State in connexion with the construction and maintenance of its railways. But no preference or discrimination shall within the meaning of this section be taken to be undue and unreasonable or unjust to any State unless so adjudged by the Inter-State Commission.   Commissioners' appointment tenure and remuneration.  103. The members of the Inter-State Commission -   · (i.) Shall be appointed by the Governor-General in Council:   · (ii.) Shall hold office for seven years but may be removed within that time by the Governor-General in Council on an address from both Houses of the Parliament in the same session praying for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity:   · (iii.) Shall receive such remuneration as the Parliament may fix; but such remuneration shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.   Saving of certain rates.  104. Nothing in this Constitution shall render unlawful any rate for the carriage of goods upon a railway the property of a State if the rate is deemed by the Inter-State Commission to be necessary for the development of the territory of the State and if the rate applies equally to goods within the State and to goods passing into the State from other States.   Taking over public debts of States.  105. The Parliament may take over from the States their public debts as existing at the establishment of the Commonwealth or a proportion thereof according to the respective numbers of their people as shown by the latest statistics of the Commonwealth and may convert renew or consolidate such debts or any part thereof; and the States shall indemnify the Commonwealth in respect of the debts taken over and thereafter the interest payable in respect of the debts shall be deducted and retained from the portions of the surplus revenue of the Commonwealth payable to the several States or if such surplus is insufficient or if there is no surplus then the deficiency or the whole amount shall be paid by the several States.     CHAPTER V. The States. Saving of Constitutions.  106. The Constitution of each State of the Commonwealth shall subject to this Constitution continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth or as at the admission or establishment of the State as the case may be until altered in accordance with the Constitution of the State.   Saving of Power of State Parliaments.  107. Every power of the Parliament of a Colony which has become or becomes a State shall unless it is by this Constitution exclusively vested in the Parliament of the Commonwealth or withdrawn from the Parliament of the State continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth or as at the admission or establishment of the State as the case may be.   Saving of State laws.  108. Every law in force in a Colony which has become or becomes a State and relating to any matter within the powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth shall subject to this Constitution continue in force in the State; and until provision is made in that behalf by the Parliament of the Commonwealth the Parliament of the State shall have such powers of alteration and of repeal in respect of any such law as the Parliament of the Colony had until the Colony became a State.   Inconsistency of laws.  109. When a law of a State is inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth the latter shall prevail and the former shall to the extent of the inconsistency be invalid.   Provisions referring to Governor.  110. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor of a State extend and apply to the Governor for the time being of the State or other chief executive officer or administrator of the government of the State.   States may surrender territory.  111. The Parliament of a State may surrender any part of the State to the Commonwealth; and upon such surrender and the acceptance thereof by the Commonwealth such part of the State shall become subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Commonwealth.   States may levy charges for inspection laws.  112. After uniform duties of customs have been imposed a State may levy on imports or exports or on goods passing into or out of the State such charges as may be necessary for executing the inspection laws of the State; but the net produce of all charges so levied shall be for the use of the Commonwealth; and any such inspection laws may be annulled by the Parliament of the Commonwealth.   [277] Intoxicating liquids.  113. All fermented distilled or other intoxicating liquids passing into any State or remaining therein for use consumption sale or storage shall be subject to the laws of the State as if such liquids had been produced in the State.   States may not raise forces. Taxation of property of Commonwealth or State.  114. A State shall not without the consent of the Parliament of the Commonwealth raise or maintain any naval or military force or impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to the Commonwealth nor shall the Commonwealth impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to a State.   States not to coin money.  115. A State shall not coin money nor make anything but gold and silver coin a legal tender in payment of debts.   Commonwealth not to legislate in respect of religion.  116. The Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion or for imposing any religious observance or for prohibiting the free exercise of any religlon and no religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or public trust under the Commonwealth.   Rights of residents in States.  117. A subject of the Queen resident in any State shall not be subject in any other State to any disability or discrimination which would not be equally applicable to him if he were a subject of the Queen resident in such other State.   Recognition of laws &c. of States.  118. Full faith and credit shall be given throughout the Commonwealth to the laws the public Acts and records and the judicial proceedings of every State.   Protection of States from invasion and violence.  119. The Commonwealth shall protect every State against invasion and on the application of the Executive Government of the State against domestic violence.   Custody of offenders against laws of the Commonwealth.  120. Every State shall make provision for the detention in its prisons of persons accused or convicted of offences against the laws of the Commonwealth and for the punishment of persons convicted of such offences and the Parliament of the Commonwealth may make laws to give effect to this provision.     CHAPTER VI. New States. New States may be admitted or established.  121. The Parliament may admit to the Commonwealth or establish new States and may upon such admission or establishment make or impose such terms and conditions including the extent of representation in either House of the Parliament as it thinks fit.   Government of territories.  122. The Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory surrendered by any State to and accepted by the Commonwealth or of any territory placed by the Queen under the authority of and accepted by the Commonwealth or otherwise acquired by the Commonwealth and may allow the representation of such territory in either House of the Parliament to the extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.   Alteration of limits of States.  123. The Parliament of the Commomwealth may with the consent of the Parliament of a State and the approval of the majority of the electors of the State voting upon the question increase diminish or otherwise alter the limits of the State upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed on and may with the like consent make provision respecting the effect and operation of any increase or diminution or alteration of territory in relation to any State affected.   Formation of new States.  124. A new State may be formed by separation of territory from a State but only with the consent of the Parliament thereof and a new State may be formed by the union of two or more States or parts of States but only with the consent of the Parliaments of the States affected.     CHAPTER VII. Miscellaneous. Seat of Government.  125. The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be determined by the Parliament and shall be within territory which shall have been granted to or acquired by the Commonwealth and shall be vested in and belong to the Commonwealth and shall be in the State of New South Wales and be distant not less than one hundred miles from Sydney.   Such territory shall contain an area of not less than one hundred square miles and such portion thereof as shall consist of Crown lands shall be granted to the Commonwealth without any payment therefor.   The Parliament shall sit at Melbourne until it meet at the seat of Government.   [278] Pwwer to Her Majesty to authorise Governor-General to appoint deputies.  126. The Queen may authorise the Governor-General to appoint any person or any persons jointly or severally to be his deputy or deputies within any part of the Commonwealth and in that capacity to exercise during the pleasure of the Governor-General such powers and functions of the Governor-General as he thinks fit to assign to such deputy or deputies subject to any limitations expressed or directions given by the Queen; but the appointment of such deputy or deputies shall not affect the exercise by the Governor-General himself of any power or function.   Aborigines not to be counted in reckoning population.  127. In reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth or of a State or other part of the Commonwealth aboriginal natives shall not be counted.     CHAPTER VIII. Alteration of the Constitution. Mode of altering the Constitution.  128. This Constitution shall not be altered except in the following manner: -   The proposed law for the alteration thereof must be passed by an absolute majority of each House of the Parliament and not less than two nor more than six months after its passage through both Houses the proposed law shall be submitted in each State to the electors qualified to vote for the election of members of the House of Representatives. But if either House passes any such proposed law by an absolute majority and the other House rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with any amendment to which the first-mentioned House will not agree and if after an interval of three months the first-mentioned House in the same or the next session again passes the proposed law by an absolute majority with or without any amendment which has been made or agreed to by the other House and such other House rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with any amendment to which the first-mentioned House will not agree the Governor-General may submit the proposed law as last proposed by the first-mentioned House and either with or without any amendments subsequently agreed to by both Houses to the electors in each State qualified to vote for the election of the House of Representatives.   When a proposed law is submitted to the electors the vote shall be taken in such manner as the Parliament prescribes. But until the qualification of electors of members of the House of Representatives becomes uniform throughout the Commonwealth only one-half the electors voting for and against the proposed law shall be counted in any State in which adult suffrage prevails.   And if in a majority of the States a majority of the electors voting approve the proposed law and if a majority of all the electors voting also approve the proposed law it shall be presented to the Governor-General for the Queen's assent.   No alteration diminishing the proportionate representation of any State in either House of the Parliament or the minimum number of representatives of a State in the House of Representatives or increasing diminishing or otherwise altering the limits of the State or in any manner affecting the provisions of the Constitution in relation thereto shall become law unless the majority of the electors voting in that State approve the proposed law.   SCHEDULE OATH.  I A.B. do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria Her heirs and successors according to law. SO HELP ME GOD!     AFFIRMATION.  I A.B. do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria Her heirs and successors according to law.   (NOTE. - The name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for the time being is to be substituted from time to time.)   In his despatch of 27th December 1878 Sir George Bowen informed me that the Legislative Assembly of Victoria had authorised Mr. Graham Berry the Chief Secretary and Prime Minister and Mr. Pearson a member of the Assembly to proceed to London as Commissioners or delegates to solicit my advice and assistance and to lay' before me the views on the political affairs of Victoria entertained by the majority of the Assembly; [...] Shortly after the arrival of Mr. Berry and Mr. Pearson in England I received them at this office and Mr. Berry then left with me the letter of which I enclose a copy.  The objects of their mission have since been fully discussed between us at several interviews and I will now proceed to convey to you the opinion which Her Majesty's Government have form upon the important question at issue after full consideration of the statements that have been placed before them on behalf of the Government and the Assembly of Victoria on the one side and of the Council on the other.  The request urged by Mr. Berry in his letter of 26th February that Parliament should "by a simple alteration of the 60th section of the Constitution Act of Victoria enable the Legislative Assembly to enact in two distinct annual sessions' with a general election intervening any measure for the reform of the Constitution" is in my opinion even more open to objection than the proposal I understood him to convey in his memorandum of 6th August. [438]  But it is not necessary to discuss the merits of this or any other proposal for though fully recognizing the confidence in the mother country evinced by the reference of so important a question for the counsel and aid of the Imperial Government I still feel that the circumstances do not yet justify any Imperial legislation for the amendment of that Constitution Act by which self - government in the form which Victoria desired was conceded to her and by which the power of amending the Constitution was expressly and as an essential incident of self-government vested in the colonial Legislature with the consent of the Crown. The intervention of the Imperial Parliament would not in my opinion be justifiable except in an extreme emergency and in compliance with the urgent desire of the people of the colony when all available efforts on their part have been exhausted. But it would even if thus justified be attended with much difficulty and risk and be in itself a matter for grave regret. It would be held to involve an admission that the great colony of Victoria was compelled to ask the Imperial Parliament to resume a power which desiring to promote her welfare and believing in her capacity for self-government the Imperial Parliament had voluntarily surrendered; and that this request was made because the leaders of political parties from a general want of the moderation and sagacity essential to the success of constitutional government had failed to agree upon any compromise for enabling the business of the Colonial Parliament to be carried on.  It is nevertheless important that the question should be settled so soon as possible where it can be properly dealt with - that is in the Colonial Parliament; and I shall be glad if by the observations which I am about to make I can remove some part of the misunderstanding which has been amongst the chief obstacles to such a settlement.  Following the generally accepted precedent the Constitution Act of Victoria established two Legislative Chambers the Council and the Assembly and laid down to a certain extent their mutual relations - of which it appears to me a better definition rather than an alteration is now required. For as no party in Victoria desires to abolish the Council I feel confident that there can be no wish in the words of your Ministers to "reduce it to a sham" or by depriving it of the powers which properly belong to a second Chamber to confer on the Assembly a complete practical supremacy uncontrolled even by that sense of sole responsibility which might exert a beneficial influence on the action of a single Chamber. Nor can I suppose that the extreme view of the position of the Council which it has recently to a great extent itself disclaimed can be supported by any who have sufficiently examined the subject.  The recent difference between the two Houses of Victoria like the most serious of those which have preceded it turned upon the ultimate control of finance. I observe that the address of the Legislative Assembly of the 14th February 1878 dwells almost exclusively on the necessity of securing to that House sufficient financial control to enable adequate supplies to be provided for the public service and it is prominently urged in Mr. Berry's letter of 26th February in proof of the necessity for finding some solution of the present constitutional difficulty that "scarcely a year passes but it becomes a question whether the supplies necessary for the Queen's service will be granted". [439] But this difficulty would not arise if the two Houses of Victoria were guided in this matter as in others by the practice of the Imperial Parliament the Council following the practice of the House of Lords and the Assembly that of the House of Commons. The Assembly like the House of Commons would claim and in practice exercise the right of granting aids and supplies to the Crown of limiting the matter manner measure and time of such grants and of so framing Bills of Supply that these rights should be maintained inviolate; and as it would refrain from annexing to a Bill of Aid or Supply any clause or clauses of a nature foreign to or different from the matter of such a Bill so the Council would refrain from any steps so injurious to the public service as the rejection of an Appropriation Bill.  It would be well if the two Houses in Victoria accepting the view which I have thus indicated of their mutual relations in this important part of the work would maintain it in future by such a general understanding as would be most in harmony with the spirit of constitutional government. But after all that has passed it may be considered necessary to define those relations more closely than has been attempted here and this might be effected either by adopting a joint standing order as was proposed in 1867 or by legislation. Of these the former would seem to be the preferable course for there might be no slight difficulty in framing a statute to declare the conditions under which one House of Parliament in a colony having two Houses should exercise or refrain from exercising the powers which though conferred upon it must not always be asserted. But I must add that the clearest definition of the relative position of the two Houses however arrived at would not suffice to prevent collisions unless interpreted with that discretion and mutual forbearance which has been so often exemplified in the history of the Imperial Parliament.  If however it should be felt that the respective positions of the two Houses in matters of taxation and appropriation can only be defined by an amendment of the Constitution Act there may be other points such as a proposal to enact that a dissolution of Parliament shall apply to the Legislative Council as well as the Assembly that might usefully be considered at the same time; but I refrain from discussing them now feeling that their merits can best be appreciated in the Colony itself. [440]  It has been urged that some legislation is necessary to insure mechanically the termination after reasonable discussion and delay of a prolonged difference between the two Houses upon questions not connected with finance. I do not yet like to admit that the Council of Victoria will not like similar bodies in other great colonies without any such stringent measure recognise its constitutional position and so transact its business that the wishes of the people as clearly and repeatedly expressed should ultimately prevail; nor have I yet seen any suggestion for such legislation which I can deem free from objection.  I hope that the views I have expressed may not be without influence in securing such a mutual agreement between the two Houses as to remove any necessity for Imperial legislation and that as both parties profess to desire only what is reasonable and as there has been now an interval for reflection a satisfactory and enduring solution of the difficulty may be arrived at in the colony. The course of action which Her Majesty's Government might adopt should this hope unfortunately be disappointed must in a great degree depend upon the circumstances which may then exist; but I can hardly anticipate that the Imperial Parliament will consent to disturb in any way at the instance of House of the Colonial Legislature the settlement embodied in the Constitution Act unless the Council should refuse to concur with the Assembly in some reasonable proposal for regulating the future relations of the two Houses in financial matters in accordance with the high constitutional precedent to which I have referred and should persist in such refusal after the proposals of the Assembly for that purpose an appeal having beets made to the constituencies on the subject have been ratified by the country and again sent up by the Assembly for the consideration of the Council.  SIR  A Despatch signed by yourself (No. 121 of the 1st of October 1878) was handed to the Ministers by His Excellency Sir G. F. Bowen a few days after ) Parliament had been prorogued. Had this Despatch been communicated in time to the Cabinet Ministers would have felt it their duty to request that it might be laid before Parliament. It is only right however to add that the proved futility of attempts at reconciliation frequently renewed had produced a state of feeling in both Houses which made it undesirable to protract discussion in Parliament.  The Despatch alluded to the differences of opinion which have existed at various times in the colony as to the method in which reform should be effected. There is not and there never has been any difference of opinion among the large body of electors as to the principles on which reform must be based. All agree that the legislation of the colony ought to express the mature will of the great majority of the electors whereas Government is controlled at present in all essential particulars by the veto of the minority. Mr. Francis proposed that both Houses should vote together in cases of dispute. The circumstances of the session 1877-8 induced Ministers to favor the plan of a nominee Upper House and the measure they introduced last session proposed to limit the use of the veto enjoyed by the Legislative Council. [441]  In all proposals however the object aimed at was the same to give effect to the deliberate purpose of the representative Chamber.  The legislative measures which after mature deliberation Ministers finally decided on as most proper for the Assembly to request and for the Imperial Parliament to grant was a simple alteration of the 60th section of The Constitution Act so as to enable the Legislative Assembly to enact in two distinct annual sessions with a general election intervening any measure for the reform of the Constitution. It can scarcely be called an extreme measure to propose that a Bill carried in the Assembly by an absolute majority on the second and third readings afterwards submitted to the constituencies and again carried in the new House by absolute majorities should at last pass into law. Such a change in the present Constitution would it is believed supply that safety-valve which is admittedly required. Ministers also feel that it would simply carry into effect the original intention of the Imperial Government which undoubtedly intended to confer self-government on the colony.  The third paragraph of the Despatch proceeds to state that in your opinion no sufficient cause has been shown for the intervention of the Imperial Parliament in the manner suggested. I venture to believe that this opinion will be modified by a consideration of the events which have taken place since you received the information on which your Despatch is based. The Council has refused even to discuss the Bill carried in the Assembly. Invited by the Assembly to a conference the representatives of the Council declined either to abandon the right to reject Money Bills including the annual Appropriation Bill or to substitute a suspensive for the absolute veto on legislation at present enjoyed and freely exercised by the Council.  Thus after long and exhaustive discussions the representatives of the Assembly were compelled to report that not even a basis for negotiation could be secured; and informal overtures for fresh negotiations have been barren of all results except to show that the most conciliatory members of the Assembly could devise nothing which the Council would even consider. I feel it my duty to express a belief that no Ministry will be able to carry on the Queen's Government satisfactorily in Victoria if some solution to present difficulties be not provided. At present scarcely a year passes but it becomes a question whether the supplies necessary for the Queen's service will be granted and the discussion of useful laws is unavoidably postponed to that of constitutional reform.  The Assembly has decided to invite the interposition of England not because its members are in doubt with respect to powers conferred on them by the Constitution Act sufficient to practically establish the principle for which they contend but in order to escape from exercise of those powers at times and under circumstances when the public mind becomes unduly if not dangerously excited.  I am &c.  GRAHAM BERRY.  Whereas it is expedient to constitute a Federal Council of Australasia for the purpose of dealing with such matters of common Australasian interest in respect to which united action is desirable as can be dealt with without unduly interfering with the management of the internal affairs of the several colonies by their respective legislatures:   Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows:   2. There shall be in and for Her Majesty's possessions in Australasia a Federal Council constituted as herein-after provided and called the Federal Council of Australasia which shall have the functions powers and authority herein-after defined. [458]  3. Within such possessions Her Majesty shall have power by and with the advice and consent of the Council to make laws for the purposes herein-after specified subject to the provisions herein contained respecting the operation of this Act.  4. A session of the Council shall be held once at least in every two years.  5. Each colony shall be represented in the Council by two members except in the case of Crown colonies which shall be represented by one member each. Her Majesty at the request of the legislatures of the colonies may by Order in Council from time to time increase the number of representatives for each colony.  6. The legislature of any colony may make such provision as it thinks fit for the appointment of the representatives of that colony and for determining the tenure of their office.  7. The first session of the Council shall be held at Hobart in the colony of Tasmania. Subsequent sessions shall be held in such colony as the Council shall from time to time determine.  8. The Council shall be summoned and prorogued by the Governor of the colony in which the session shall be held; and shall be so summoned and prorogued by proclamation published in the "Government Gazette" of each of the colonies; and shall meet at such time and at such place as shall be named in the proclamation.  9. The Governor of each colony shall from time to time transmit to the Governors of the other colonies the names of the members appointed to represent the colony of which he is Governor.  10. Notwithstanding any vacancy in the representation of any colony the Council shall be competent to proceed to the dispatch of business and to exercise the authority hereby conferred upon it.  11. At the request of the Governors of any three of the colonies a special session of the Council shall be summoned to deal with such special matters as may he mentioned in the proclamation convening it. Until the Council shall make other provision in that behalf any such special session shall be summoned by the Governor of Tasmania and shall be held at Hobart.  12. The Council shall in each session elect one of its members to be president.  13. The presence of a majority of the whole number of members of the Council for the time being representing a majority of the colonies with respect to which this Act is in operation shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the dispatch of business and all questions which shall arise in the Council small be decided by the votes of a majority of the members present including the president. [459]  14. No member of the Council shall sit or vote until he shall have taken and subscribed before the governor of one of the colonies the oath of allegiance contained in the schedule hereto: Provided that every member authorised by the law of the colony which he represents to make an affirmation instead of taking an oath may make such affirmation instead of the oath hereby required to be taken.  15. Saving Her Majesty's prerogative and subject to the provisions herein contained with respect to the operation of this Act the Council shall have legislative authority in respect to the several matters following: -   (a) The relations of Australasia with the islands of the Pacific:  (b) Prevention of the influx of criminals:  (c) Fisheries in Australasian waters beyond territorial limits:  (d) The service of civil process of the courts of any colony within Her Majesty's possessions in Australasia out of the jurisdiction of the colony in which it is issued:  (e) The enforcement of judgments of courts of law of any colony beyond the limits of the colony:  (f) The enforcement of criminal process beyond the limits Of the colony in which it is issued and the extradition of offenders (including deserters of wives and children and deserters from the imperial or colonial naval or military forces):  (g) The custody of offenders on board ships belonging to Her Majesty's Colonial Governments beyond territorial limits:  (h) Any matter which at the request of the legislatures 'of the colonies Her Majesty by Order in Council shall think fit to refer to the Council:  (i) Such of the following matters as may be referred to the Council by the legislatures of any two or more colonies that is to say general defences quaranthe patents of invention and discovery copyright bills of exchange and promissory notes uniformity of weights and measures recognition in other colonies of any marriage or divorce duly solemnized or decreed in any colony naturalisation of aliens status of corporations and joint stock companies in other colonies than that in which they have been constituted and any Other matter of general Australasian interest with respect to which the legislatures of the several colonies can legislate within their own limits and as to which it is deemed desirable that there should be a law of general application: provided that in such cases the Acts of the Council shall extend only to the colonies by whose legislatures the matter shall have been so referred to it and such other colonies as may afterwards adopt the same. [460]  Every Bill in respect of the matters marked (a) (b) or (c) shall unless previously approved by Her Majesty through one of Her Principal Secretaries of State be reserved for the signification of Her Majesty's pleasure.  16. The Governors of any two or more of the colonies may upon an address of the legislatures of such colonies refer for the consideration and determination of the Council any questions relating to those colonies or their relations with one another and the Council shall thereupon have authority to consider and determine by Act of Council the matters so referred to it.  17. Every Bill passed by the Council shall be presented for Her Majesty's assent to the Governor of the colony in which the Council shall be sitting wino shall declare according to his discretion but subject to the provisions of this Act and to Her Majesty's instructions either that he assents thereto in Her Majesty's name or that he withholds such assent or that he reserves the Bill for the signification of Her Majesty's pleasure or that he will be prepared to assent thereto subject to certain amendments to be specified by him.  18. When the Governor assents to a Bill in Her Majesty's name he shall by the first convenient opportunity send an authentic copy of the Act to one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State and if Her Majesty within one year after receipt thereof by the Secretary of State thinks fit to disallow the Act such disallowance (with a certificate of the Secretary of State of the day on which the Act was received by him) being signified by such Governor by message to the Council or by proclamation in the "Government Gazette" of all the colonies affected thereby shall annul the Act from and after the day of such signification.  19. A Bill reserved for the signification of Her Majesty's pleasure shall not have any force unless and until within one year from the day on which it was presented to the Governor for Her Majesty's assent such Governor signifies by message to the Council or by proclamation published as last aforesaid that it has received the assent of Her Majesty.  20. All Acts of the Council on being assented to in manner herein-before provided shall have the force of law in all Her Majesty's possessions in Australasia in respect to which this Act is in operation or in the several colonies to which they shall extend as the case may be and on board all British ships other than Her Majesty's ships of war whose last port of clearance or port of destination is in any such possession or colony.  21. Every Act assented to in the first instance shall be proclaimed in the "Government Gazette" of the colony in which the session of the Council at which it was passed was held and shall also) be transmitted by the Governor assenting thereto to the Governors of the several colonies affected thereby and shall be proclaimed by them within the respective colonies of which they are Governors. [461]   22. If in any case the provisions of any Act of the Council shall be repugnant to or inconsistent with the law of any colony affected thereby the former shall prevail and the latter shall so far as such repugnance or inconsistency extends have no operation.  26. The necessary expenditure connected with the business of the Council shall be defrayed in the first instance by the colony wherein the expenditure is incurred and shall be ultimately contributed and paid by the several colonies in proportion to their population. The amounts payable by the several colonies shall be assessed and apportioned in case of difference by the Governor of the colony of Tasmania.  29. The Council may make such representations or recommendations to Her Majesty as it may think fit with respect to any matters of general Australasian interest or to the relations of Her Majesty's possessions in Australasia with the possessions of foreign powers.  30. This Act shall not come into operation in respect of any colony until the legislature of such colony shall have passed an Act or Ordinance declaring that the same shall be in force therein and appointing a day on and from which such operation shall take effect nor until four colonies at the least shall have passed such Act or Ordinance.  31. This Act shall cease to be in operation in respect to any colony the 'legislature of which shall have passed an Act or Ordinance declaring that the same shall cease to be in force therein: Provided nevertheless that all Acts of the Council passed while this Act was in operation in such colony shall continue to be in force therein unless altered or repealed by the Council.  32. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as the Federal Council of Australasia Act 1885.  (b) The Supreme Court and Local Courts Compared  Anyone who will take the trouble to compare the course of proceeding followed in our Supreme Court in an action at law with that of our Local Courts cannot fail to be struck by the immense superiority of the latter over the former. In the Supreme Court it may safely be asserted that no layman has yet ventured to draw his own pleadings and conduct his own case till ripe for trial without professional assistance. Few indeed are the instances in which a suitor has had the hardihood or the confidence to conduct the trial of his own case. In the Local Courts there is nothing in the practice to prevent every man from being his own lawyer. Persons frequently issue their own summonses and conduct their own cases without any help whatever from legal men. In the Supreme Court the costs on both sides attendant upon the trial of a cause can hardly be estimated at less than £100. Frequently they amount to between £300 and £400 and the sad experience of suitors will confirm the statement that even this latter sum cannot be taken as an extreme limit. In the Local Courts the cost of a similar action may be estimated at a sum varying according to the amount in dispute  -  between a few shillings and £20. But the most striking feature of the suggested comparison has yet to be noticed  -  the difference between the two tribunals in the all-important matter of the time elapsing between the commencement and final determination of the proceedings.  In the Local Court a plaintiff may reasonably expect to reap the fruits of a successful action within a month  -  that is provided there is no appeal to the Supreme Court. Should a Local Court suitor be drawn by an appeal to the higher court its cumbrous and wearisome proceedings may extend the time by some two or three months  -  a delay vexatious enough it must be confessed but far preferable to the ordinary course of a Supreme Court action which we will now consider.  A suitor in the Supreme Court may deem himself most fortunate if in spite of the delays in pleading he brings his cause to trial in six weeks from the issue of the writ. More often than not this interval may be reckoned by months instead of weeks. After the trial the much abused practice of obtaining a rule nisi upon every conceivable point that technical ingenuity can suggest comes into play. After the granting of the rule nisi a considerable time elapses before the argument  -  a time which cannot be estimated even approximately. Anything is seized hold of and admitted as an excuse for delay here; a marriage and death in the family of either counsel or of one of the judges seems to be quite a legitimate ground for putting off the cause. Then when at length the argument is concluded the judgment is commonly reserved and another interval occurs which may be calculated at from one to eighteen months before the final judgment is given unless indeed the cause itself dies out as has sometimes happened in which case the judgment is never given at all. If the rule nisi is made absolute the delays are again repeated till many a disappointed and purse-exhausted suitor is driven into the Insolvent Court  -  a step which invokes ideas of wretchedness not only to the suitor but to his wife and children too distressing to be here dilated upon. [188]  It need perhaps hardly be said that this comparison is designed solely to bring into a popular view the defects of procedure attendant upon remedies sought in the Supreme Court and is in no wise intended as disrespectful to the judges who administer an imperfect system.  In view of all these advantages possessed by the Local Courts it is evident that an extension of their present limited jurisdiction would be a most desirable instalment of law reform. It would relieve the Supreme Court of a large number of the smaller cases now necessarily subject to that tribunal. It would tend towards that bringing of justice to every man's door so desiderated by earnest law reformers. Rich men having heavy interests at stake might still indulge in the luxury of a Supreme Court action but these are just the persons and these are just the interests which can best afford the prolixity and expense of that form of proceeding. Poorer individuals to whom that prolixity and expense are simply ruinous would find cheap and expeditious justice in the inferior tribunals instead of being as now compelled into buying justice too dearly in the higher court. In short every reason which can be found in support of the creation and existence of Local Courts at all may fairly be urged in aid of the extension of their jurisdiction. The lawyers might suffer and no doubt will find objections; but the interest of the general body of the public being involved there remains scarcely a doubt that when the community awake to a sense of the advantages they will obtain by the proposed amendment a Bill to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Local Courts will meet with unqualified approval. 