 I have all along disclaimed any pretensions to scientific knowledge. Without any knowledge whatever of the science of geology I simply compared in my own mind the geological formations which I saw in California with others that I had seen in Australia eighteen years previously; and becoming fully persuaded that if the existence of gold was to be tested by such outward appearances gold must exist in Australia as well as in California I acted on that persuasion and as will be seen in the sequel at the very first trial discovered the existence of gold where I had imagined it to be and in an alluvial form. [...]  It was with an anxious heart therefore that I again landed at Sydney in the month of January 1851. On my passage [i.e. from California] thither and immediately on my arrival I made known to my friends and companions my confident expectations on the subject; one and all however derided me and treated my views and opinions as those of a madman. Still undaunted on the 5th of February [1851] I set out from Sydney on horseback alone to cross the Blue Mountains. [...]  After resting one day at Guyong on the 12th of February [1851] I started thence accompanied by young Lister. Our course was down the Lewes Pond Creek a tributary to the Summer Hill Creek which again is a tributary of the Macquarie River. After travelling a distance of about fifteen miles I found myself in the country that I was so anxiously longing to behold again. My recollection of it had not deceived me. The resemblance of its formation to that of California could not be doubted or mistaken. I felt myself surrounded by gold; and with tremulous anxiety panted for the moment of trial when my magician's wand should transform this trackless wilderness into a region of countless wealth.   Still one difficulty seemed to present itself. There had been an unusual drought during the summer which was now drawing to a close and the creek; where we then were was completely dried up. My guide however in answer to my inquiries told me that we should find water lower down; so following its course we soon fell in with some rocks which contained a sufficient supply. [4]  We now turned out our horses; and seated ourselves on the turf as it was necessary to satisfy the cravings of hunger before I ventured on my grand experiment. Had that failed but little appetite for food would have been left me.  My guide went for water to drink and after making a hasty repast I told him that we were now in the goldfields and that the gold was under his feet as he went to fetch the water for our dinner. He stared with incredulous amazement and on my telling him that I would now find some gold watched my movements with the most intense interest. My own excitement probably was far more intense than his. I took the pick and scratched the gravel of aschistose dyke which ran across the creek at right angles with its side; and with the trowel I dug a panful of earth which I washed in the water-hole. The first trial produced a little piece of gold. "Here it is!" I exclaimed; and I then washed five panfuls in succession obtaining gold from all but one.  No further proof was necessary. To describe my feelings at that eventful moment would be impossible. What I said on the instant - though I must admit not warranted as the language of calm reflection - - has been since much laughed at. And though my readers may renew the laugh I shall not hesitate to repeat it because as it was the natural and impulsive expression of my overwrought feelings at the moment so is it the only account I can now give of what those feelings were.  "This" I exclaimed to my guide "is a memorable day in the history of New South Wales. I shall be a baronet you will be knighted and my old horse will be stuffed put into a glass-case and sent to the British Museum !"  At that instant I felt myself to be a great man. I was as mad perhaps at the moment as Don Quixote was his life through; and assuredly my companion was as simple as Sancho Panza - for the good youth afterwards told me he expected I should obtain for him the honour I had promised.  On our return that night to the inn at Guyong I wrote a memorandum of the discovery which I afterwards gave to the Colonial Secretary as a memorial of the great event.  So far as the digging prospects are concerned I can merely repeat what I have already stated that some are doing very well others earning good wages and great numbers scarcely earning their rations. [22] The gold digger's fortune cannot be more suitably expressed than by terming it a lottery. Here's a case in point. The party next to us have dug better than 3 lbs. To-day and our company have realised something less than half an ounce. To give anything like the average earnings is entirely out of the question for none of the miners like to make known the proceeds of their labours. The most communicative are the very fortunate and the unfortunate the latter because they have nothing to be robbed of and the former because they take great pleasure in talking of their luck. Messrs. Meyers and Twaddle have commenced a store in a bark building with an excellent prospect of success. The great evil to be apprehended and the one which will be the stepping stone to every description of irregularity if not to bloodshed has at length made its appearance. You will easily understand that I allude to sly-grog selling. The feeling here against this accursed nuisance particularly amongst the respectable portion of our body is decidedly strong. One gentleman proposed upon hearing the intelligence to proceed at once to the camp of the retailer and stave his keg in. Indeed my impression is that bumboatmen will get very little quarter at Ophir and the less the better. You can form little idea of the rapidity of our increase. Ophir is a lake into which numbers of rivers and streams have been turned without any visible outlet but its supplies of labour or rather its capability of receiving it like the volume of the increasing waters when they arrive at a certain point must find a passage for themselves and overflow the country in some other direction.  In my last I stated that many were doing little good and I now repeat the statement; but this is not surprising in numberless instances for there are scores who come hither without any preparation whatever and if anything were wanting to prove an expression formerly made by you that the people were afflicted with temporary insanity the fact that mobs are constantly arriving here from Sydney without food money or implements were of itself sufficient. They evidently came hither with the idea that they could kick the precious metal out of the earth with their heels and would thus be enabled to supply themselves with necessaries. Although something of the sort has been said before you cannot impress it too strongly upon the minds of the public that the requisites for success as a general rule are a good constitution inured to hard work a plentiful supply of provisions warm bedding and a complete set of implements. The stories told of men washing the auriferous earth in cabbage-tree hats and tin plates are mere inventions of the fancy although the outfit of many who have come to Ophir to share its treasures is very little superior in point of real usefulness to those articles of colonial necessity.  The first great outcry which was raised when the discovery was made public was what will the settlers do for labour? [23] This was a very natural source of alarm; but so far as I can see it is as regards the immediate country a groundless one. The outside districts will no doubt be materially injured. Shepherds and hut-keepers will be rushing to Ophir at the expiration of their agreements to do a very little bit of work get disgusted and return to their former occupations. Even now there would be little difficulty in hiring a hundred men and if the neighbouring stockholders require servants by coming hither they will be enabled to supply themselves.  There are several things I wished to say but as the dogs have eaten all the fat and when that was done bolted with the lamp I am obliged to scribble by the fire and as moreover two of my neighbours are carrying on an interesting conversation in a rather obstreperous style as to whether rocks grow like pumpkins or cabbages my brain is getting into a state of delightful obfustication and I must knock off.  Flour is selling at £3 for 100 lbs.; beef 3d. per lb.; mutton 3.5d. ditto; tea 3s. ditto; sugar 6d. ditto; tobacco 8s. As I have not many facts to give you I have interlarded the few contained in this scrawl with an opinion or two. You can use them or not as you choose.  Ophir May 29.  Since our correspondence of the above date we have received another communication but not having space for the whole we select the following incident as illustrative of remarkable coolness. A person residing in the neighbourhood of Bathurst missed his horse a few days ago and having reason to suspect that he had been ridden to the diggings by a certain individual he started forthwith. He had not proceeded far on his journey before he discovered that he was on the right track his horse with a rider upon him having preceded him only a few hours. Putting spurs to his Rocinante he dashed onward at a brisk pace and arrived at the diggings just in time to see the horse-thief dismount. As a matter of course he proceeded to take charge when the fellow coolly drew a pistol from his belt and presented it threatened if he laid his hand upon the animal or in any way interfered with himself he would scatter his brains to the wind. This determined movement of the impudent villain so paralysed the owner of the animal that he quietly took himself off leaving the desperado in undisturbed possession. This story smells strongly of California.  THE DIGGINGS  (From a Correspondent.)  Golden Point Ballarat 27th October 1851.  The first view of the Golden Point as it bursts upon the vision of the traveller has been often described but such descriptions have been invariably sad failures; an association of ideas appeared wanting in the delineators. I have no hesitation in saying having queried those whose judgment is worth something and who coincide in my views - that upon the first blush of the affair the resemblance of the diggings to a city which has undergone the horrors of a siege and been battered to the ground is most complete; whilst the thousands moving amongst the ruins ably represent the besieging army removing the wounded and plundering the tents spread as they are over the ground in all directions add to the truthfulness of the picture which at night is rendered complete by the thousands of watch-fires which cover hill and dale. So much for description; now for stern facts.  An almost endless amount of paper ink and breath has been expended touching the success which may be rationally looked for by those who seek for gold in these regions. The whole affair lies in a remarkably small compass. If a party fully equipped and with an inflexible determination to treat cavalierly the hardships which they must encounter in the pursuit of gold - who are not to be daunted by unsuccessful efforts at the outset and who are prepared to devote three months to delving the earth there is no doubt that their efforts must be ultimately crowned with success. A parcel of drivelling idiots have been here and returned to Melbourne after excavating a few feet and expecting that such an unusual amount of labour was to be rewarded by saddle bags stuffed with the precious metal and with a dolorous whine declaring there was no luck for them and the hardships they had encountered were incredible. The wives of such individuals had better in future secure them to their apron strings; instead of allowing them to roam in search of gold; for where like the Sybarite of old a rumpled rose-leaf would destroy the repose of a man he may be well assured that gold-seeking is not his mission. Gold-finding here is a pure matter of chance: by having the good fortune to make choice of a piece of ground through which the much-coveted vein makes its way very large amounts are realised whilst on the other hand the very next hole although sunk to a considerable depth shall not yield a speck. Such is gold-hunting at Ballarat. To talk of judicious selection as to land for mining purposes is sheer humbug there not being the slightest indication upon the surface. The amount of gold found in the aggregate is large. [25] You must not suppose the gold brought in by the escort may be taken as a guide as to the yield of the mines; it is indeed very far from it for I unhesitatingly affirm that three times the amount is taken from the ground by private hands weekly than is forwarded down by the Government escort independent of which it is notorious that very large sums are to be found upon the ground amongst some of the miners - a very injudicious proceeding tempting the cupidity of the dishonest. [...] In the aggregate there are ten thousand persons employed within a circle of twelve miles more or less connected with mining operations; and although many are daily leaving for their homes their places are speedily supplied by fresh speculators. Adelaide is also pouring in some hundreds with yellow fever remarkably strong upon them. As there is a fear that the waters of the creek will have dried up before the termination of the summer a meeting was held the other day W. Westgarth Esq. M.L.C. in the chair when it was unanimously agreed that the miners should pay one shilling per head for the erection of a dam so that if carried out the miners' greatest dread - a scarcity of water - will be obviated. For some weeks past I have observed in a Geelong Journal attacks continually being made upon the officers of Government employed here and as continual dropping of water will wear away a stone I began to place some confidence in the reiterated statements as they remained almost entirely or at all events very feebly contradicted. You may imagine then my surprise upon arriving here and making the necessary inquiries to find that all such charges were baseless and without the slightest foundation - malice and sheer invention alone had been brought to bear on the matter. This is scandalous and highly disreputable in any public Journal being made the vehicle for such falsehoods. Captain Mair P.M. and Messrs. Doveton and Armstrong combine the suaviter in modo with the fortiter in re in the discharge of their various public duties. It may be true that certain stump orators are dissatisfied with such a state of things for unless they can find opportunities to abuse those set in authority over them and create a ferment amongst the designing and ignorant they are nothing and consequently convene illegal meetings with the view of exciting to breaches of the law Let such men beware for it would look rather ignominious for a very choice stump orator to be suddenly dragged from his pedestal manacled and unceremoniously marched into town for preaching resistance to the laws. This must be the result to put down such demagogues; and in doing which all respectable individuals upon the ground will support the constituted authorities to the death. There not being the slightest prospect of these diggings being exhausted for years permanent officers' quarters together with an hospital should be established.   The scene here has been made more cheering during the past week by the visit of many ladies from Melbourne and Geelong numerous public officers and other gentlemen being in their train. [26] They were of course as they should be well received.  Sly-grog-selling having obtained a head which began palpably to be felt and to threaten a pretty general demoralization - three cart-loads of spirits and malt liquors were seized by the police on Saturday last. Mr. Owen Fisher has opened a Teetotal establishment which is well patronised by those who prefer the "cup which cheers but not inebriates."  I have great complaints to make of the Buninyong Post Office. We cannot obtain the newspapers for some reasons which Mr. Veitch I imagine will find it rather difficult to explain. Your last papers have not arrived and the disappointment is very great as they are looked for up [here] with the greatest avidity as the only wholesome literary good which can be obtained upon the ground. My own papers also have not arrived although I have written to the Postmaster for that purpose. Captain McCrae should come up immediately as in duty bound and examine the Buninyong Post Office in which I suspect cart loads of letters and papers are lying for persons at the Diggings. All letters or papers for the Diggings should be directed Ballarat and not Buninyong.  Several robberies have occurred here lately in fact they are on the increase and a stronger body of police with a couple of Detectives is requisite.  The Escort leaves here to day with £12000 worth of gold.  A body of special constables are to be sworn in in aid of the constituted authorities. I look upon this as an excellent regulation. I must conclude for the present.  GEELONG  (FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT)  Thursday 11th September The news from Buninyong continues to be of a most exciting nature each succeeding day reveals some new and startling account of good fortune on the part of the diggers many of which reports however must be looked upon with extreme suspicion or I should rather say acted upon with extreme caution; the result of the late intelligence from that quarter has driven many almost to madness. [285] No sacrifice is spared to secure an outfit for the diggings families are left unprotected and in some cases left on but scanty means while their head and protector plunges without the least foresight into the exciting but fickle game. -  Such a reckless thirst for gain cannot be too severely censured or such a sudden revolution of feeling too much deplored; the gold field is not confined to one square mile of country it is not on one hill one creek or on one station only that it exists it will not disappear of its own accord it must be taken away and there is not the smallest reason for this universal rush from comparative comfort to a hard toilsome and perhaps precarious occupation to all who really intend going to the gold field I would say wait for fine weather; there is no chance of one hundred times the number of diggers that are there at present getting all the gold either this or next year; there is as yet no protection at the mines wait for that also and thus by a regular and steady stream of adventurers pouring into the mines much good may result but if the present general rush be not checked a fearful scene of confusion and disappointment must follow.  Considering that at the time the present discovery was made many parties had laid out a considerable sum of money one shilling of which they had not recovered by gold digging; and also that very many have not been so fortunate as the few it would hardly be fair to immediately exact the 30s. license. But it must be evident to every One that it is now high time for the Government to interfere and so long as it acts judiciously it is necessary that we should support it.  I am informed on what I consider unquestionable authority that the majority of the respectable class of diggers are crying out for police protection and not only expressing a desire to obtain that protection but expressing also their willingness to pay for it; but they do not think that after the loss they have sustained and the hardships they have endured they should immediately be called on to pay the full amount. - -  My informant left the diggings on Tuesday morning last; there were then two hundred and fifty people on the ground he past about seventy on the road up among whom was one man actually wheeling a bag of flour. [286] He reports that some of the diggers had been robbing Mr. Yuille of his sheep; that one man had been robbed on his way from the mines to Buninyong of two ounces of gold the robber having completely cut the left eye out of his victim's head with the blow of a sharp stone; that there are sad doings in the township of Buninyong connected with the public house and that the country is in a fearful state owing to the late rains.  The only protection at present afforded to the whole district consists of the Chief Constable of Chepstowe and three constables. But as the district is a very large one only one can be spared for the diggings and as we may reasonably suppose that at least one-third of the diggers are not saints we may be able to guess what would become of the constable in the event of any disturbance.  It is therefore apparent to every one that immediate measures must be adopted by the Government and if not too severe supported by the people to preserve order and make the colony what there is every prospect of its becoming the finest and richest country in the world.  A mounted patrol between the diggings and Melbourne and Geelong and some half dozen troopers a constable at the mines with at least three in the township of Buninyong will be immediately required for the protection of the mails as well as of the travellers to and from the mines for the quantity of gold that may now be expected to arrive regularly will be a great temptation to some of the prowlers that are always found travelling the country.  THE BALLARAT DIGGINGS   Buninyong Monday morning.  I can hardly realise the sudden changes in this locality Where three weeks ago was a wilderness is now encamped some two hundred workmen whose numbers are hourly increasing at a ratio that will double the population in another eight or ten days. [287] Allotments are marked out new sites fixed upon and the pick-axe and spade are brought into operation without a moment's delay after arrival - it is a race for wealth in which even the laggard gains a prize. Every movement is measured by troy weight and any of the workmen would as soon think of swallowing a nugget as making a strait back. Gold is revolutionising manners and language - everything is tinctured with the yellow hue and ounces and grains have become familiar words. There is a momentous change coming and the sooner we prepare ourselves the better for every day brings proof stronger and stronger; that we are as yet merely on the verge of still more important discoveries.  But here I may be pardoned if I give one word of caution - to those who by the paper I perceive are intending to give up their situation I ask them to consider if it would not be to their advantage to show to their employers that in a time of great excitement devotion to their duties out-weighed the prospect of a transitory gain. I say transitory for I feel assured that many who may take up gold-digging for a time and even meet with success will be unable to continue it on account of the excessive toil it entails - it is a calling that requires strength sinew endurance and a good sound constitution to combat the inclemency of the weather and constant exposure to it added to which there is the chance of ill success for gold digging is at best a lottery; but truth compels me to state at the same time that up to the present I know of no instance of entire failure but new-comers will have to take their chance and discover fresh localities and submit to the same inconveniences and loss of time as those who heralded the present discoveries.   At Ballarat every man is his own architect. Here are tents and bark huts of the most primitive construction A few poles and a stick athwart overstretched with a few yards of calico gives protection against wind and rain or rather I should say are supposed to do so for I am much mistaken if whilst sleeping coiled like a 'cocoon' within the folds of a blanket I did not feel a copious aspersion from a passing storm followed by a small rivulet running along my bed instead of its own and emptying itself into a lagoon at my feet; which novel situation was not counterpoised by the facility of taking an astronomical lesson gratis through a rent in the top of the canvas. [288] A serenade of frogs may be pleasant but certainly is not universally so; nor does a possum snarl chord agreeably with the boom of a bull frog's bassoon but exhausted nature needs no wooing and stringybark is a good substitute for swansdown. Shaving is entirely dispensed with - all have turned 'beardies'; soaping a chin might lose a 'nugget' so beards luxuriate and a ferocious crop of moustachios are coming on as though the diggers were preparing for shearing time. Everyone is transmogrified and the scene whirls on as though it were a dream or a phantasy.  It is morning - the laughing-jackass has imitated an apoplectic alderman enjoying a joke and magpies round notes have bid welcome to the morn - fires are blazing steaks and chops are frizzling pannikins are clattering tea-kettles fizzing and many a hungry eye is watching the matutinal preparations of their respective 'Soyers'. Breakfast dispatched all hands are at work - pick spade sledge cart and cradle are in rapid movement the work has begun in earnest and with the exception of a pause for dinner will continue until nightfall. Hark! there is a man in a red nightcap puts his hand to his mouth and in stentorian voice calls on all men to strike work and come to a public meeting. At the sound spades are stuck in the ground pickaxes are thrown aside and the cradles are stilled. Cabbage trees red night-caps and blue shirts flock to the appointed spot a most motley group of hirsute mortals earnestly resolved and men not to be trifled with. And so all come trooping and after a brief delay appoint a Chairman who mounts a high stump. He is the 'Stump Orator'. Before discussing the question which is a dispute with some new-comers he calls in virtue of his office for a division. 'All who are satisfied with the present regulations stand on this side' says Tom Toddleton 'and those who are dissatisfied remain where they are'. Tom thus executes a 'coup d'etat' securing a large majority without the bother of discussion which is a decided improvement and wastes no time which is a valuable commodity just now. The Stump Orator then recites the 'Regulations' and intimates to the malcontents that the majority is resolved as one man to maintain them peaceably if possible but if not at the expense of a few broken heads. [289] This combination of the moral and the physical was instantaneous in its effects - the dissatisfied set to work and all are doing well.  The yield of the field is an improvement on the last communication. I subjoin the following as large quantities gratifying to record but I do sincerely hope not calculated to mislead. One party of three has netted 28 oz. in fifteen days. Another party of four in 8 days in conjunction with an extra two for the last 2 days have realised the enormous quantity of 63 oz. Jones 8 oz. in I believe a week; amongst them a nugget weighing 151 grs. and another weighing 92 grs. Dunlop and Regan 6 oz. 40 grs. in 54 days. Two tin dishes average 1 oz. each per day and the new machine mentioned in my last has turned 54 oz. in 3 days. I have heard of but have not seen two very large nuggets found on Saturday; and I speak advisedly when I state that upwards of 100 oz. have passed through one hand during the past week. I forward 6 oz. per this mail.  I have endeavoured as far as in me lay to convey correct accounts of the Ballarat Diggings whilst at the same time the truths I was writing would I felt assured produce great excitement and would probably lead to a disarrangement of the labour market for a time; but it will tend ultimately to an equipoise when excitement has cooled down to reasoning point and I could wish now that some able hand would take up the Gold question and treat it in its various bearings immediate and more remote. It is especially 'Our Question' and the first effects on the Labour Market will be to establish the rate of wages in other employment above the minimum yield of a goldfinder. So at least it appears to me; if wrong I leave it to some more profound disciple of Adam Smith but it is a question that demands attention.  Another point to which I would call attention is the necessity of an escort for gold which can only be sent in small quantities at great risk by the Mail - a medium which may be judged of by the subjoined letter. Until an escort is provided no adequate idea will be formed of the richness of Ballarat. Here is now a prime opening for Geelong speculation; the first step is the only difficulty the difficulty is not a Gordian one and private enterprise might cut it through with one stroke. [290] Remember you have wealth and prosperity at your thresholds and once neglected it may pass away for ever.  The Clunes Diggings are deserted and all the diggers are coming down to Ballarat.  (FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT)  Wednesday 17th September 1851.  Geelong is mad stark staring gold-mad. If all who are now going to the diggings make their fortune they will be lucky fellows indeed; the host of disconsolate wives or as they are here called 'grass-widows' and their families is astonishing. In Moorabool-street to-day I saw two bullock drays being loaded for the diggings and I should think there were not less than 120 people about them although not all going with them at that time; there were five or six cradles two or three wheelbarrows a couple of dozen tin dishes and about the same number of beds and boxes on each; besides ropes frying-pans ovens stretchers tarpaulins quart and pint pots buckets guns sieves picks crowbars spades &c. &c. &c. but while looking at them and admiring the anxiety each displayed to get the drays loaded the wind came swooping round the corner enough to cut one in two and I left them thanking my stars that I was not so foolish as to face the road to the mines during the present weather. I verily believe it will be the death of some of them.  GEELONG  (FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT)  Wednesday 1st October.  We have got abundance of gold and the evil effects of the discovery are following fast in the wake of it. [291] Already wages are rising the common necessaries of life are rising wood and water are rising. There is no appearance of the demand for labour for our shearing and harvest being supplied even if a constant stream of emigration sets in immediately it will benefit us far less than many expect. The women and children may remain in town but the male adults will go to the mines. It is impossible to reason with most men on this subject and persuade them that the whole matter is one of chance. No they must have a try to satisfy themselves; if that trial be successful there they will stick - their services are lost to the country.  The evil is of such magnitude and the position of the colony with its government so unsettled that I would strongly advise the immediate appointment by public meeting of a deputation to meet the Executive and consider the best means of averting what is likely to become a great public calamity. Geelong and I suppose Melbourne is similarly situated is being depopulated. The police force are handing in resignations daily; even the sergeants are leaving.  The Custom House hands are off to the diggings; seamen are deserting their vessels; tradesmen and apprentices are gone their masters are following them: contractors men have bolted and left large expensive jobs on their hands unfinished. What are the contractors to do? Why follow their men and off they go; patients in becoming convalescent forget the attention of their doctor and his kindness in bringing them round and depart without ever wishing him good bye; the doctor must of course follow and the lawyer on the same principle follows his clients and all agree that Ballarat is the only place where there is a possibility of squaring off old accounts by coming down with the dust.  Some rather ridiculous scenes begin to show themselves down here. Young misses whose papas have been to Ballarat begin to appear in neat new bonnets with perhaps a parasol and strut about like India rubber dolls. They would certainly go the whole animal were there not a severe check to their presumption and pride in the fact that all the nice young men and the majority of the old bachelors have left the town. [292] Several once respectable and sedate matrons are coming out strong in beautiful new silk dresses with the additional advantage of being strongly perfumed which with their gaudy dresses gives them the appearance of small walking flower-gardens. Another class of an inferior stamp may occasionally be seen in some of the inns here with a small roll of notes in one hand and a pot of half-and-half or half a pint of gin in the other treating all and sundry who come in their way.   It appears the merchants of Geelong are behaving very badly to the diggers who bring their gold to town. The gold from Ballarat is universally admitted to be equal to any ever yet exhibited in these colonies either from California Turon or Ophir and superior to most samples that have come from these places. And yet our merchants refuse to purchase at any but a price that they ought to be ashamed to offer; they stand very much in their own light by such conduct as this. The Government price for gold in Sydney is £3 6s per ounce but the merchants here are afraid to purchase at anything over £3 with a deduction of 5 per cent. £2 17s per ounce for as fine gold as any in the world. It is absurd altogether; how can they expect to be patronized when they behave in this way! The diggers must either send their gold on to Melbourne at once or deposit it in the Bank here till they gather as much as will pay them for taking it to Sydney Hobart Town or even England for sale.  THE PRESS. One of the Geelong newspapers the Victoria Colonist has yielded to the pressure of the times; all hands having 'sloped' for the diggings. A promise has been given to resume in two months but this will we think be found to be only a genteel style of literary decease. The Geelong Advertiser announces in the same issue that it will be compelled to diminish its size. A new paper is to be started at Buninyong entitled The Prospector and Buninyong Gazette.  A SENSIBLE RESOLVE. - Captain Godfrey of the Statesman seeing that his company were resolved to be off to the diggings determined to take them there himself. [293] He consequently left his first and second officer in charge and accompanied by the rest of his crew has started for Ballarat. - Melbourne Daily News.  THE GOLD FEVER. - A medical friend informs us that the prevailing epidemic somewhat resembles ordinary fever at its commencement as the premonitory symptoms are restlessness anxiety and a disinclination to follow one's ordinary avocations. During the first stage of the attack a sufferer may be known by an unshorn beard a dirty face and an embryo bandit appearance. As the disease advances the patient sticks a short pipe in his mouth and assumes a red shirt and a pair of moleskin trowsers. If the symptoms are unchecked by a rise in his salary all objects he views appear of a golden hue - excitement terminates in delirium - 'one morn we miss him from the "custom'd spot" ' - and the answer to all the anxious inquiries of his friends is that he was last seen on a loaded bullock dray provided with a straw mattrass a tin pannikin a shovel and a cradle.   My DEAR SIR - I sit down to redeem my promise of writing to you from this most astonishing place. I left on Thursday the 2nd and arrived here on the 9th having accompanied the drays. This place exhibits the most extraordinary sight that ever met my eyes. Imagine a small but rapid stream of water with a very winding course and for about one mile the banks or rather the margins on both sides as thickly studded with human beings all males almost for occasionally you will see a woman employed with her clothes held between her knees rocking a cradle with the untiring energy of man; in other cases two or three men mostly are employed one rocking with one hand while he occasionally stirs up the earth in the hopper of the cradle with the other; another for the most part is actively employed in filling the hopper with earth and the other is perpetually pouring water with a dipper with a long handle like a warming-pan over the earth &c. filled in the hopper; one is sometimes employed picking and shovelling the earth out of the hole and two more in carrying the earth to the waterside; so that besides the enormous mass of persons stationary at the cradles there is a moving population from the various holes to the cradles on the water side equally numerous. [294] Some carry the earth on hand-barrows made of two long wooden handles and a sack sewed long wise on which they carry it. Some use wheel-barrows; others a piece of bark as a sledge on which they place a bag full of earth and draw it along the ground. Some carry it in sacks on their backs while the tin dish washers of which there are many hundreds carry it in their tin dishes on their heads; it is for the most part one scene of busy eager industry. If you speak to a man he answers but stops not his work. The average earning seems to be an ounce a day; the tin dish washers get this; they are cadgers in some instances in others they get occasional dishes from the diggers opening new holes and in return report the richness or poverty of the soil; the business is a perfect lottery; some men have opened seven or eight holes with no good success but it seems to me from all I can learn that even these holes pay the current expenses. I have no doubt from what I see that very large portions of this colony and of New South Wales contain gold. I have frequently travelled for miles in such a country in both places and many localities in both colonies will be found abounding in precious metal. One man came to sell 3 oz 2 dwts a few nights since the produce of his day's labour; and I last night heard but cannot vouch for the truth of it that a man had found a piece 20 lbs and upwards in an ant-hill in breaking the surface for his hole. Every thing presents a golden aspect: the water is yellow from the clay in which most of the gold is found; the men's clothing and the cradles have the same hue from the same cause; the whole ground is covered with tents or huts of all shapes sizes colours and appearance. [295] The store tents fly a gaudy handkerchief as an indication of their calling. Meat is 2d per lb on the spot but nothing less than half or a quarter of a sheep is sold. Other provisions are as reasonable as might be expected from the expense of carriage. It is a very difficult thing to find any particular person. An old man was looking for his son all day yesterday unsuccessfully; and yet the space of ground occupied lies in a half mile square though the windings of the creek make the washers occupy a mile. The people are very well behaved when the material is considered; but it is quite evident that they do not like gentlemen amongst them. Deaths are frequent and accidents more so. The first two days after my arrival two men were killed one by the fall of a tree the other by the wall that divided his hole from the next falling in on him. The next day one man died of apoplexy in his hut and another had one or both his legs broken. We have here lawyers doctors and methodist parsons all hard at work for the gold; the bearded prophets and others indulge in a little open air preaching on Sundays on which day not a cradle is seen to be worked. At night volleys of firearms are discharged in honor of 'The Point' as it is called while two bands of music on each side of the creek parade with lively but it must be confessed antiquated tunes; but yells whoops and shrieks with dogs barking and fighting 'make the night hideous'.  There are many ways in which gold is to be had besides digging and washing for it and all day and sometimes for hours at night the sound of a pestle and mortar is heard cracking the pieces of rock which in that poor process will give to a tent keeper a full quarter of an ounce a day; a steam-crushing machine value £300 would pay most admirably as all this productive rock is now thrown aside for want of the means of crushing it.  THERE ARE moreover a few rather pretty kinds of wood found in the brushes besides these of which I may mention the tulip-wood rose-wood and one or two other woods used for flooring etc. It is the red cedar however that is the most valuable; and the MacLeay at the time of my visit produced the best. Now the greater part has been cut except that which is so far above the first falls or fords as to be unavailable. It is found not to pay when cut at any distance from water-carriage: and consequently the sawyers at first confined themselves to that which grew below the point to which the tide flows. That becoming scarce they attacked the brushes ten twenty thirty and at last forty miles above tide flow felling timber ultimately eight miles up 'Henderson's Creek' which falls into the river ten miles above the point where I first struck upon it.  These sawyers and their mates are a strange wild set comprising in general a good proportion of desperate ruffians and sometimes a few runaways they themselves commonly being ticket-of-leave men or emancipists. Two or three pair accompanied by one or two men for falling squaring small timber and digging pits shoulder their axes and saws and with a sledge or dray-load of provisions proceed to some solitary brush where they make a little 'gunya' or hut with a few sheets of bark and commence operations. They labour very hard stripping to the waist in the hottest summer days; but they live in extreme abundance and indeed wastefulness though their fare is but simple consisting only of salt beef damper tea and sugar. From their migratory habits they are unable to have any kind of vegetables but they invariably indulge in flour of the finest quality.  The timber is only squared with the saw into large logs and is left at the pit a new pit generally being dug when all the trees in the immediate vicinity of their former one have been felled and squared. After working for two or three months in this way these men will go down the river to receive their wages or 'have a settlement' as they call it.  Though generally from one hundred to two hundred per cent is charged by their employer on the rations and clothes supplied to them they have always a large amount to receive on getting which (invariably in the shape of orders etc.) they start off to the nearest public-house (perhaps a distance of forty miles) there to remain till they have spent every farthing often exceeding thirty or forty pounds when they return once more to the brush in order to resume as before the same labour. They are certainly the most improvident set of men in the world often eclipsing in recklessness misery and peculiarity of character the woodcutters of Campeachy and the lumberers of the Ohio and Mississippi. [181]  In riding along some path leading through a brush and bewildered and lost amid the various and endless mazes of cedar tracks one will often stumble upon a miserable cabin shut out from the genial rays of the sun instinct with life in the shape of gigantic mosquitoes and other vermin and inhabited by a lonely sawyer and his dirty and forbidding wife or mistress probably a ticket-of-leave woman or emancipist. If there are any children which is occasionally the case they are in the last stage of squalor and filth their pale and emaciated features already showing that fever and ague - the demons of these brushes - have begun their work with them.  When rum is brought to these abodes of labour and wretchedness and a few sawyers are convened then begin the scenes of riot and mischief It is well known that men have been killed on these occasions; and I have been assured that in lonely places one or two sawyers have combined to make away with another in order to share the fruits of his toil. Their usual carelessness of money when they have it is well exemplified by an instance which fell within my own observation. Out of a spirit of bravado or 'flashness' as it is called one of them actually used a pound-note as wadding for his powder and shot; an application to which the Bank would doubtless have no objection. These extraordinary habits are attributable to several causes: the depraved and degraded class to which most of the sawyers belong; their loneliness and seclusion being cut off during their whole time from any chance of good advice or example; and the comparatively high pay for their work together with the large sums which they receive at onetime. The rafters are of the same class and partake of the same habits.  When the sawyers have completed their work the bullock-drivers go up with their teams and draw the logs to the bank of the river. The rafters follow them and with levers throw the timber into the stream where (if below tide-flow) it is fastened together at once by means of ropes sometimes vines passing through an iron staple in each log. A raft is thus formed on which the men and sometimes their wives float down to Trial Bay a distance of about forty or forty-five miles from the first falls.  The timber cut higher up the river after being thrown in lies waiting for a flood to take it down and is sometimes in this predicament for a twelvemonth or more. If. however there happens to be enough of water at the time of its immersion the rafters follow it commonly in a canoe getting out at every fall or ford and pushing onwards every log that is aground taking care also to examine every pool and corner in order to extricate all logs that may be caught in bushes or cast ashore by eddies.  It often happens that a large flood will occur when there is timber in the river on which occasion it is carried far back upon the flats and forest land and left high and dry on the subsiding of the water. I have often after such a flood seen immense flocks of cedar perched up in the tops of the oaks and other trees and the ends of others peeping out from such masses of wreck and at such a distance from the river as renders it not worth removing. [182] To catch those logs floated singly down the river a rope or chain is stretched across below the lowest falls. But many logs float out to sea and occasionally a whole raft will break adrift and share the same fate.  The brushes have now been well nigh exhausted and most of the sawyers have migrated to the Nambucca the Ballitean the Clarence Richmond and Brisbane. Wherever they have been at work they have left immense numbers of cedar slabs generally from eight to twelve feet long and from one to three feet broad sawn flat on one side and forming a useful material for building rough bush houses. The settler whose station is near these brushes finds them very advantageous on this account; as instead of falling and splitting gum-trees he has only to send his team to the brush and spare-chain these slabs. They are not to be recommended however for dwelling-houses as they are always found to harbour vermin.  REV. AND DEAR SIRS - Although I fully agree to the principle enunciated in the first clause of the Petition which you left with me yesterday and in the sentiments expressed in the latter part of the second and in the third clause yet I am obliged after full consideration to decline signing it.  My reasons are first that there are some of the sentiments e.g. that expressed in the former part of the second clause in which I do not concur; and secondly that in the position which I occupy I do not consider myself justified in petitioning the Legislature for the abolition of a grant which many of my clerical brethren as well as of the laity of my own branch of the church regard as absolutely necessary for the maintenance of an efficient ministry.  I have felt the less difficulty in coming to this decision because I have already expressed my opinions upon the subject of this grant in the Church of England Messenger for September. In accordance with these opinions I am myself perfectly willing to encounter any difficulties which the immediate withdrawal of all assistance by the State towards the maintenance of public worship might occasion in order that our Colony might be freed from the guilt of supporting a corrupt form of Christianity. [358] I think however that it would be more equitable to name a period after which such assistance should cease rather than withdraw it altogether at once.  As to any increase of the amount of the present grant I would most earnestly deprecate it as implying an approval of and tending to perpetuate a false and most pernicious principle; and as stereotyping so far as the State can do every existing religious error.   The recent petition of the Roman Catholics must I should think make every Protestant Legislator sensible that that Church feels itself dependent upon State support for its continued existence in this Colony and that its Priests are aware of the impossibility of retaining their dominion over the consciences of an intelligent and independent people such as the inhabitants of Victoria are likely to become. Great therefore in my opinion is the guilt of assisting to - prop up among us this system of Satanic delusion. I am Reverend and dear Sirs  Your affectionate brother in the Lord  C.-MELBOURNE. The Rev. J. Clow and the Rev. A. M. Ramsay.  He stood alone - beneath the deep dark shade  Of the Australian forest where the trees  A century old the youngest of them made  Hollow and mournful music in the breeze.   One day when I was indulging in these meditations and gazing round from my Robinson Crusoe hut upon the surface of the waters I thought I heard the sound of human voices; and on looking up was somewhat startled at seeing three natives standing on the high land immediately above me. They were armed with spears and had opossum skins thrown over their shoulders partially covering their bodies. Standing as they did on an elevated position armed too and being myself totally defenceless I confess I felt alarmed; so that hoping I had not been seen I crept into a crevice in a rock near at hand where I endeavoured to conceal myself. They were however soon upon my track and shouting what I considered to be a call for me to come out I resolved to do so; indeed I could not have remained there long on account of the water. With but faint hopes of meeting with good treatment at their hands I crawled out from my shelter and surrendered at discretion. They gazed on me with wonder: my size probably attracting their attention. After seizing both my hands they struck their breasts and mine also making at the same time a noise between singing and crying: a sort of whine which to me sounded very like premeditated mischief. Pointing to my hut they evinced a desire to examine it - so we entered. [72] My new friends if friends they were to be made themselves very much at home although uninvited. One made up a large fire another threw off his rug and went into the sea for crayfish which on his return he threw alive into the flame - at the same time looking at me with an expression as much as to intimate that they intended to grill me next by way of a change of diet. I can afford to smile and even laugh now at the recollection; but at the time I assure the reader I was by no means satisfied with the prospect before me or with my visitors. At length my suspense ended by their taking the fish fairly dividing them and handing to me the first and best portion. Having finished our meal they gave me to understand they wished me to follow them. To this I hesitated not being satisfied as to their intentions but after a time consented.   On leaving the hut two of them went before and having thus only one to contend against I thought of making my escape but my armed guard was too vigilant; so that defenceless as I was no safe opportunity was afforded. We proceeded in this way until we came to their huts two small turf cabins - in each of which there was just room enough for two persons to lay at length under their shelter. It was nearly dark and finding that I was to have my sentry friend beside me and that the other two were to occupy the second cabin my hopes revived - that during the night an opportunity for my escape would offer. He however did not sleep a wink but kept muttering to himself all the night so that by the morning I was fairly worn out by anxiety and watching. At daylight they gave me to understand they were going farther and that I must accompany them. I on the contrary thought it safer to come to an understanding at once and with this view mustering all my resolution I intimated a refusal that I would not do so. After a warm discussion by signs and to both parties by sufficiently significant sounds they apparently consented that I should remain; but as they wished me not to leave until their return my old and nearly worn-out stockings were required by them as an assurance offering. This I steadily declined complying with so that after sundry striking of the breasts and stamping with the feet they were content to leave me unmolested. I watched them until I thought the coast was clear and then began to consider in what direction I should steer for I had not now the beach as a guide for my movements. Whilst thinking over the matter one of them returned bringing with him a rude kind of basket made of rushes. In it was some of the berries I have already mentioned which he wished to barter for one of my much courted stockings. I however objected being resolved on letting him know I was positive in that matter hoping by so doing to give him a favourable opinion of my determination on questions which might arise between us of greater consequence. Finding his negotiation useless he left the fruit and followed his companions. When I thought them sufficiently far off I took to my heels in the direction as I thought for the sea coast and fortunately I made it without much difficulty. [73] Going musing along I came to a high rock against which the waves were beating violently the sea at the time being very tempestuous: it was a very grand but a dreary and melancholy scene. Whilst viewing it with a very aching and downcast heart and spirit I observed a small rocky island a short distance from the beach covered with the strangest looking animals I had ever seen. They appeared to be about four or from four to six feet long having a head similar to that of a pig without feet with tails like those of a fish a large fin on each side and a body covered with short glossy hair: I suppose them to be the fur seal or sea elephant.  Finding night coming on having no fire to warm me and with so dreary a prospect of the future - without food of any kind - I began to repent having left the natives and resolved on returning to their huts from whence I had made my escape. I accordingly traced my way back but on my arrival found they had not returned. After remaining some hours I decided on going in the direction I supposed them to have taken but after a weary march I found I had completely lost myself and very much distressed I laid myself down for the night within the shelter of a large hollow tree such as are to be found in the Australian forests. Having secured a fire-stick during the day I made a good fire it being very cold and raining heavily.  I remember I had no sleep that night for my fire attracted the notice of the wild dogs and opossums whose horrid howls and noises were such as to render sleep impossible. The cries of the latter were like the shrieks of children appearing to be at times over me and at others close to my ear. Under these circumstances I hailed the daylight very thankfully and then proceeded on my solitary way endeavouring to get upon the trail of the natives who as I supposed had gone in that direction. In this I was not successful and having entangled myself in the labyrinths of the forest in a country entirely unknown to me I became at length lost and remained so for three days without a morsel of food or a drop of water excepting small quantities which I occasionally met with in the clay holes. When I laid myself down to rest hoping to sleep the same unearthly noises appeared to have followed me and my mind for want of relaxation was failing as the minds of the strongest men will fail under such circumstances. I continued to wander about in this way subsisting upon succulent shrubs and berries until I came to a large lake upon which I could see an abundance of ducks and geese and swans and other wild fowl. From that lake I found a very considerable river flowing as I concluded toward the sea. I at once resolved to follow its course; and on reaching its entrance saw the little rocky island already mentioned as having the seal or sea elephants upon it; and it was a great comfort to me to find myself once more not far from my old quarters where the three natives had left me. I soon after arrived at the turf cabins having now acquired some acquaintance with the locality and although suffering from much hunger lay myself down and slept soundly. [74] At daylight I had the satisfaction to find some of the same kind of fruit the native had brought me in the rush basket. On these I made a great feast and after remaining there that day returned to my own hut on the beach. Here I must have remained many months - how long I cannot tell - subsisting as before; but at length it appeared likely that my supplies would fail and I began again to reflect on my deplorable condition. My clothes were all in tatters my shoes were worn out my health was much impaired by want and exposure and my spirits broken - so much so that I determined on retracing my steps in order to regain the ship in the event of her remaining in the bay and with the hopes of rejoining my companions should they be still in existence. The winter was fast approaching the weather had set in dreadfully cold and tempestuous so that it was not without great difficulty I could go down amongst the rocks for shell fish which as I have already said were now from some cause or other getting very scarce in that locality. I therefore bade goodbye to my lonely habitation and started on my return.  One night whilst travelling along the beach I was completely bewildered having been stopped in my progress by a high perpendicular rock stretching out from the cliffs some distance into the sea. The tide running in fast my only chance of escape was by climbing the rock. This I did with great difficulty and just above high water mark I found a large cavern into which I crept for shelter. Having had no fire for some time I was again living upon such raw shell fish as I could find in each day's journey and with these was making my wretched meal when I found I had intruded upon the lodgings of some of the tenants of the deep who could only reach their rocky quarters when the tide was at the highest. I was completely horrified and knew not what to do as it was nearly dark and they were waddling in at the entrance. To rush out appeared to be nothing less than certain death; but happening to make a noise it struck terror into them and tumbling one over the other into the sea they left me once more master of the cavern. I remained during the rest of the night undisturbed and the following morning again pursued my weary way.  PART EIGHT  The Aborigines  SECTION I  1642. - At the era of discovery by Tasman Van Diemen's Land was in-habited. He heard or thought he heard the voices of people and the sound of a trumpet: he noticed the recently cut notches five feet asunder on the bark of the trees and he saw the smoke of fires. He inferred that they possessed some unusual method of climbing or that their stature was gigantic. In the sound the colonist recognises the vocal cooey of the aborigines and learns from the steps "to the birds' nests" that they then hunted the opossum and employed that method of ascent which for agility and daring has never been surpassed. Thus during more than 150 years this country was forgotten; and such were the limits of European knowledge when the expedition of Cook was dispatched by Great Britain to explore this hemisphere. No navigator brought larger views and a temper more benevolent to the task of discovery. To some nations he opened the path of civilisation and religion: to this race he was the harbinger of death.  1773. - Furneaux Captain Cook's second in command first visited this country. He saw the fires of the natives ten miles off. They had left their huts formed but for a day in which there were fragments of shell-fish baskets and spears. The British deposited gun-flints an old barrel and nails in payment for the relics they removed; and they left Adventure Bay concluding that a most miserable race of mortals inhabited a country capable of producing all the necessaries of life "and the finest climate in the world."  One year before Captain Marion a Frenchman according to the authors of his country visited this island. The intercourse was hostile and left traces of blood.  1777. - The descriptions of Cook are founded on his own observations and are on the whole favorable to the natives. The English while wooding and watering were surprised by the visit of eight men and a boy. [259] They were unarmed except that one of them carried a stick pointed at the end. They were of middling stature slender and naked. On different parts of their bodies were ridges both straight and curved raised in the skin: the hair of the head and beard was smeared with red ointment. They were indifferent to presents; they rejected bread and the flesh of the sea elephant but accepted some birds which they signified their intention to eat. Cook prevailed on a native to throw the stick at a mark twenty yards distant but he failed after repeated trial. The Otaheitian Omai to exhibit his skill fired off a musket: at the report they fled and so great was their fear that they dropped the axe and knives they had received.  This Otaheitian [Tahitian] was returning from England to his native country. In London he was the lion of the day: he was introduced to the first circles and saw whatever in a great city could elevate his ideas: his manners acquired the polish of society. Granville Sharp (he who secured the decision that the soil of Britain gives freedom to the slave that touches it) endeavoured to improve his moral sentiments. He pointed out the practical injustice of polygamy. Omai replied "One wife good - two wife very good - three wife very very good;" but he had not misunderstood the argument. Taking three knives he put two of them side by side and the other at a distance and referring to a nobleman who had left his wife for a mistress said - "There Lord A. and there Miss - ; and there Lady A. lie down and cry."  But the moment he landed he resumed all the customs of his countrymen and employed his knowledge of arms to destroy them. This was the only trace of his civilisation which survived the voyage: he had seen regal grandeur and mercantile power but he retained his preference for the habits of his then heathen race.  A dead calm retarded the departure of the vessels next day and the parties sent ashore were accompanied by Cook. About twenty natives soon joined them: one who was conspicuously deformed amused them by the drollery of his gestures and the seeming humour of his speeches. Some wore three or four folds round the neck made of fur; and round the ankles a slip of the skin of kangaroo. Captain Cook returned to the vessel leaving Lieutenant King in charge: soon after the women and children arrived: they were introduced by the men to the English. The children were thought pretty; of the beauty of the women the account was not equally favorable. They rejected with disdain the presents and freedoms of the officers and were ordered by an elderly man to retire - a command to which they submitted with reluctance.  Dr. Anderson the surgeon of the Resolution describes the natives as a mild cheerful race with an appearance less wild than is common to savages. He considered them devoid of activity genius and intelligence; their countenance he delineates as plump and pleasing.  1792. - But though later on the spot assisted by the remarks of previous observers Labillardière of all was the most assiduous and exact. The naturalist of d'Entrecasteaux's expedition he saw mankind with the eye of a philosopher. [260] He was pleased to examine the passions of a race least of all indebted to art; yet the prevailing notions of Citizen Frenchmen perhaps gave him a bias when estimating an uncivilised people. He left Europe when the dreams of Rousseau were the toys of the speculative and before they became the phantoms of the populace. His observations doubtlessly correct; but his grouping is artistic and not without illusion. In his work the Tasmanian blacks appear in the most charming simplicity harmless and content; an extraordinary remnant of primitive innocence.  Labillardière having landed with several companions proceeded towards a lake; hearing human voices they followed the direction of the sound; when the sudden cry of the natives induced them to return for their arms. Proceeding towards the woods they met the tribe - the men and boys in a semicircle with the women and children behind. Labillardière offered a piece of biscuit and held out his hand which a savage chief accepted and smiling drew back one foot and bowed with admirable grace. He gave to the French a necklace which he called cantaride formed of whelk shells in exchange for articles of dress a poll-axe and knives.  The proportions are worth remarking: in a party of forty-two there were seven men and eight women; in another of forty-eight there were ten men and fourteen women. Thus the females were more numerous and the rising generation nearly one-third more than the adults. They were generally healthy; one only suffered from cutaneous disease one from a defect of vision and several from slight wounds. It will be told that a sad reverse was afterwards their fate. They could endure the water twice as long as Europeans. In the intervals of diving they roasted their spoil and warmed themselves between two fires; sometimes feeding their children or themselves. Thus they continued alternately fishing and cooking until all were satisfied.  The men seemed indolent; nothing could persuade them to dive: they sauntered about with the right hand passed behind and holding the left forearm in its grasp. As the elders moved with gravity on the beach the girls romped and raced with the seamen - repelling without resenting their rudeness. They were sprightly and voluble and chattered on without intermission. On one occasion they were missed when turning to a tree they were seen perched naked in the branches over ten feet from the ground: an interesting group remarks the naturalist.  In the incidents of their social life he saw their character. The children cried their mothers soothed them with those maternal caresses which art has not improved. They held them to be decorated by the French and placed them in their arms. A father corrected a little boy for the ancient diversion of throwing stones at another and the culprit wept! A lad concealed a basket from the seamen to amuse by his perplexity and its dexterous replacement! The clothes given by the French they hung on the bushes but they valued the tin ware the axes and the saws. The liberality of their visitors induced them to take more than was given; but they seemed unconscious of offence and whatever was required they restored without reluctance. [261] A girl refusing the French a skin they desired to possess retreated to the woods: her friends were distressed at her ill-nature. She at last complied. A pair of trousers was given in exchange; she stood between the Frenchmen leaning on the shoulder of each while they guided her errant legs into these novelties of Europe.  Their refusal of food for themselves and children was from distaste rather than from distrust; and they only discovered suspicion when the French penetrated the country. They posted a guard to give notice of any movement and when an attempt was made it was interrupted by the loud screams of the women and the entreaties of the men. They resisted the intrusion with displeasure and even menace.  On other occasions they tended on the French with great kindness removing fallen branches from their path; and when the ground was sloping and slippery they walked beside them and held them up; - "these good savages took hold of our arms and supported us." They rested every half mile saying medi "sit down"; then rising again after a few minutes' rest.  They themselves first saw the French: who having travelled several miles lay down for the night near a brook: their fires discovered them. A native next morning pointed to their resting place: laid his head on his hand and closed his eyes. The good-nature of these people never languished: twice when the French lost their way they directed them to their ships. They welcomed their visits by raising their hands over their heads shouting and stamping on the ground. They greeted them as often as their wanderings brought them in sight of the vessels and with the same friendly sounds bade them adieu.  1798. - We owe to Captain Flinders and Dr. Bass the next description of the natives of Tasmania. They were saluted by voices from the hills that border the Derwent; one of these they ascended and saw a man and two women who catching up their baskets scampered away. The man met them with confidence: they tried in vain to converse with him in the dialects of New Holland. They desired him to lead them to his hut; but he hesitated and moved slowly in the direction to which he had pointed. Consulting his apparent feelings they desisted and parted in friendship. This was the first man they had met in the island. His countenance they described as unusually benignant; his features less negro-like than common and his manners frank and open. He exhibited neither curiosity nor fear nor did he seem attracted by any part of their dress except their cravats!  Mr. Bass made several expeditions into the country attended only by his dogs and meeting no inhabitants he concluded that their numbers were inconsiderable.  The accounts descriptive of native customs by these authorities are full of errors; but they are errors of inference not of observation: it is useless to repeat in order to correct them. The colonists have possessed better opportunities and their acquaintance with aboriginal habits supplies more accurate information than could be expected in the volumes of navigators. [262] Such as here given is their testimony to the social aspect of the native character: nothing unfavorable is omitted. In a people so gentle and affable it is difficult to recognise the race afterwards covered with sores wasted by want and vice or animated with revenge; and who filled the colony with disgust and terror.    SECTION II  The party dispatched from Sydney to take possession of the island who landed in September 1803 on their arrival at Risdon saw nothing of the natives. A solitary savage armed with a spear afterwards entered the camp and was cordially greeted. He accepted the trinkets which they offered but he looked on the novelties scattered about without betraying surprise. By his gestures they inferred that he discharged them from their trespass. He then turned towards the woods and when they attempted to follow he placed himself in the attitude of menace and poised his spear.  On the 3rd of May 1804 during the absence of Lieutenant Bowen the officer in command the first severe collision occurred. Five hundred blacks supposed to belong to the Oyster Bay tribe gathered on the hills which overlooked the camp: their presence occasioned alarm and the convicts and soldiers were drawn up to oppose them. A discharge of fire-arms threw them into momentary panic but they soon re-united. A second of ball cartridge brought down many; the rest fled in terror and were pursued: it is conjectured that fifty fell.  The accounts of this affair differ greatly. By one party they are said to have assailed a man and woman living in advance of the camp and to have burned their hut. William White who saw them earliest and gave notice of their approach declared they then exhibited no hostility and were not near the hut before the collision. They came down in a semicircle carrying waddies but not spears; a flock of kangaroo hemmed in between them. The women and children attended them. They came singing and bearing branches of trees.  This curvilinear mode of marching was noticed by Labillardière: they probably assembled for a corroboree. "They looked at me" said the witness "with all their eye;" but they did not attempt to molest him.  For the British it may be alleged that customs afterwards understood were then less known. They were ignorant of the language and temper of the blacks and the preservation of the settlement was the first military duty of Lieutenant Moore who directed the fire. The action was sudden and perhaps no statement is exact. The natives were provoked by the occupation of their common place of resort and it is no discredit to their character if even they attempted to expel the intruders.  The consequences of these events were lamentable. The losses of the natives in their ordinary warfare rarely extended beyond two or three; but the havoc of their new enemy awakened irremediable distrust. [263] The sorrows of a savage are transient: not so his resentment. Every wrong is new until it is revenged; and there is no reason to suppose these terrible sacrifices were ever forgotten.  In these collisions no British subject had fallen; but in the succeeding year (1805) a prisoner of the crown was speared while following a kangaroo; and two years after (1807) another named Munday met with a similar fate. The black had received presents from his hands and approaching him in pretended amity trailed between his toes the fatal spear. These facts are given to illustrate the cruelty of the natives; and it may be presumed that from the slaughter of Risdon not many could be added to the number. These were however the acts of individuals and without concert or much premeditation.  The scarcity of food compelled the British to adopt a mode of life somewhat resembling that of the aborigines. Germain a marine was employed from 1805 to 1810 in procuring kangaroo which he hunted with dogs: he but rarely carried a gun slept on the ground in the summer and in the winter on the branches of trees. During his wanderings he often encountered the natives but they offered no violence; and he stated as the result of his experience that until bushrangers excited them by cruelties "there was no harm in them." The daughter of a settler of 1804 was left sometimes in their care; their kindness was among the recollections of her childhood.  The prisoners of the crown were dispersed. The government unable to supply the common necessaries of life gave them license to forage: labor could not be exacted nor discipline enforced; and when circumstances altered it was difficult to recall the wanderers or to recover authority so long relaxed. In their intercourse with the natives licentious and cruel outlaws committed every species of atrocity which could be suffered by the weak in contact with the wicked.  Lord Hobart under whose auspices the colony was planted directed the Lieutenant-Governor to conciliate the natives: to preserve them from oppression and to encourage them to resort for protection to his authority. "You are to endeavour by every means in your power to open an intercourse with the natives and to conciliate their good will - enjoining all persons under your government to live in amity and kindness with them; and if any person shall exercise any acts of violence against them or shall wantonly give them any interruption in the exercise of their several occupations you are to cause such offender to be brought to punishment according to the degree of the offence." Their natural rights were recognised but unhappily no provision was made to define their interest in the soil of their country. Their migratory habits were unfavourable to official supervision and the success of humane suggestions depended on the doubtful concurrence of ignorant cotters and wandering shepherds.  In 1810 an order was issued by Governor Collins forcibly describing the wrongs of the natives and the revenge to which they were prompted. [264] They had pursued an officer residing at Herdsman's Cove and failing to capture him they fired his premises. Two persons George Getley and William Russell had disappeared: it was supposed the victims of resentment awakened by the "abominable cruelties and murders" (such is the language of Collins) perpetrated by the white people. This Russell was himself notorious for skill in their torture - the subject of his boast. The government declared that persons who wantonly fired on the natives or murdered them "in cold blood" should suffer the last penalties of the law.  The natives who have been rendered desperate by the cruelties they have experienced from our people have now begun to distress us by attacking our cattle. Two were lately wounded by them at Collins-vale; and three it is reported belonging to George Guest have been killed at Blackman's Bay. As this tribe of natives have hitherto been considered friendly the change in their conduct must be occasioned by some outrage on our part. No account having been received up to this time of William Russell and George Getley there can be no doubt of the miserable death they have been put to. This unfortunate man Russell is a striking instance of divine agency which has overtaken him at last and punished him by the hands of those very people who have suffered so much from him; he being well known to have exercised his barbarous disposition in murdering or torturing any who unfortunately came within his reach."  The official treatment of the aborigines was not always judicious or calculated to impress the whites with the notion of civil equality. A native whom it was deemed desirable to detain was fettered by Colonel Collins. Notwithstanding he escaped and was seen long after with the iron on his leg; nor can the punishments inflicted for crimes committed against the blacks unusual as those punishments were be given in proof that both races were valued alike. It is not however true that cruelty was always unpunished. A man was severely flogged for exposing the ears of a boy he had mutilated; and another for cutting off the little finger of a native and using it as a tobacco stopper.  The natives continued to shun the settlement for many years but their confidence was easily renewed by gentle treatment; it was however capricious or more probably it was soon shaken by insult unknown to all but themselves. It was desired by Colonel Davey to establish a friendly intercourse and he instructed the men to invite to Hobart Town the tribes they might encounter. A servant of this governor employed at South Arm suddenly came on a tribe of thirty-six persons. A native woman living with a white willingly went forth to communicate the wishes of the Governor. They consented to visit Hobart Town to which they were transferred by water. Davey endeavoured to win their confidence and they remained about town for weeks. Having received some offence from worthless Europeans they retreated to their woods and never returned. This party attempted to reach Bruni Island and all were drowned except one woman. [265]  Mr. Knopwood remembered that in 1813 and 1814 the natives were fed at his door. A number of children were forcibly taken from them and they disappeared from the camp.  J Colonel Davey bore witness to the continuance of cruelty which he censured in the strongest language of indignation. Certain settlers established a species of juvenile slavery: they followed up the mother retarded by the encumbrance of her children until she was compelled in her terror to leave them. Well might the Governor declare that crime so enormous had fixed a lasting stigma on the British name. These provocations produced their usual consequences: by spearing cattle and other acts of hostility a tribe at the Coal River revenged the robbery of their children; surely a slight retaliation for such incredible wickedness.  An expedition to Macquarie Harbour in 1817 discovered a tribe hitherto unknown. They received the first visit with the usual friendliness - a feeling which was however of short duration.  The Oyster Bay tribe are mentioned at this time by the press. They had begun to exhibit that spirit of hostility which made them a terror to the colony and armed the entire community against them. They had speared one man and killed another; but the origin of this feeling is distinctly stated: a native had been shot in an expedition to capture some aboriginal children.  Sorell prolongs the testimony that tells so mournfully in behalf of the natives. He speaks of firing on the blacks as a habit; that child-stealing was practised in the remoter districts; that settlers had adopted groundless prejudices against the unfortunate people as alike incapable and unworthy of conciliation; that they offered no serious discountenance to the cruelty of their servants. Thus several whites had perished and cattle had been speared in revenge. He reminded the colonists that as their flocks increased and the shepherds extended their range this obvious method of retaliation then rarely adopted would multiply the loss both of property and human life. The danger was proved by examples: - In 1819 a collision occurred; a man on each side killed and cattle and sheep were speared; but the account continues the stock-keepers detained and maltreated the wife of a chief. Either on this or some such occasion they were pursued by a party of the 48th regiment and seventeen were slain. Governor Sorell maintained very strenuously the opinion of his predecessors that the aborigines were not often the aggressors and that the injuries they inflicted were committed under the impulse of recent provocation.  Sorell provided for the native children except those committed to private hands by their parents or retained with the express sanction of himself. There is no reason to doubt that several of these were orphans and adopted and reared with the utmost humanity. Among the expenses of the times it is gratifying to observe one item in the rental of a house for the entertainment of the aborigines. The sentiments of Governor Sorell are honorable to his character and cannot be doubted; but we are startled to find that when charges so solemnly imputed must have been founded upon particular facts no equal punishment seems to have overtaken the crimes proclaimed. [266] The government disapproved of oppression but it was either too weak or too indolent to visit the guilty. -  Mr. Commissioner Bigge who came to the colony 1820 in his voluminous reports rarely alludes to the natives of these seas. Those of Van Diemen's Land engaged a very small share of his attention and in two brief paragraphs he describes their character and disposes of their claims. He remarks that an act of unjustifiable hostility had awakened their resentment passes over an interval of sixteen years and expresses his conviction that no obstacle they could oppose to colonisation need excite alarm. It is probable that his instructions would but briefly touch on questions relating to these children of the soil; but considering that the notices and orders of government must have apprised him of their sufferings he dismisses their case with astonishing indifference.  Several Wesleyan missionaries visited this island during the years 1821 and 1822. The natives attracted their notice: they described with brevity their moral and social state; but they did not intimate the smallest apprehension of their malice.  For several years reference to the aborigines is of rare occurrence. The year preceding the first series of outrages furnished no incident worth contemporary record. We are reminded however that they survived by an act of equestrian audacity. Mr. Risely looking down Allan Vale saw a naked girl dashing off at full speed on a valuable horse which she bridled by the tether - the first of her race ever known to gallop. Horsemen pursued her for two days without overtaking her.  In those numerous publications which precede 1824 the aborigines are always represented as originally friendly and only dangerous when excited by cruelty. It was the boast of the times that the whole island could be crossed in safety by two persons armed with muskets; and Curr who wrote latest does not even mention their existence. It is difficult to imagine more decided proof that at this time the depredations of the blacks were neither numerous nor sanguinary.  It is the general opinion however that the remonstrances of Sorell had been attended with some success and that the settlers and stock-keepers were not unimpressed with his predictions of a more concerted and continuous revenge; nor can we doubt that many persons of humanity even exaggerated this peril to restrain those brutal natures which are sensible only of personal risk. [267]    SECTION III  It would be useful to mankind to trace the causes which led to that long and disastrous conflict in which so many lives were sacrificed and a people all but a fading fragment became extinct.  1st. Among those mentioned by the government was the admission into the colony of Sydney blacks and the ascendancy which one of them acquired.  The emigrants of 1822 remember a number of natives who roamed about the district and were known as the "tame mob." They were absconders from different tribes and separated from their chiefs. They often entered the town and obtained bread tobacco and even rum from the inhabitants. Their importunity was troublesome and their appearance offensive: the eruptive disease which covered their skin especially on the legs most exposed to the heat of their fires added to their squalor and wretchedness. They are thus described by the Rev. Mr. Horton: he saw them at Pittwater crouching round their fires and entirely naked - a company of demoralised savages.  Musquito [Mosquito] became their head. He was transported from Sydney to this colony for the murder of a woman. For some time he acted as a stock-keeper; he was then employed as a guide in tracking the bushrangers having the keenness of vision and almost canine instinct by which in the slightest traces he discovered a certain clue. For this service it is said he was promised restoration to his country - a promise unhappily forgotten. He was odious to the prisoners who taunted him as a nose for the hangman; his resentful nature could not brook the insult and he struck down a convict who thus reviled him. He was then taken into custody; in alarm he escaped to the bush. The muscular strength and superior skill of this man were supposed to have recommended him to the natives as their chief. He was seen by Gilbert Robertson to cut off the head of a pigeon with a stick while flying. Musquito answered Mr. Horton with intelligence when that gentleman represented the misery of a vagrant life; he said that he should prefer to live like the white man tilling the ground but that none of his companions would join him. Before he united with the natives he was accustomed to pursue them with all the virulence of a savage. In company with a convict servant he would face the darkness and go out "to storm the huts" he had seen in the day. On one such occasion in spite of prohibitions he set out at night; but the natives had observed him and decamped leaving behind them large fires to deceive their enemy. Returning at midnight he was mistaken for a Tasmanian black; and but for discovery at the moment would have suffered the fate he deserved.  It was said by Mr. Robertson that the first murders of Musquito were committed in self defence. He associated with the Oyster Bay tribe and his power over them was great: he even prevailed on them to perform some rude agricultural labor. He had high notions of his own worth: he would stalk into the cottages of the settlers seat himself with great dignity: his followers to the number of one or two hundred patiently awaiting his signal to approach. [268]  As the influence of Musquito enlarged it became more pernicious. He not only misled his immediate followers but propagated his spirit. Deeds of great enormity were committed at his direction; several by his own hand. He drew a man from his house at Pittwater by the cooey and then speared him to death. A servant of Mr. Cassidy and another of Mr. Evans met a similar fate. In concert with Tom a Tasmanian black he became a terror to the colony. Their parties moved in large bodies and acted under a common impulse. In carrying on their depredations their tactics aimed at military unity and skill. A party of sixty appeared before the premises of Mr. Hobbs at the Eastern Marshes (1824): they watched the servants deliver their fire and before they could reload their muskets they rushed upon them and by weight of numbers drove them off the ground. A few days after the natives again appeared: a small party came forward first and reconnoitred; then returning to a hill they made signals to a body of a hundred and fifty in an opposite direction. Both divisions bore down on the establishment. The English were now well armed and maintained the post for five hours; but escaped when they saw the natives prepare to surround the dwelling with fire. Overcome with terror for several days they refused to return and the property was left to its fate. Mr. Hobbs was specially unfortunate: his house lay in the track both of the natives and bushrangers and thrice in one season his premises were pillaged.  The arrest of Musquito became an object of importance and Colonel Arthur then Governor offered a reward for his capture. Teague an aboriginal boy brought up by Dr. Luttrell was dispatched with two constables. They overtook Musquito at Oyster Bay: he resisted but was shot in the groin and being unarmed was captured with two women and conveyed to Hobart Town.  It was resolved to bring him to justice. By the care of Dr. Scott he was cured and transferred from the hospital to gaol. Black Tom was subsequently taken and both were tried for the murder of William Hollyoak and Patrick M'Arthur. Of the last of these offences the Tasmanian was found guilty but Musquito was convicted of both.  Mammoa an Otaheitian was killed with Hollyoak: Musquito had lingered in their neighbourhood and watched their movements for days; he had visited their hut and received provisions from their hands; but on the morning of the murder he purloined the guns and removed the dogs. Mammoa fell instantly; but the Englishman endured the misery of long pursuit and several wounds and dropped at last pierced through and through with spears.  Such were the men who in February 1825 suffered death with six European criminals. They were unassisted by counsel and perhaps the evidence was not fully understood by them. It is useless however to extenuate their treachery: and their execution whether politic or not can scarcely be accounted unjust. [269] But unhappily these deeds of barbarity were not left to the vengeance of the law. The colonists of higher grades preserved the distinction between the guilty and the innocent which it is the object of public trials to establish; but the lower orders and especially the dissolute and the worthless justified hatred to the race and finally systematic massacre by the individual acts of such men as Musquito.  It is instructive if not amusing to observe how nicely the theory of some philosophers and the sentiments of the lowest European robbers meet together; how what one predicts the other executes. The supposed eternal laws of nature are accomplished by the wild license of an English savage. It became the serious conviction of stockmen that blacks are brutes only of a more cunning and dangerous order - an impression which has long ceased in this colony but which still flourishes in Australia Felix.  Bent the proprietor of the only newspaper published at that time referring to the outrages of the hostile blacks seemed to dread these doctrines. With great consideration he detaches Musquito's guilt from the tribes in general: a distinction by no means trite or universally recognised. "Until corrupted by the Sydney natives they were" he asserts "the most peaceable race in existence." These humane suggestions deserve more praise than the highest literary skill.  2nd. The disposition to conciliate the blacks eventually contributed to the same disastrous consequences. A tribe of sixty appeared in Hobart Town November 1824; they came in a peaceable manner their visit was unexpected and its cause unknown. On the first notice of their approach the Governor went forth to meet them: he assigned three places for their fires supplied them with food and blankets and appointed constables to protect them. They departed suddenly and on their journey attempted to spear a white man. Whether the abrupt retreat resulted from caprice or distrust it did not prevent a similar visit to Launceston in the following December. There were 200 in this party. When crossing Paterson's Plains they were wantonly fired on by the whites and in their return some of their women were treated with indescribable brutality; the ruffians who maltreated them were indeed punished with 25 lashes. When they reached the Lake River two sawyers who had never before suffered molestation were wounded by their spears. The recent cruelty they had experienced fully accounted for their rage.  It was the anxious desire of the Governor to establish a native institution deriving its funds partly from the public purse and partly from private benevolence. A code was prepared by the Rev. Messrs. Bedford and Mansfield; and a public meeting held in the church of St. David the Governor presiding approved the regulations; but at that time the colony was distracted by the ravages of robbers and its financial resources were depressed: and the prevailing opinion that civilisation was impossible still further embarrassed the project and confined the hopes of the most sanguine to the rising generation. Mr. Mansfield rested his expectation rather on the power of God than upon human probabilities. [270]  The civilisation of a barbarous people is perhaps impossible in the presence of organised communities of white men. The contrast is too great and the points of contact too numerous and irritating. Never have colonists civilised aborigines; but the failure is easily explained without recourse to egotistical superstition that the white man's shadow is to men of every other hue by law of Heaven the shadow of death.  The children of aborigines adopted by the whites when they grew to maturity were drawn to the woods and resumed the habits of their kindred. A black girl trained in Launceston thus allured laid aside her clothing which she had worn nearly from infancy. It was thus with many: a sense of inferiority to the youth about them united with the mysterious interest which every heart feels in kindred sympathies is sufficient to account for these relapses. Examples will crowd upon the memory of the reader in which the polish and caresses of the British capital did not disqualify the savage to re-enter with zest on the barbarous pursuits of his forefathers.  The desire for sugar bread and blankets could only be regularly gratified by an abandonment of migratory habits. When remote from the government stores the natives still coveted what they could not obtain but as spoil. They had learned to prefer articles of steel to the crystal and they acquired an imperfect mastery of fire-arms. Some were however exceedingly expert; a chief conciliated by Mr. G. A. Robinson brought down an eagle hawk with all the airs of a practised sportsman. Thus their untutored nature could not resist the temptation created by new wants: they watched the hut of the stock-keeper which they stripped during his absence; till growing more daring they disregarded his presence; and even the populous districts and establishments of considerable force were not safe from their depredations.  At the time when they first became formidable armed bushrangers scoured the colony; sometimes the allies of the natives much oftener their oppressors. Outlaws themselves they inculcated the arts of violence. The improved caution and cunning of the natives so often noticed by the government were ascribed in no small degree to the treacherous lessons of degraded Europeans. But when the bushranger did not employ these people as the instrument of his designs moved by fear or cruelty often he destroyed them: thus Lemon and Brown set up the natives as marks to fire at. The irritated savage confounded the armed though unoffending stock-keeper with his marauding countrymen and missing the object of his premeditated vengeance speared the first substitute he encountered. This conclusion is amply supported by facts. The common principles which affect the minds of nations towards each other; the reprisals which are vindicated in civilised war only differ in circumstances. A thousand injuries never recorded if stated in a connexion with these results would enable us to see how often the harmless settler was sacrificed to passions provoked by his robber countrymen.  In 1826 a remarkable instance of this was brought under the notice of government. Dunne who at length met the punishment he deserved seized a woman and forced her to the hut of Mr. Thomson on the Shannon where he detained her with violence; she however escaped to her people and roused them to avenge her. [271] Dunne next morning suddenly found himself in their midst: his musket protected him and after hours of such torture as his conscience and fears might inflict he managed to get off. On the following day the woman led her tribe vociferating threats to the hut in which she had been maltreated where they massacred James Scott a man with whom they had lived in friendship for many years and who when warned a few days before to be on his guard smiled at the notion of danger.  The treatment of some of these women was such as no one can be expected to credit until prepared by extensive acquaintance with human depravation. A monster boasted that having captured a native woman whose husband he had killed he strung the bleeding head to her neck and drove her before him as his prize. Had not this fact been guaranteed by formal enquiry it could only have been admitted as a specimen of brutal gasconade and in proof of how much a cruel fancy could exceed the actual guilt of mankind. It sometimes happened that an unfortunate servant would receive the spear intended for his predecessor in the same employ to whom it was justly due. Among the whites there were men distinguished for the malicious vigour with which they tracked and murdered the native people. A lad on his arrival from England was sent into the interior and warned never to wander from his dwelling; but he forgot the danger he did not see and straying a short distance he was murdered. He had never injured his destroyers; but then he lived on the lands just before in charge of a villain and who like a Roman warrior took his name of "Abyssinian Tom" from the locality of his exploits.  3rd. The infliction of judicial punishments interrupted the friendly intercourse of the tribe that visited Hobart Town and who were encouraged to resort to Kangaroo Point where huts were erected for their use. The arrest of two of their number filled them with apprehension. The aborigines Jack and Dick were executed on the 13th September 1826 an event which terminated all present hope of amicable relations. The murder of a shepherd at Oyster Bay Great Swan Port was proved against them by the evidence of convict stock-keepers; a topic of contemporary complaint: but the courts regularly relied on the same class of witnesses and in this case there is no special reason for suspicion. The fact was not questioned: the culprits had been treated with kindness by the government and efforts had been made by Colonel Arthur to acquaint them with the obligations of British subjects. He asserts that by personal interviews he was fully convinced that they understood the benevolent views of the crown. One of these blacks was so far civilised as to be admitted to the sacrament of the English church. His companion was a youth and denied his guilt. The old black was carried to the scaffold and resisted the execution: the younger disentangled his arms and struggled for his life. It was indeed a melancholy spectacle. Successive Governors had witnessed crimes against their race atrocious and unpunished: hundreds had fallen unavenged by that public justice which treated them as murderers.  A LADY'S VISIT TO THE GOLD-DIGGINGS OF AUSTRALIA.  Chapter I. Introductory Remarks  It may be deemed presumptuous that one of my age and sex should venture to give to the public an account of personal adventures in a land which has so often been descanted upon by other and abler pens; but when I reflect on the many mothers wives and sisters in England whose hearts are ever longing for information respecting the dangers and privations to which their relatives at the antipodes are exposed I cannot but hope that the pre-sumption of my undertaking may be pardoned in consideration of the pleasure which an accurate description of some of the Australian Gold Fields may perhaps afford to many; and although the time of my residence in the colonies was short I had the advantage (not only in Melbourne but whilst in the bush) of constant intercourse with many experienced diggers and old colonists - thus having every facility for acquiring information respecting Victoria and the other colonies. [2]  It was in the beginning of April 185 -  that the excitement occasioned by the published accounts of the Victoria "Diggings" induced my brother to fling aside his Homer and Euclid for the various "Guides" printed for the benefit of the intending gold-seeker or to ponder over the shipping columns of the daily papers. The love of adventure must be contagious for three weeks after (so rapid were our preparations) found myself accompanying him to those auriferous regions. The following pages will give an accurate detail of my adventures there - in a lack of the marvellous will consist their principal faults but not even to please would I venture to turn uninteresting truth into agreeable fiction. Of the few statistics which occur I may safely say as of the more personal portions that they are strictly true. [3]  [4] Chapter II. The Voyage Out  Everything was ready - boxes packed tinned and corded; farewells taken and ourselves whirling down by rail to Gravesend - too much excited - too full of the future to experience that sickening of the heart that desolation of the feelings which usually accompanies an expatriation however voluntary from the dearly loved shores of one's native land. Although in the cloudy month of April the sun shone brightly on the masts of our bonny bark which lay in full sight of the windows of the "Old Falcon" where we had taken up our temporary quarters. The sea was very rough but as we were anxious to get on board without farther delay we entrusted our valuable lives in a four-oared boat despite the dismal prognostications of our worthy host. A pleasant row that was at one moment covered over with salt-water - the next riding on the top of a wave ten times the size of our frail conveyance - then came a sudden concussion - in veering our rudder smashed into a smaller boat which immediately filled and sank and our rowers disheartened at this mishap would go no farther. The return was still rougher - my face smarted dreadfully from the cutting splashes of the salt-water; they contrived however to land us safely at the "Old Falcon" though in a most pitiable plight; charging only a sovereign for this delightful trip - very moderate considering the number of salt-water baths they had given us gratis. In the evening a second trial proved more successful and we reached our vessel safely. [5]  A first night on board ship has in it something very strange and the first awakening in the morning is still more so. To find oneself in a space of some six feet by eight instead of a good-sized room and lying in a cot scarce wide enough to turn round in as a substitute for a four-post bedstead reminds you in no very agreeable manner that you have exchanged the comforts of Old England for the "roughing it" of a sea life. The first sound that awoke me was the "cheerily" song of the sailors as the anchor was heaved - not again we trusted to be lowered till our eyes should rest on the waters of Port Philip. And then the cry of "raise tacks and sheets" (which I in nautical ignorance interpreted "hay-stacks and sheep") sent many a sluggard from their berths to bid a last farewell to the banks of the Thames. [6]  In the afternoon we parted company with our steam-tug and next morning whilst off the Isle of Wight our pilot also took his departure. Sea-sickness now became the fashion but as I cannot speak from experience of its sensations I shall altogether decline the subject. On Friday the 30th we sighted Stark Point; and as the last speck of English land faded away in the distance an intense feeling of misery crept over me as I reflected that perchance I had left those most dear to return to them no more. But I forget; a description of private feelings is to uninterested readers only so much twaddle besides being more egotistical than even an account of personal adventures could extenuate; so with the exception of a few extracts from my "log" I shall jump at once from the English Channel to the more exciting shores of Victoria. [7]  Wednesday May 5 lat. 45° 57' N. long. 11° 45' W. - Whilst off the Bay of Biscay for the first time I had the pleasure of seeing the phosphoric light in the water and the effect was indeed too beautiful to describe. I gazed again and again and as the darkness above became more dense the silence of evening more profound and the moving lights beneath more brilliant I could have believed them the eyes of the Undines who had quitted their cool grottos beneath the sea to gaze on the daring ones who were sailing above them. At times one of these stars of the ocean would seem to linger around our vessel as though loth to leave the admiring eyes that watched its glittering progress. * * * *   Sunday 9 lat. 37° 53' N long. 15° 32' W. - Great excitement throughout the ship. Early in the morning a homeward-bound sail hove in sight and as the sea was very calm our captain kindly promised to lower a boat and send letters by her. What a scene then commenced; nothing but scribes and writing-desks met the view and nought was heard but the scratching of pens and energetic demands for foreign letter-paper vestas or scaling-wax; then came a rush on deck to witness the important packet delivered to the care of the first mate and watch the progress of the little bark that was to bear among so many homes the glad tidings of our safety. On she came - her stunsails set - her white sails glittering in the sun - skimming like a sea-bird over the waters. She proved to be the Maltese schooner 'Felix' bound for Bremen. Her captain treated the visitors from our ship with the greatest politeness promised to consign our letters to the first pilot he should encounter off the English coast and sent his very last oranges as a present to the ladies for which we sincerely thanked him; the increasing heat of the weather made them acceptable indeed. [8]  Wednesday 12 lat. 33° 19' N long. 17° 30 W. - At about noon we sighted Madeira. At first it appeared little more than a dark cloud above the horizon; gradually the sides of the rocks became clearly discernible then the wind bore us onward and soon all traces of the sunny isle were gone. [9]  Friday 28 lat. 4° 2' N. long. 21° 30' W. - Another opportunity of sending letters but as this was the second time of so doing the excitement was proportionately diminished. This vessel was bound for the port of Liverpool from the coast of Africa; her cargo (so said those of our fellow-travellers who boarded her) consisted of ebony and gold-dust her only passengers being monkeys and parrots.   Sunday June 6 long. 24° 38' W. - Crossed the Line to the great satisfaction of all on board as we had been becalmed more than a week and were weary of gazing upon the unruffled waters around us or watching the sails as they idly flapped to and fro. Chess backgammon books and cards had ceased to beguile the hours away and the only amusement left was lowering a boat and rowing about within a short distance of the ship but this (even by those not pulling at the oars) was considered too fatiguing work for a tropical sun was above us and the heat was most intense. Our only resource was to give ourselves up to a sort of dolce far niente existence and lounge upon the deck sipping lemonade or lime-juice beneath a large awning which extended from the fore to the mizen masts. [10]  Tuesday August 17 lat. 39° 28' S. long. 136° 31' E. - Early this morning one of the sailors died and before noon the last services of the Church of England were read over his body; this was the first and only death that occurred during our long passage and the solemnity of committing his last remains to their watery grave cast a saddening influence over the most thoughtless. I shall never forget the moment when the sewn-up hammock with a gaily coloured flag wrapped round it was launched into the deep; those who can witness with indifference a funeral on land would I think find it impossible to resist the thrilling awe inspired by such an event at sea.   Friday 20 lat. 38° 57 S. long. 140° S' E. - Sighted Moonlight Head the next day Cape Otway; and in the afternoon of Sunday the 22nd we entered the Heads and our pilot came on board. He was a smart active fellow and immediately anchored us within the bay (a heavy gale brewing); and then after having done colonial justice to a substantial dinner he edified us with the last Melbourne news. "Not a spare room or bed to be had - no living at all under a pound a-day - every one with ten fingers making ten to twenty pounds a-week." "Then of course no one goes to the diggings?" "Oh that pays better still - the gold obliged to be quarried - a pound weight of no value." The excitement that evening can scarcely be imagined but it somewhat abated next morning on his telling us to diminish his accounts some 200 per cent. [11]  Monday 23. - The wind high and blowing right against us. Compelled to remain at anchor only too thankful to be in such safe quarters.   Tuesday 24. - Got under weigh at half-past seven in the morning and passed the wrecks of two vessels whose captains had attempted to come in without a pilot rather than wait for one - the increased number of vessels arriving causing the pilots to be frequently all engaged. The bay which is truly splendid was crowded with shipping. In a few hours our anchor was lowered for the last time - boats were put off towards our ship from Liardet's Beach - we were lowered into the first that came alongside - a twenty minutes' pull to the landing-place - another minute and we trod the golden shores of Victoria.  [12]  [13] Chapter III. Stay in Melbourne  At last we are in Australia. Our feet feel strange as they tread upon terra firma and our sea-legs (to use a sailor's phrase) are not so ready to leave us after a four months' service as we should have anticipated; but it matters little for we are in the colonies walking with undignified awkward gait not on a fashionable promenade but upon a little wooden pier.   The first sounds that greet our ears are the noisy tones of some watermen who are loitering on the building of wooden logs and boards which we as do the good people of Victoria dignify with the undeserved title of pier. There they stand in their waterproof caps and skins - tolerably idle and exceedingly independent - with one eye on the look out for a fare and the other cast longingly towards the open doors of Liardet's public-house which is built a few yards from the landing-place and alongside the main road to Melbourne. [14]  "Ah skipper! times isn't as they used to was" shouted one addressing the captain of one of the vessels then lying in the bay who was rowing himself to shore with no other assistant or companion than a sailor-boy. The captain a well-built fine-looking specimen of an English seaman merely laughed at this impromptu salutation.   "I say skipper I don't quite like that d-d stroke of yours."   No answer; but as if completely deaf to these remarks as well as the insulting tone in which they were delivered the "skipper" continued giving his orders to his boy and then leisurely ascended the steps. He walked straight up to the waterman who was lounging against the railing.   "So my fine fellow you didn't quite admire that stroke of mine. Now I've another stroke that I think you'll admire still less" and with one blow he sent him reeling against the railing on the opposite side. [15]  The waterman slowly recovered his equilibrium muttering "that was a safe dodge as the gentleman knew he was the heaviest man of the two."   "Then never let your tongue say what your fist can't defend" was the cool retort as another blow sent him staggering to his original place amidst the unrestrained laughter of his companions whilst the captain unconcernedly walked into Liardet's whither we also betook ourselves not a little surprised and amused by this our first introduction to colonial customs and manners.   The fact is the watermen regard the masters of the ships in the bay as sworn enemies to their business; many are runaway sailors and therefore I suppose have a natural antipathy that way; added to which besides being no customers themselves the "skippers" by the loan of their boats often save their friends from the exorbitant charges these watermen levy.   Exorbitant they truly are. Not a boat would they put off for the nearest ship in the bay for less than a pound and before I quitted those regions two and three times that sum was often demanded for only one passenger. We had just paid at the rate of only three shillings and sixpence each but this trifling charge was in consideration of the large party - more than a dozen - who had left our ship in the same boat together. [16]  Meanwhile we have entered Liardet's en attendant the Melbourne omnibus some of our number too impatient to wait longer had already started on foot. We were shown into a clean well-furnished sitting-room with mahogany dining-table and chairs and a showy glass over the mantelpicce. An English-looking barmaid entered "Would the company like some wine or spirits?" Some one ordered sherry of which I only remember that it was vile trash at eight shillings a bottle.   And now the cry of "Here's the bus" brought us quickly outside again where we found several new arrivals also waiting for it. I had hoped from the name or rather misname of the conveyance to gladden my eyes with the sight of something civilized. Alas for my disappointment! [17] There stood a long tumble-to-pieces-looking waggon not covered in with a plank down each side to sit upon and a miserable narrow plank it was. Into this vehicle were crammed a dozen people and an innumerable host of portmanteaus large and small carpet-bags baskets brown-paper parcels bird-cage and inmate &c. all of which as is generally the case were packed in a manner the most calculated to contribute the largest amount of inconvenience to the live portion of the cargo. And to drag this grand affair into Melbourne were harnessed thereto the most wretched-looking objects in the shape of horses that I had ever beheld.   A slight roll tells us we are off.   "And is this the beautiful scenery of Australia?" was my first melancholy reflection. Mud and swamp - swamp and mud - relieved here and there by some few trees which looked as starved and miserable as ourselves. The cattle we passed appeared in a wretched condition and the human beings on the road seemed all to belong to one family so truly Vandemonian was the cast of their countenances.   [18] "The rainy season's not over" observed the driver in an apologetic tone. Our eyes and uneasy limbs most feelingly corroborated his statement for as we moved along at a foot-pace the rolling of the omnibus owing to the deep ruts and heavy soil brought us into most unpleasant contact with the various packages before-mentioned. On we went towards Melbourne - now stopping for the unhappy horses to take breath - then passing our pedestrian messmates and now arriving at a small specimen of a swamp; and whilst they (with trowsers tucked high above the knee and boots well saturated) step slide and tumble manfully through it we give a fearful roll to the left ditto ditto to the right then a regular stand-still or perhaps by way of variety are all but jolted over the animals' heads till at length all minor considerations of bumps and bruises are merged in the anxiety to escape without broken bones.   "The Yarra" said the conductor. I looked straight ahead and innocently asked "Where?" for I could only discover a tract of marsh or swamp which I fancy must have resembled the fens of Lincolnshire as they were some years ago before draining was introduced into that county. Over Princes Bridge we now passed up Swanston Street then into Great Bourke Street and now we stand opposite the Post-office - the appointed rendezvous with the walkers who are there awaiting us. Splashed wet and tired and also I must confess very cross right thankful was I to be carried over the dirty road and be safely deposited beneath the wooden portico outside the Post-office. Our ride to Melbourne cost us only half-a-crown a piece and a shilling for every parcel. The distance we had come was between two and three miles. [19]  The non-arrival of the mail-steamer left us now no other care save the all-important one of procuring food and shelter. Scouts were accordingly despatched to the best hotels; they returned with long faces - "full." The second-rate and in fact every respectable inn and boarding or lodging-house were tried but with no better success. Here and there a solitary bed could be obtained but for our digging party entire which consisted of my brother four shipmates and myself no accommodation could be procured and we wished if possible to keep together. "It's a case" ejaculated one casting his eyes to the slight roof above us as if calculating what sort of night shelter it would afford. At this moment the two last searchers approached their countenances not quite so woe-begone as before. "Well?" exclaimed we all in chorus as we surrounded them too impatient to interrogate at greater length. Thank Heavens! they had been successful! The house-keeper of a surgeon who with his wife had just gone up to Forest Creek would receive us to board and lodge for thirty shillings a week each; but as the accommodation was of the indifferent order it was not as yet une affaire arrangée. On farther inquiry we found the indifferent accommodation consisted in their being but one small sleeping-room for the gentlemen and myself to share the bed and apartment of the temporary mistress. This was vastly superior to gipsying in the dirty streets so we lost no time in securing our new berths and ere very long with appetites undiminished by these petty anxieties we did ample justice to the dinner which our really kind hostess quickly placed before us. [20]  The first night on shore after so long a voyage could scarcely seem otherwise than strange one missed the eternal rocking at which so many grumble on board ship. Dogs (Melbourne is full of them) kept up an incessant barking; revolvers were cracking in all directions until daybreak giving one a pleasant idea of the state of society; and last not least of these annoyances was one unmentionable to ears polite which would alone have sufficed to drive sleep away from poor wearied me. How I envied my companion as accustomed to these disagreeables she slept soundly by my side; but morning at length dawned and I fell into a refreshing slumber. [21]  The next few days were busy ones for all though rather dismal to me as I was confined almost entirely within doors owing to the awful state of the streets; for in the colonies at this season of the year one may go out prepared for fine weather with blue sky above and dry under foot and in less than an hour should a colonial shower come on be unable to cross some of the streets without a plank being placed from the middle of the road to the pathway or the alternative of walking in water up to the knees.   This may seem a doleful and overdrawn picture of my first colonial experience but we had arrived at a time when the colony presented its worst aspect to a stranger. The rainy season had been unusually protracted this year in fact it was not yet considered entirely over and the gold mines had completely upset everything and everybody and put a stop to all improvements about the town or elsewhere. [22]  Our party on returning to the ship the day after our arrival witnessed the French-leave-taking of all her crew who during the absence of the captain jumped overboard and were quickly picked up and landed by the various boats about. This desertion of the ships by the sailors is an every-day occurrence; the diggings themselves or the large amount they could obtain for the run home from another master offer too many temptations. Consequently our passengers had the amusement of hauling up from the hold their different goods and chattels; and so great was the confusion that fully a week elapsed before they were all got to shore. Meanwhile we were getting initiated into colonial prices - money did indeed take to itself wings and fly away. Fire-arms were at a premium; one instance will suffice - my brother sold a six-barrelled revolver for which he had given sixty shillings at Baker's in Fleet Street for sixteen pounds and the parting with it at that price was looked upon as a great favour. Imagine boots and they very second-rate ones at four pounds a pair. One of our between-deck passengers who had speculated with a small capital of forty pounds in boots and cutlery told me afterwards that he had disposed of them the same evening he had landed at a net profit of ninety pounds - no trifling addition to a poor man's purse. Labour was at a very high price carpenters boot and shoemakers tailors wheelwrights joiners smiths glaziers and in fact all useful trades were earning from twenty to thirty shillings a day - the very men working on the roads could get eleven shillings per diem and many a gentleman in this disarranged state of affairs was glad to fling old habits aside and turn his hand to whatever came readiest. I knew one in particular whose brother is at this moment serving as colonel in the army in India a man more fitted for a gay London life than a residence in the colonies. The diggings were too dirty and uncivilized for his taste his capital was quickly dwindling away beneath the expenses of the comfortable life he led at one of the best hotels in town so he turned to what as a boy he had learnt for amusement and obtained an addition to his income of more than four hundred pounds a year as house carpenter. In the morning you might see him trudging off to his work and before night might meet him at some ball or soirée among the élite of Melbourne. [23] [24]  I shall not attempt an elaborate description of the town of Melbourne or its neighbouring villages. A subject so often and well discussed might almost be omitted altogether. The town is very well laid out; the streets (which are all straight running parallel with and across one another) are very wide but are incomplete not lighted and many are unpaved. Owing to the want of lamps few except when full moon dare stir out after dark. Some of the shops are very fair; but the goods all partake too largely of the flash order for the purpose of suiting the tastes of successful diggers their wives and families; it is ludicrous to see them in the shops - men who before the gold-mines were discovered toiled hard for their daily bread taking off half-a-dozen thick gold rings from their fingers and trying to pull on to their rough well-hardened hands the best white kids to be worn at some wedding party; whilst the wife proud of the novel ornament descants on the folly of hiding them beneath such useless articles as gloves. [25]  The two principal streets are Collins Street and Elizabeth Street. The former runs east and west the latter crossing it in the centre. Melbourne is built on two hills and the view from the top of Collins Street East is very striking on a fine day when well filled with passengers and vehicles. Down the eye passes till it reaches Elizabeth Street at the foot; then up again and the moving mass seems like so many tiny black specks in the distance and the country beyond looks but a little piece of green. A great deal of confusion arises from the want of their names being painted on the corners of the streets: to a stranger this is particularly inconvenient the more so as being straight they appear all alike on first acquaintance. The confusion is also increased by the same title with slight variation being applied to so many as for instance Collins Street East; Collins Street West; Little Collins Street East; Little Collins Street West &c. &c. Churches and chapels for all sects and denominations meet the eye; but the Established Church has of all the worst provision for its members only two small churches being as yet completed; and Sunday after Sunday do numbers return from St. Peter's unable to obtain even standing room beneath the porch. For the gay there are two circuses and one theatre where the "ladies" who frequent it smoke short tobacco-pipes in the boxes and dress-circle. [26]  The country round is very pretty particularly Richmond and Collingwood; the latter will I expect soon become part of Melbourne itself. It is situated at the fashionable - that is east - end of Melbourne and the buildings of the city and this suburban village are making rapid strides towards each other. Of Richmond I may remark that it does possess a "Star and Garter" though a very different affair to its namesake at the antipodes being only a small public-house. On the shores of the bay at nice driving distances are Brighton and St. Kilda. Two or three fall-to-pieces bathing-machines are at present the only stock in trade of these watering-places; still should some would-be fashionables among my readers desire to emigrate it may gratify them to learn that they need not forego the pleasure of visiting Brighton in the season. [27]  When I first arrived as the weather was still very cold and wet my greatest source of discomfort arose from the want of coal-fires and the draughts which are innumerable owing to the slight manner in which the houses are run up; in some the front entrance opens direct into the sitting-rooms very unpleasant and entirely precluding the "not at home" to an unwelcome visitor. Wood fires have at best but a cheerless look and I often longed for the bright blaze and merry fireside of an English home. Firewood is sold at the rate of fifty shillings for a good-sized barrow-full.   The colonists (I here speak of the old-established ones) are naturally very hospitable and disposed to receive strangers with great kindness; but the present ferment has made them forget everything in the glitter of their own mines and all comfort is laid aside; money is the idol and making it is the one mania which absorbs every other thought.   The walking inhabitants are of themselves a study: glance into the streets - all nations classes and costumes are represented there. Chinamen with pigtails and loose trowsers; Aborigines with a solitary blanket flung over them; Vandemonian pickpockets with cunning eyes and light fingers - all in truth from the successful digger in his blue serge shirt and with green veil still hanging round his wide-awake to the fashionably-attired newly-arrived "gent" from London who stares around him in amazement and disgust. You may see and hear too some thoroughly colonial scenes in the streets. Once in the middle of the day when passing up Elizabeth Street I heard the unmistakeable sound of a mob behind and as it was gaining upon me I turned into the enclosed ground in front of the Roman Catholic cathedral to keep out of the way of the crowd. A man had been taken up for horse-stealing and a rare ruffianly set of both sexes were following the prisoner and the two policemen who had him in charge. "If but six of ye were of my mind" shouted one "it's this moment you'd release him." The crowd took the hint and to it they set with right good will yelling swearing and pushing with awful violence. The owner of the stolen horse got up a counter demonstration and every few yards the procession was delayed by a trial of strength between the two parties. Ultimately the police conquered; but this is not always the case and often lives are lost and limbs broken in the struggle so weak is the force maintained by the colonial government for the preservation of order. [28] [29]  Another day when passing the Post-office a regular tropical shower of rain came on rather suddenly and I hastened up to the platform for shelter. As I stood there looking out into Great Bourke Street a man and I suppose his wife passed by. He had a letter in his hand for the post; but as the pathway to the receiving-box looked very muddy he made his companion take it to the box whilst he himself from beneath his umbrella complacently watched her getting wet through. "Colonial politeness" thought I as the happy couple walked on.   MCIVOR DIGGINGS.  (From Our Own Correspondent.)  The road -- On the Saturday we started from Melbourne there had been four days' fine weather; which circumstances had rendered the roads somewhat more passable for the various conveyances from the ponderous bullock-team to the light spring-cart en route to the diggings. Understanding that the best road to McIvor diggings was by the Broadmeadows we proceeded out of town by way of Flemington. On reaching the Lincolnshire Arms Inn about five or six miles from Melbourne we took the left-hand road leading to the Lady of the Lake Inn situated about ten miles from town. On approaching that inn the road to the Broadmeadows branches off to the right. This road in some parts is very good; but in places here and there some fearfully deep ruts exist through which our light cart proceeded with much difficulty. Presently we passed the prettily-situated village of Broadmeadows immediately beyond is a steep pinch which owing to the late rains having made the road very slippery occasioned our horses and others that were -in company much trouble in ascending. At this spot I was in the act of "scotching" the wheel of the cart for our horses to rest a while in ascending the steep when the wheel caught my fingers; by a sudden jerk I got my hand away but found the weight of the wheel on the middle finger had caused me the loss of the nail thereon though I felt no pain at the instant. We now proceeded along a pretty good road fenced mostly on each side with here and there a stiff rut to get through. Night coming on we camped for the first night among some excellent feed about twenty miles from town. During the evening a steady fall of rain commenced which to our great sorrow continued almost without intermission for three days. Next day we passed along a succession of hill and plain but owing to the very bad state of the roads we only reached the foot of Pretty Sally's Hill (approx. 25 miles) by our second evening. Next day we had much difficulty in getting over this very steep hill for the horses could scarcely hold their footing in ascending the same. Here the road gradually descends towards the township of Kilmore All along we passed a great many teams camped along the side of the road unable to proceed. When within two miles from Kilmore leaving the main road we took a new track to' the left for we were told that to go through Kilmore was almost an impossibility with a cart. We passed a number of small farms lying to the right of Kumore through a fearful bad road; and finding our horses very much exhausted camped for the third evening. Next morning proceeding through some fences we passed Mr. Clark's station. Here to our great joy we found the road was more hard and firm the country passing from the black soft soil through which we had passed with much difficulty into a red clayey soil. [36] The road we found now passed along the foot of a series of ranges and in about fifteen miles from Kilmore we arrived at Moilison's station very pleasantly situated on a rising eminence to our left. We found on inquiry at the eating house located at this spot that the distance to the McIvor diggings was twenty miles. Passing Mollison's station the road proceeds through a fine open country covered on all sides with great granite boulders and resembling in appearance very much the approach to the entrance of the Bendigo district. Four miles from Mollison's station we camped for the fourth evening. Next morning we found the road gradually entered a series of high ranges on both sides until we arrived at the Pick and Shovel Inn which is ten miles from the McIvor diggings. In five miles more we passed the McIvor Inn and towards evening we concluded our five days' trip by camping outside the diggings.  The pursuit is in fact rapidly assuming a more determined character. There is an observable decrease in the number of large prizes of a chance character and a steady increase in the number of those persons who adhere to diggings as an occupation at which they can gain a much higher remuneration on the whole than at almost any other employment.  New diggings are still being discovered. Within the last few weeks a spot named the McIvor Creek about sixty-five miles north from Melbourne and about fifty miles east from Mount Alexander has been found to be richly auriferous and already several thousands of diggers are at work in the locality. There is little doubt but that it will prove a new centre of operations. The diggers in many of the gullies at Mount Alexander and Bendigo have been much impeded during the summer from want of water; but they have been digging out large heaps of rich soil which will yield immense quantities of gold now that the streams are beginning to flow and the washing season is coming round. It is not improbable that the amount brought down during the present winter will exceed even that of last winter. The diggers at the Ovens on the other hand have been hindered by floods by impassable roads and consequent high prices of provisions. At Ballarat steady yields are still the rule but even there the miners in many of the flats have been incommoded by the abundance of water. Thus it will be seen how singularly variable a pursuit that of gold-mining is; and it will also strike the intelligent reader that the colony must be amazingly rich in the precious metal to have yielded such vast quantities in spite of all these disadvantages backed by methods of working which are still grossly unscientific.  The Government has issued a new code of Gold Regulations which are chiefly noticeable for the facilities they offer for the formation of companies for reworking the ground over which the diggers have already passed. There cannot be a doubt that such companies provided they introduced improved modes of operation and were conducted on the co-operative principle would prove highly profitable. The ordinary "digging" does not by any means exhaust the soil; it is impossible that it should do so; and the best proof of the fact is that many men gain considerable profits by washing out a second time or even a third time the stuff thrown aside by previous workers. Much more then would scientific processes be profitable if so employed. Several such companies as we have mentioned have been projected since the regulations were issued and it is likely that something considerable will before long be accomplished in this way. [40] But we should again warn English readers that we are not giving any countenance by these statements to the numerous bubble companies which have sprung into existence in England with the ostensible design of working our gold-fields. These companies from the very nature of them are almost certain to prove dishonest schemes; and some of them are known to be swindling concerns of the most nefarious character. Let no man who values his property have anything to do with them.  No masses of gold of striking magnitude have been brought to light since our previous summary; but even if there had been they would not have excited much attention here. Nuggets of a few pounds' weight have become too common to deserve special mention and after a time people become tired of being told of even ten or twenty pound lumps.  A great deal of dissatisfaction and numberless complaints have come under my notice within the last few weeks in reference to the undue severity and tyrannical conduct of the police When in search of unlicensed persons. No. 1 of the regulations appended to the license sets forth that "every licensed person must always have his license with him ready to be produced whenever demanded by a Commissioner or persons acting under his instructions; otherwise he is liable to be proceeded against as an unlicensed person." [54] This rule in particular is the one which causes the greatest amount of complaint. Should a person although in possession of his license by any means be unfortunate enough not to have it on his person he is immediately walked off and however near he may be to his dwelling he is not allowed to go for it. An instance of this nature and I must certainly say it appears to me rather too much of a good thing occurred on Monday last. A storekeeper named Dale at Golden Point was employed at the door of his store on Monday last when he was asked for his license; he pointed it to the constable hanging on a nail inside his store; immediately after another constable came up and again asked him for his license but when told he had not the piece of paper upon his person but could produce it in the store the constable would not consent to let him in and insisted upon his being marched off. Mr. Dale begged to have his coat he being without one which was also refused. In the meantime Mrs. Dale brought out the required coat and license. Mr. Dale appealed to Inspector Evans representing the conduct of the constables in very strong terms and promised that the thing should not rest there. Mr. Evans discharged Mr. Dale from custody. This is one of numerous instances of a similar nature. And again servants in charge of property are very often similarly treated and property left to the mercy of the weather although the parties very often held the required license as a letter from a Mr. Day a butcher will explain. The felon-like treatment of the police towards unlicensed persons is loudly complained of; but not to trespass upon your space I refer your readers to the following remarks furnished me by a very respectable resident at Campbell's Creek (a distance of five miles from this office) of what occurred there on Monday last.   I think it but just to give occasionally the information as furnished to me to show the state of the public mind and what the tyrannical conduct of the authorities will eventually lead to. My informant says - Considerable excitement was created at Campbell's Creek on Monday the 20th inst. by the arbitrary and reckless conduct of the Inspector of Police. Nearly every person walking on the Queen's highroad was stopped and a license demanded; tents were entered and the inmates dragged out if not in possession of licenses as if they were the vilest criminals; all the stores were called at and the storekeepers required in the most insulting manner to produce their licenses. In one case a schoolmaster teaching his scholars was taken from his school; men were taken from their employment; diggers who had licenses at their tents were taken in custody; and Englishmen marched along the highway in charge of the mounted police exposed to the gaze of the populace. [55] Amongst those thus marched prisoners was a nephew of Mr. Campbell of Campbell's station. The diggers and storekeepers are greatly exasperated. Here and there little knots of diggers may be heard murmuring that in California this state of things would soon be altered and that in a summary way. It is a pity that the unfortunate people who intend leaving the shores of England for this police-ridden country should be left in ignorance of the treatment they will receive on arrival.  It may not be known to the Melbourne public or to the British public that if a man have no license and is unable to pay the fine of three or five pounds he is thrust into a small cell for fourteen days or a month in company with felons of the vilest description; thieves horse-stealers lags and murderers; amidst filth vermin and stench destitute of a bed obliged to lie on the ground and compelled to listen to the most obscene and diabolical language - scarcely ever being permitted to breathe the pure air of heaven and all this because the poor but honest Englishman is unable to pay thirty shillings for a license - a sum which many hundreds do not obtain in a month of digging.  The sentiments of this writer I can confidently assert are reechoed by almost every feeling individual. It must be remembered that at the present time there are not so many fortunate miners as some months back and consequently there are many who have not the wherewith to purchase food much more the possibility of procuring a license. Numbers of new arrivals also who arrive here are not immediately in a position to hand over their thirty shillings for a license. Such complaints are not so prevalent on the Sydney diggings the reason being that the law is administered with a lenient hand.  In the year 1835 I was a resident of Van Diemen's Land when the rumour of this fertile land reached that place and induced many of my fellow colonists to make a voyage to spy out the land. Their report being favourable to Port Phillip as a grazing land a number of persons formed themselves into a company under the style of the "Van Diemen's Land Association" who with some sheep started for Port Phillip. With this party were the Messrs. J. and H. Batman and J. Fawkner. Mr. J. Batman and Mr. J. Fawkner settled at Doutta Galla (now Melbourne)' while Mr. H. Batman returned and by his flattering accounts I was induced to forward to Port Phillip a flock of 750 sheep with six freedmen as shepherds under the charge of Robert Mudie Esquire in the ship Adelaide. Mr. Mudie having settled the flock with the shepherds returned and again sailed in the Norval with 500 sheep and five shepherds; and on the next voyage of the same vessel I sent 1100 sheep and seven men. On this voyage they encountered a heavy gale and were compelled to run into what is now called Western Port where it was deemed necessary to land the sheep and in doing so my good friend Mudie lost his life by the upsetting of the boat in a heavy surge between the ship and the shore. With the exception of 75 sheep which were recovered this large flock became a prey to the natives and native dogs. On this voyage Messrs. Gellibrand W. Robertson and one or two other gentlemen visited Port Philip. On their return I was made acquainted with the melancholy loss of my friend Mr. Mudie and then set about making arrangements to come over myself and took my passage in the ship Caledonia having Messrs. Strachan Anstey Gatenby G. Russell Dr. Thomson and a few others for fellow-passengers. We landed after a pleasant voyage at what is now called Williamstown where Dr. Thomson pitched his tent the others proceeding to Doutta Galla (Melbourne). Here we found a house of entertainment where we could not get entertained. [38] This building was of turf or sods with a portion of wood and comprised six apartments of a very primitive order occupied by "Johnny Fawkner" as a public-house and was of course "The Royal Hotel" it being the first and then the only public-house in the district of Port Philip. Here we could get a glass of bad rum and plenty of water by paying a good price for the same; but we could get nothing to eat nor a place to sleep in. This celebrated hotel stood on the site now occupied by the Custom House in Flinders lane or street. Mr. Batman having built himself a hut about the spot where the "Clarendon Hotel" now stands hospitably invited us to share his home for which we were exceedingly grateful and dined supped and next morning breakfasted on a schnapper fish and damper our host being a bit of a fisherman as well as occupying the proud situation of High Constable having been appointed by the Van Diemen's Land Association under whose auspices Mr. Batman was thus the first and then the only man who wielded the baton of authority. The Mansion House was a mud hut about 20 feet long and 12 feet broad the one side of which was occupied by the family of our host whilst our party consisting of Dr. Cotter Messrs. Anstey Mager Gatenby G. Russell my working overseer Fergusson and myself seven in number pigged on the other side in the best manner we could and were thankful for the shelter. On the following day we got our luggage provisions &c. from the ship and on the next day we started to find our way to Western Port in hope of recovering the remains of my lamented friend Mr. Mudie. We took an aboriginal for our guide but he being of a tribe near Sydney was little acquainted with the Port Phillip district and consequently no more use to us than to afford us a good deal of amusement by the antic manner in which he managed to roll himself over the soft mud creeks. On coming to a large creek or river which we could not ford and not being over-sure of our course we considered it prudent to retrace our steps; having spent two days and slept two nights in the bush we were again grateful for the shade of friend Batman's hut at Doutta Gala (Melbourne) where we were again hospitably received and availed ourselves of our host's kindness for two days by way of resting. [39] We then started for the Western District some of my men having taken up a station on the River Werribee. Having found matters there to my satisfaction we made our way downwards to the junction with the Barwon which we followed to the station which had just been taken up by Messrs. Cowie and Stead on the ground afterwards the race-course now a cultivated farm the property of Joseph Griffin and known as the old racecourse. Here we were kindly received and passed the night. On the next morning we started for Indented Head which had also been taken up by my men as a station. Here I found two of my men were missing and was informed that they had been killed by the natives. Having seen the stock &c. all correct we spent five days searching for the remains of the poor fellows without success. About twelve months afterwards their bones were pointed out to me by an old aboriginal named "Woolmurgen" who described the manner in which they met their deaths as follows : - The men were on their way with a pack-bullock laden with provisions for the Werribee Station and were met by a tribe of aborigines near the Murradock Hill. The men were both armed with fowling-pieces which caused the wary tribe to entrap them by a stratagem thus: by persuading one that he could shoot an emu they got him to accompany a portion of their party to the one side of the hill whilst under pretence of having a shot at a kangaroo they prevailed upon the other to go in a contrary direction. Having thus managed to separate the men the latter became an easy prey to these heart-less savages who also killed the bullock and made themselves masters of a plentiful supply of provisions and all the property in possession of their unfortunate victims. I had their bones gathered together and decently interred. After resting a day we took a tour into the bush following the course of the Barwon River to the sea and much enjoying the romantic and picturesque scenery particularly the lake Connewarre; returning by an angle across the country we made Corio (Geelong) where we were struck with the magnificent scene which burst upon our view as we reached the rise now the centre of the town known as Church Hill. [40] The splendour and magnitude of Corio Bay the gentle rise from the bay to where we stood about three-quarters of a mile and the like gentle fall to the River Barwon the You Yangs Station Peak the Barrabool Hills with all the varied scenery of hill and vale around clothed in the beautiful verdure of Nature seemed to proclaim this spot as the site of a great mercantile city. Lost in contemplation we were overtaken by night and had the satisfaction of finding the shelter of a gum-tree near the place now called "La Trobe Terrace"; here we camped for the night.  Next morning we made Messrs. Cowie and Stead's where we were entertained with a comfortable breakfast and likewise got our provision bags replenished. We then crossed the Moorabool River and afterwards the Barwon at the place now known as Pollock's Ford; we tethered our horses in the valley and walked to the top of Mount Moriac from which elevated spot we had a beautiful prospect of this delightful district and with the assistance of a good telescope we were able to trace the various windings of the Rivers Leigh and Barwon; also from this mount we had another view of beautiful Corio and its lovely bay. In imagination we could picture a splendid city with the bay coyered with ships of all nations which fancies I have lived to see in part realized. This year 1853 whilst yet under our first Governor a commencement has been made to remove the only impediment to the navigation of the bay. The town has been beautified by the erection of many elegant buildings both public and private and many more have been projected some hastening to completion; whilst we have also had the pleasure of seeing the foundation stone of the first railway in the Colony of Victoria laid in Geelong. Having thus far digressed from my subject I must return to Mount Moriac where having taken our bearings we descended to where we left our horses and there we encamped for the night and next morning started across the country and made the River Leigh at its junction with the Barwon where I afterwards formed my home-station; [41] we then followed up the Leigh River for about six miles to the place where Mr. Russell's station now is; here we crossed the country in a direct line towards the Anakie Hills until we came to the Moorabool River where we halted for the night. In the morning we ascended the highest of these hills from which we had a most magnificent view of nearly all the hills valleys creeks and rivers comprised within that portion of the country now the County of Grant. We then proceeded to Station Peak where our view was extended over the waters of Port Philip to the mountains on the opposite shore. From thence we took our course to the Werribee Station which we reached with much difficulty and next morning we started for Doutta Galla (Melbourne) intending to return to Van Diemen's Land; but finding that our ship had sailed we had to content ourselves until her return. To fill up this time we employed ourselves in building a house for Dr. Thomson near the spot now occupied by St. Paul's Church. In this we were engaged about three weeks and our vessel having returned we took our passage to Van Diemen's Land with the full determination of returning to Port Philip having all been greatly delighted with this beautiful country. Being now satisfied that sheep-farming would prove a profitable speculation in the New Land as Port Phillip was then called in Van Diemen's Land we entered into a co-partnership to carry it out extensively. In this we were joined by Messrs. Swanston Mercer and Learmonth and purchased up the shares and interest of the Van Diernen's Land Association. We took the style and title of the "Derwent Company." In the latter end of the year 1836 I returned to Port Phillip for the purpose of forming the different stations afterwards occupied by the Derwent Co. and pitched my tent at the south side of Geelong on the north bank of the Barwon River near where a bridge was afterwards built communicating with the Western District. [42] Here I built the first house in Geelong worthy of the name; it is built of weatherboards of Van Diemen's Land timber which house yet stands and is still rather an ornament to what is now called Barwon Terrace. In this house I had the honour of receiving His Excellency Sir Richard Bourke who had come hither to spy out the nakedness of the land and with his suite encamped on the banks of the Barwon next to my house. It is worthy of remark that on the night of Sir Richard Bourke's arrival the district was visited by an earthquake the shock of which was felt all over the district. Such a phenomenon has never occurred since that time but I was informed by a very old native King Murradock that such had been felt before but it was "long long ago."  In the month of September (1837) having finished my house and got all things comfortable for the reception of my family I proceeded to Van Diemen's Land to bring them over taking my passage by the James Watt the first steam vessel that visited these shores. In the month of March following (1838) I returned with my family and having got them settled at Barwon Terrace I proceeded to inspect the stations already formed and also formed new stations at Mount Mercer and the Wardy Yalloak; and then accompanied by Major Mercer Mr. George Mercer and our overseer named Anderson started upon an exploring expedition to the interior on which occasion we formed the station at Mount Shadwell which was the farthest out station from Geelong on the eastward of Portland. During this tour I undertook a new occupation. Major Mercer and myself being occupied in shaving which operation being observed by some of the natives afforded them much amusement and one of them signifying a desire to be trimmed I undertook the task which I accomplished amidst the yells shouts and laughter of some fifty savages with their lubras who enjoyed the affair very much; and thus I believe myself to be the first that shaved an aboriginal of New Holland and that aboriginal the first that was shaved. [43] Nor do I think he ever was shaved again for his beard was very hard and the razor none of the best rendering the operation anything but pleasant and I much doubt if he would ever again submit to the ordeal. This was nigh being my last joke as soon after Major Mercer's servant in taking a loaded piece from the luggage by some means caught the trigger upon something which caused the piece to explode - the ball passing under the Major's arm striking a tin pannikin out of which I was drinking and carrying it clean from my hand.  The full details of this tour were kept by Mr. George Mercer a copy of whose journal I beg to annex for Your Excellency's information. From this time settlers were pouring into the district from Van Diemen's Land and New South Wales with their flocks and herds and the land began to get peopled by mechanics and tradesmen; stores sprung up in every quarter and the whole country began to wear the aspect of prosperity.  Mr Batman who arrived in May 1835 was the first person who visited Port Philip from Van Diemen's Land. Messrs. Jackson Evans and myself arrived in Hobson's Bay in September of the same year for the purpose of exploring the country preparatory to bringing stock over from Van Diemen's Land. The country appeared to us so well adapted for grazing purposes both as regarded pasturage and climate that we lost no time in going back to Van Diemen's Land for our stock. [49] In March 1836 I landed with my sheep &c. at Arthur's Seat owing to the ship getting aground in the Bay and travelled with them to this place called by His Excellency Sir Richard Bourke Mount Aitken where I have continued to reside ever since. Mr. Batman and Mr. Arthur brought sheep over from Van Diemen's Land about the end of 1835 or the beginning of 1836.3 The above-mentioned gentlemen were the only parties who brought stock prior to my arrival.  Various other parties arrived soon after me with stock viz.: - Messrs. Jackson Evans Brock Brodie Sams Wedge Franks Malcolm Smith Sutherland Whyte Clarke and Fawkner. The latter gentleman was the Cain or the first tiller of the soil in this province. Unfortunately he made a poor selection opposite the present city of Melbourne in the swamp and consequently it turned out a failure. Owing to this circumstance the impression became general that however well adapted the country was for the grazing of sheep and cattle it was altogether unsuited for agricultural purposes. The consequence of this false impression was that the Van Diemen's Land farmers immediately raised the price of wheat to £1 per bushel as they imagined this country would be entirely dependent upon them for supplies of breadstuffs.  In June and July 1837 settlers from the Sydney side commenced to arrive. Amongst the earliest were Messrs. Howey Ebden Mollison Hamilton Coghill and Hepburn a great number of others immediately following them.  With reference to the natives: - On landing at Arthur's Seat they were most friendly assisting me to land my sheep &c. About 80 was the number I then saw being the Western Port tribe some of whom accompanied me in my journey round the Bay to Melbourne.  The Mount Macedon tribe of natives came to my tent soon after my arrival at Mount Aitken. I did all in my power to conciliate them by giving them rations of rice sugar flour &c. while they remained about the place. [50]  The number of the tribe as near as I could guess was about 100 - men women and children. I consider that this tribe was more savage than the Western Port tribe a neighbour of mine (Mr. Franks) and his servant being murdered while serving out food to them. Two of Mr. Gellibrand's men were killed soon after by the same tribe. I had great reason to be thankful that I succeeded in saving myself and shepherds from sharing a similar fate.  I arrived in Port Philip towards the end of the year 1838 and about six weeks afterwards proceeded to Cape Schanck accompanied by William Ryrie Esq. to look at a tract of country which had just been taken up with a herd of 800 head of cattle from Maneroo by an overseer in the employ of Charles Campbell Esq. Sydney.  By the advice of Mr. Ryrie (the stock and run being for sale) I proceeded to Sydney overland completed the purchase and took possession from the 1st of January 1839. The boundaries of the run were very indefinite as I was the only settler on the coast side of Arthur's Seat and all the country from Point Nepean to Cape Schanck now comparatively so thickly populated was then in undisputed possession of the kangaroo emu and native dog the first of these running literally in large herds. [90]  Between my run and Melbourne a distance of about 70 miles there was but one settler Mr. Edward Hobson located at Kangerong at the base of Arthur's Seat.  About the month of July 1839 Messrs. Hobson Desailly and myself accompanied by three aboriginal natives carted a whaleboat from Kangerong to Western Port for the purpose of exploring the country in the neighbourhood of that bay. The result of the expedition was my taking possession of the run at the head of Western Port known afterwards as Yalloak and moving my stock there with the exception of about 150 head of cattle which with my right to the Cape Schanck run I sold to Messrs. Willoughby and Thomson. Mr. Thomson afterwards sold to the present occupant John Barker Esq.  For a considerable period after occupying Yalloak the only settlers beyond me were Messrs. Anderson and Massie who had an agricultural establishment on the Bass River and sent their produce to market by water employing for that purpose small vessels of from 20 to 30 tons burthen. I retained possession of Yalloak Station till the year 1845 when I sold out to Henry Moor Esq.  In the beginning of 1839 there were very few settlers on the south side of the Yarra. Messrs. Ryrie were the highest up the river; between them and near to town were Messrs. Wood and one or two others. On the road to Western Port was the Dandenong Station superintended by A. Langhorne Esq. and beyond it there were I think only Ruffy's and O'Connor's stations while lastly on what is now the Point Nepean road was the solitary station of Mr. Hobson.  The tribe of aboriginal natives known as the Western Port blacks numbered I should imagine when I knew them first upwards of 300; but on this point Mr. Assistant Protector Thomas would be an authority. [91]   During the seven years of my residence in the bush I saw a great deal of the natives and invariably found them quiet inoffensive and willing in their way to be useful. They never did me any harm intentionally and on many occasions really helped me; although any attempt to induce one or more of them to settle to any steady work however light even for a single day was utterly vain. I believe I may safely say that the settlers south of the Yarra were invariably kind to the natives and there are I believe few if any instances of ingratitude in return on record.  I was not however so fortunate with the aboriginal natives of Gippsland who before the occupation of that district by white men came to attack the Western Port tribe and making my station did a considerable amount of damage; but fortunately no lives were lost.  The COLAC country was first occupied in September 1837 by myself accompanied or immediately followed by Messrs. G. F. and A. Lloyd and Wm. Carter; my flock consisted of 100 ewes and theirs jointly of 500 which we joined together for mutual protection. These sheep were brought from Van Diemen's Land at a cost of about £3 per head the price there at that time being £2.  We were the only occupants of the country for about six months our nearest neighbour being Mr. Thomas Ricketts who occupied a station on the River Barwon - about ten miles distant - at the point where Gellibrand and Hesse were last seen.  Early in 1838 Messrs. Pollock Dewing Bromfield and Mr. Briggs (for Capt. Fyans) took up the unoccupied land around the banks of Lake Colac. They were followed by Messrs. Watson and Hamilton and after them the Messrs. Manifold stretched out to the west and towards the end of that year and the beginning of 1839 the squatters spread rapidly over the Western District. All those persons I have named came from V. D. Land and brought their sheep from there except Capt. Fyans who brought cattle from Sydney. [103]  I first heard of the Colac country from a party who were in search of Gellibrand and Hesse in August 1837 under the guidance of the Rev. Mr. Naylor and believe they were the discoverers of it. It may be interesting to state that this party consisting of fourteen men fitted out by Mrs. Gellibrand for three months at an expense of £700 when arrived at Lake Colac allowed some of the Barrabool tribe of aborigines who were with them to murder an old man and a child of the Colac tribe whom they found on the banks of the lake and afraid of retaliation from the tribe fled back in haste next morning having passed the night without fire for concealment and gave up the search. The blacks brought with them on the end of their spears portions of the man and child they had killed which I saw them eat with great exultation during the evening. They stayed at our tent at the Barwon on their return.  The Colac tribe of natives was not numerous when we came here - men women and children not numbering more than 35 or 40. From their own account they were once numerous and powerful but from their possessing a rich hunting country the Barrabool Leigh Wardy Yalloak and Jancourt tribes surrounding made constant war upon them and the tribe from having been the strongest became the weakest. The extent of their country was a radius of about 10 miles from Lake Colac except on the south where in the extensive Cape Otway Ranges there was no other tribe.  We had very little intercourse with them for the first eighteen months their demeanour towards us being always treacherous and dishonest. They never lost an opportunity of stealing our sheep - at first by night carrying off a few from the fold but afterwards became more daring and drove off a score or two in the day time from the shepherd. These they would take to some secure corner and feast upon them breaking the legs of those they did not at once kill to detain them. [...]  In the beginning of August 1838 the Rev. Mr Glow took possession of the cattle run Corhanwarrabul which was so named after the mountain that formed its north-eastern boundary but his home-station was at Tirhatuan that part of the run which is adjacent to the junction of the Narrewong with the Dandenong.  Before that period the more eligible portion of the country beyond him had been taken up. Mr. John Highett he has been informed was the first settler that crossed the Dandenong with stock and that he was followed by O'Connor and the Ruffys and that next after them came Mr. Joseph Hawdon who may be considered the first that settled on the Dandenong as those who had preceded him had gone about eight or ten miles to the east of it. He transferred his right to the Dandenong run to Captain Lonsdale who had Mr. Alfred Langhorne for his overseer at the time Mr. Glow settled at Tirhatuan. Their head station was at the bridge over the creek where the present township of Dandenong is situated. They had one out-station Eumemmering and both of these were transferred to Dr. McCrae in 1839; and shortly afterwards Eumemmering was transferred by him to the Fosters and by them to Johnstone and Wilson and by them to Mr. Power by whom it is still held. [107] The Dandenong station was retained by Dr. McCrae for several years and then became the property of its present occupant Mr. R. C. Walker. The run which belongs at present to Mr. Charles Wedge and which is generally known by the name of the Waterholes was a part of country originally occupied by Mr. Hawdon and has been since then in the possession of various owners.  Along the Dandenong on the east side towards the mountain and adjacent to Eumemmering was the Corhanwarrabul run which was occupied twelve years by Mr. Glow and transferred by him to Mr. Beilby its present owner. In 1840 he formed an out-station close to the base of Corhanwarrabul on one of three rivulets which fell into a swamp and which on issuing from it at its south-west extremity compose the Narrewong creek. These on the side next the mountain always continue to run however hot or long the dry season may be; but in general for two or three months after the first of January the Narrewong ceases to run the water from the mountain being evaporated and lost in the swamp where it has no channel and is spread out over a large surface among long grass and rushes. In dry summers the Dandenong along its whole course also ceases to run for one two or three months and like many other creeks in Australia it spreads out ere it reaches the sea into a swamp where a great portion of its water is lost and evaporated in the way that has just been described.  Throughout the period of Mr. Clow's residence at Tirhatuan his family was very frequently visited by the aborigines belonging to the Yarra Yarra and Western Port tribes. They often encamped near his house; they were uniformly treated with kindness and in return they always conducted themselves peaceably and honestly.  While encamped on the Melbourne side of the Dandenong till a bridge was made for crossing the cattle and dray his party was visited by a number of blacks but the day after he crossed about half a mile from his tents an old man was found alone beside a crab-hole in which was a little water but he was without food and shelter. [108] He had been left there by his tribe because he had fallen from a tree and was so lame that he was incapable of accompanying them on a hunting excursion to Corhanwarrabul. He was removed to the tents for he could not walk and was taken care of till his people returned; but as they did not do so in less than a week it is difficult to conceive how he could have survived so long had he not been removed to the tents and fed. For the kindness shown him he was very grateful. He appeared to be the oldest member of his tribe but lived many years after that time and often referred to the occurrence which first brought him to Mr. Glow's acquaintance but never did so without the most evident satisfaction and thankfulness. Not very long after the Tirhatuan Station was formed Jack Weatherly who was one of the finest looking and most intelligent of the natives was applied to by Mrs. Clow in Melbourne to carry some biscuits to her son as she was apprehensive that his provisions must have been expended and as owing to the state of the country after a heavy fall of rain it seemed to be the best if not the only way she could send him a supply.  He readily agreed to carry four dozen of biscuits to the station a distance of seventeen miles on the very easy terms that he should have six to himself. With evidently great delight he stowed away his own in his dress took up the bag containing the rest and the note which was to be delivered along with it and walked away apparently quite proud that he was trusted. However a few miles before he reached Tirhatuan he fell in with a hunting party and being one of the most athletic and expert of his tribe he could not resist the temptation to join in the chase; but before he did so he handed over the note and biscuits to a young man with strict injunctions to take them on and deliver them immediately and accordingly they were so delivered contrary to the generally expressed opinion at the time Weatherly was despatched for it was well known that the aborigines were particularly partial to bread and biscuit and it was therefore inferred that the temptation to appropriate those which he had in charge would prove too strong for his moral courage to resist. [109] This trifling incident is a pleasing illustration of the trustworthiness of two of the aborigines and reflects favourably on the whole tribe for it is not unreasonable to suppose that there were others belonging to it who if they had been employed in the same way would have acted in a similar manner. As to their honesty no instance to the contrary was ever detected at Tirhatuan. Potatoes and melons were two articles of which they were very fond and were produced at the station and quite accessible; but never was a single instance known of any of them being stolen by the aborigines. They would not even go to a potato field that had been dug to look for potatoes without first asking and obtaining leave. The principal annoyance resulting from their so much frequenting the run was occasioned by old Murray's dogs. That sable chieftan who never could be induced to adopt any part of "whitefellow's" dress always travelled with a large pack and as necessity compelled him to train them to the principle of self-reliance for a livelihood they were very ready to hunt the cattle and if possible make some little calf their victim.  At the time the Tirhatuan Station was formed some of the natives expressed a determination to be revenged on one of the servant men. As soon as they saw him there they recognised him as one whose conduct towards some of their women before he came into Mr. Clow's service had given them great offence. He confessed that he had been to blame and asked for his discharge which was immediately given him and he was safely returned to Melbourne. It is probable that had they had an opportunity they would have murdered him; but in doing so would they have done more than has been done by many Europeans though in a more refined way? Like other savages they are naturally revengeful but it is to be feared that on too many occasions their atrocities have not been committed without grievous provocation. [110]  The next settler on the Dandenong was Mr. Thomas Napier who now resides in the parish of Doutta Galla. His run which he took up about October 1839 lay along the western side of the creek and extended from the Tirhatuan bridge to Scott's bridge. About a year afterwards he sold it to Mr. Scott who died in Melbourne before he went to live there; but it was occupied by Mrs. Scott and family for two or three years when they formed a small station on the other side of the creek and sold the other to a family of the name of Drew.  It was afterwards subdivided and occupied by a number of small settlers who were principally employed in taking timber from that neighbourhood to Melbourne and other places for the purposes of building and the enclosing of purchased land.  Two brothers of the name of Rourke who were in the first instance sawyers on Mrs. Scott's original run formed the station which the elder brother still holds near the sources of the Dandenong.  The aboriginal station of Narre Narre Warren' was formed by Mr. Assistant Protector Thomas and is so well known that it is unnecessary for me to give you any account of it.  The first settlers below the Dandenong bridge and beyond the run belonging to Messrs. Lonsdale and Langhorne were Mr. Solomon and Major Frazer. The former had his station above the swamp through which the Dandenong passes and the latter had his below it on the bay of Port Phillip.  About six miles in a north-easterly direction from Tirhatuan on the south side of the principal stream which descends from the mountain of Corhanwarrabul and which mainly contributes to form the Narrewong Creek below the swamp is the sheep station of Monbolloc which was first occupied by Messrs. Kerr and Dobie. It is small and scrubby and has passed through many hands since its formation. [111]  On the south-east of Monbolloc is the small cattle station of Will-Will-Rook originally formed and still possessed by Mr. Varcoe and his family.  About the month of January 1850 during one night and a part of the succeeding day an unusual noise somewhat resembling that of a bush fire at a distance was heard at Tirhatuan and at an out-station about three miles off situated near the Gap in the ranges behind Narre Narre Warren. At the former place it was heard by Mrs. Clow and others living there. She rose in the night time and looked out to see if any of the huts was on fire; and during the day she went repeatedly into the verandah in front of the house to listen; and as the noise seemed to come from the rises on the west side of the creek she sent two persons as far as the bridge with a view to ascertain what it was. On their return they said they could not tell but that when they were at the bridge the noise seemed to be at the house. The overseer happened to come and she spoke of it to him but he said that he had not noticed any unusual sound; neither did he then perceive any. He was in a hurry and went off immediately; but happening to go to the out-station at the Mountain Gap he was asked by the two men there both of whom had resided in the colony only a short time and were therefore perhaps more liable to be easily alarmed whether the fire was coming that way. He said he did not know of any fire. They told him that they had not slept during the night for they had heard a noise as of a great fire at a distance and were afraid it was coming in that direction and that they could still discern it. He was thus forcibly reminded of what he had just before heard and on going a little way to a rise he listened and acknowledged that he could distinctly hear a noise similar to that which had been described but could not tell what occasioned it.  As heard by Mrs. Glow the noise was not always the same but rose and fell and after dying away for a little would begin again and gradually increase. [112]  To some it seemed to be in the air but the prevailing impression on her mind at the time and that to which she is still inclined is that it was subterranean. It will perhaps be considered corroborative of this opinion that on two previous occasions an earthquake had been distinctly heard and felt there.  The first was experienced in February or March 1843. It occurred at midnight when the moon was full the sky cloudless and the wind still. To me and others who heard it at Tirhatuan the sound was as if a light conveyance making a sharp rattling noise had passed rapidly between the house and the kitchen - these buildings being about eight yards apart.  The tremor though distinctly felt was not great; but at the out-station near the base of the mountain both the shock and the noise were very considerable.  The two men sleeping in the hut were instantly roused and ran out to ascertain what was the matter; but neither seeing nor hearing anything unusual they conjectured what had happened; and as the shock was experienced in the same manner at Rourke's station about five miles off it would appear that it was severest along the base of the mountain.  The second shock was felt in 1847 at the same season of the year. It occurred at four o'clock in the afternoon and was experienced at the same time in Melbourne and other adjacent places. Those in the house at Tirhatuan when they felt it moving ran out in alarm not doubting for a moment what it was. And a party that were out riding in the direction of the mountain heard it and were struck with the noise as an extraordinary one; but instead of ascribing it to an earthquake they thought it was caused by horses galloping in the bush.  Although the sound which has been described is not likely to have been produced by the action of wind on the forest as the weather at the time is said to have been calm and settled and although Mrs. Glow was then and still is of opinion that it was subterranean yet perhaps it is possible that it was occasioned by currents of air in the atmosphere but so elevated as not to disturb any objects on the face of the country at least not in that immediate neighbourhood. [113] It had often been observed that the wind blew very partially in that locality. Narrow belts of the forest scarcely a quarter of a mile broad and several miles long might be seen on the run strewed with fallen branches and uprooted trees showing that a hurricane had swept along that tract whilst the forest on both sides remained uninjured.  And it was no uncommon thing for one to witness the top of trees bending and tossed about in wild commotion - though not broken down - along only a narrow strip and to hear the sound thereby occasioned as then on the surface of the earth and within very circumscribed limits; so at some elevation above very partial and very powerful currents of air may sweep along and if they sometimes fly with increased and sometimes with diminished speed as in a hurricane or typhoon the swelling and subsiding of the noise which was heard might be thereby occasioned. No doubt it is difficult if not impossible to conceive how currents of wind in the atmosphere alone could make a noise as in order to produce it something opposing or retarding the current of air seems to be absolutely required.  I first visited it for the purpose of examining it early in February 1836 at which time there were not more than about 2500 sheep in the whole district although fully twice that number had been shipped but from casualties had been reduced to about the number I have named. One of my brothers and myself reached Gellibrand Point early in July where we heard that a number of gentlemen on a pleasure party had been with the brig Henry into Geelong harbour; and as we wished to settle westward this at once determined us on attempting to land our sheep at Point Henry then known by the native name Maloppio. We succeeded in doing this and I put the first sheep ever landed on the point ashore on the 9th day July 1836. During the same day Mr. John Steiglitz also arrived with stock.  We immediately removed to the Moorabool and occupied both sides of that river from Sutherland's Creek down to the old Racecourse. At this time there were only three stations west of the Werribee viz. Cowie Stead and Steiglitz at a place on the Moorabool known as the Bell-post; Dr. Thomson's station at the falls on the Barwon; and a Mr. Darke on the Barrabool Hills. These I believe arrived and occupied the country in the order I have named them having landed their stock either at the Heads or at Gellibrand Point.  We were immediately followed by Mr. Wm. Roadknight who occupied the country on both sides of the river where the lower vineyards are. In the September following a great influx of stock into the Western District took place by the arrival of Mr. Joseph Sutherland who settled on the creek now bearing his name; Mr. G. Russell on account of the Clyde Company on the Moorabool and Leigh; Mr. David Fisher on account of the Derwent Company occupying where Geelong now is Indented Head and the country about the junction of the Barwon and Leigh. [138] A Captain Pollock went on to the Barwon where the upper vineyard is; a Mr. Sharpe on account of Colonel Kelsall taking the upper part of Sutherland's Creek and Mr. John Highett who remained (moving about) a short time on the Barwon finally removed into the Melbourne District. The above to the best of my recollection arrived during September and October of 1836.  I then until the commencement of 1839 resided in Van Diemen's Land (with the exception of occasional short visits) and cannot say in what order the country was taken up. In November of 1837 my brothers and self examined the country about Buninyong Warrenhelp and Lake Burrumbeet and encamped one night on the now-celebrated Golden Point Ballarat little dreaming of the immense wealth beneath us. At this time there were only two stations on the upper part of the Moorabool viz. that of Mr. J. N. McLeod and that of Mr. G. F. Read.  It was in December of 1838 that my brothers first discovered Lake Purrumbete and Mount Leura country; we then abandoned our station on the Moorabool (which became a kind of depot for stock on first arrival) and removed our stock to Purrumbete which we occupied about the close of January 1839. The Messrs. Bolden had a week or two previously occupied the run on the Pirron Yalloak which they soon after' sold to Scott and Richardson. The next station formed was at Mount Noorat by a person named Taylor on account of Messrs. McKillop and Smith who sold to Messrs. Niel Black and Co. This was taken up in March 1839. The Mount Shadwell country was now occupied by a Mr. Anderson who removed from the stations now held by McMillan and Wilson (Wanly Yalloak) with a portion of stock belonging to the Derwent Company and soon afterwards fell into the hands of Captain Webster. [139]  Simultaneously with the occupation of Mount Shadwell the Messrs. Watson discovered the Hopkins and took up the Merang run on the western side and then sold to Mr. Farie.  The land on the opposite side to Farie's was first taken up by the Messrs. Bolden in August 1840 and then sold to Mr. G. Rodger.  During the period from August to Christmas 1840 the Messrs. Bolden by forming various out-stations occupied on the western side of the Hopkins all the country subsequently held by Messrs. Plummer and Dent Strong and Foster Manifold Ryrie Carmichael Good Mailor Manning Eddington Walker and Cosgrove; and on the eastern side the part of the country held by Black Johnson Walker Chisholm and Allan. I cannot name the precise time when each of these stations was occupied but believe that Plummer and Dent's (now Joseph Ware's) was occupied about the latter end of 1842 or commencement of 1843; Strong and Foster's about the same time; Ryrie's (the Lake Station) in June 1844; my own (the Grasmere Station) in the month following. The others were respectively portions sliced off the country claimed by the Messrs. Bolden. Allan's station was occupied first in 1841 and Chisholm's (junction of Hopkins and Emu Creek) about the same time.  In reply to your inquiries as to the haunts numbers &c. of the aborigines I am afraid I can give little or no information. Although each tribe has its own district and each family its portion I never could perceive that they became in any way attached to a particular spot or attempted to construct a dwelling having any greater claim to permanency than the common mia mia. Nor have I ever observed the slightest semblance of religion among them. With respect to their number at the time the country was first occupied it has been in all accounts I have seen very much overrated. I come to this conclusion from having counted their mia-mias when congregated and do not recollect in any instance seeing more than about 30 nor do I think they would average more than from four to five in a hut. [140] Their manner towards the first settlers had generally the semblance of extreme friendship but this I am convinced did not in reality ever exist; it arose from the mere novelty of the thing and a desire to gratify their curiosity which being satiated they would whenever they got a chance plunder or murder even those from whom they had only a few minutes previously received presents and food. This may seem harsh but I have known so many instances of it that I feel justified in speaking thus generally of them.  On my arrival in this country 11th April 1838 the Derwent Company (lately Port Phillip Association) possessed stock on the Indented Head and at Geelong. The land about Point Henry was only used for landing stock. Messrs. Cowie and Stead had a station on Bell Post Hill but shortly afterwards moved to their present runs. Messrs. Manifold had a run at Batesford on the Dog Rocks and they removed in April 1839 to their present runs. Mr. G. Russell (Clyde Company) had his home-station on the Moorabool now a portion of Dr. Learmonth's purchased ground but very shortly afterwards he moved up to his present head station on the Leigh. [144] Messrs. Sutherland had a station on a creek running into the Moorabool on the north side - the station Mr. William Sharpe now occupies. The Messrs. Bates were on the Duck Ponds; Mr. Jas. Simpson on the Werribee now Mr. Chirnside's station.' The Derwent Company's stations extended as high as this one - the Native Creek Murghebolac Flat and Deep Gully stations being all on the road besides a station on the Barrabool Hills on what is now Mr. Fisher's purchased land. Dr. Thomson occupied his present house and held the adjacent country towards the coast with stock. The Messrs. Learmonth had a station on my first arrival which is now a portion of this one on the south side of the Barwon but they left it about May 1838 for Buninyong. At this time there were no stations further out in the plains. In May 1838 Major Mercer Mr. Fisher and myself went out and came on the Wardy Yalloak at or about the Frenchman's Inn and following the creeks up discovered the run now held by Mr. J. G. McMillan with those now held by Mr. Aitcheson Mr. C. G. Ferrers and Mr. A. F. Cunningham as also the cattle runs now belonging to the latter and returning home by the Leigh immediately sent out stock and took up in June 1838 the last-named four runs and not long afterwards took up the first.  In March 1839 we again started with a dray from Mr. McMillan's present station went across to Timboon which we then held temporarily with two flocks of sheep for Messrs. Manifold who had penetrated through the Stony Rises and discovered their present run. From Timboon we went on to Taylor's River where Mr. F. Taylor in charge of sheep belonging to Messrs. McKillop and Smith had been about a fortnight. This station is now held by Mr. N. Black. From thence we went on to Mt. Shadwell under which the Derwent Company had two flocks. This station is now held by Mr. Burke (recently purchased from Captain Webster). Leaving this (the last station) we went by Mount Rouse Mount Napier across to Mount Sturgeon thence following the edge of the plains crossed the Fiery Creek Hopkins &c. and by Mount Emu and Emu Hill back to Mr. McMillan's station from whence we started. [145]   The station on Murghebolac Flat afterwards held by the Derwent Company was originally taken up by the Messrs. Yuille but before my arrival they had moved in consequence I believe of one of their number having been killed by the natives. The station (now Mr. P. Sharpe's) on the Native Creek on the old road to the Leigh was originally taken up by Mr. J. G. Ware. Mr. W. Harding occupied on account of Mr. Highett the station (now Mr. A. Hopkin's) on the Muddy Lake and adjoining this and on their afterwards separating formed the Mount Hesse stations (his present ones) on his own account but the dates of these I am unable to give. Captain Pollock occupied the station in 1838 (now purchased land) at Pollock's Ford on the Barwon - this is the spot where Messrs. Gellibrand and Hesse were last seen - and transferred it to Mr. J. Allan who in 1842-3 I fancy acquired the station now held by Messrs. Russell Simson and Russell from Mr. C. P. Tilley who originally settled it. Mr. A. must have sold to Mr. James Austin who sold (1851) to Messrs. B. S. and R. Mr. Prentice originally took up the station held now by Mr. A. F. Cunningham - Warrambine - lately Mr. John Thomson's. This run was allotted to my father on the division of the Derwent Company in June 1842 as also the Mount Mercer cattle station now belonging to Mr. A. F. Cunningham.  As regards the natives of the colony my intercourse with them was little chiefly in the neighbourhood of Geelong. When out on the expedition by Mount Rouse and Mount Sturgeon we were under the latter hill very nearly attacked by a band. The aborigines about Geelong were after the first year always quiet. They killed two of the Port Phillip Association's (or Derwent Company's) men on Indented Head in 1836. The Buninyong natives were occasionally troublesome both in their own country and even down as far as this. [146]  I landed on Indented Head from V. D. Land with sheep in July 1837. In September I went with a party to explore. We went round Lakes Colac and Korangamite; we were the first who went round the latter. The farthest out station at that time was Mr Ricketts's on the River Barwon 40 miles from Geelong; he had only been there about three weeks; the blacks had robbed him and were constantly driving his shepherds in with their flocks. [148] As we came along the banks of Lake Korangamite a great many parties of natives ran off into the stony rise leaving everything behind them. They were on the mouths of small creeks which run into the lake fishing. The stony scrubby rises come so close to the lake they could not see us; we were within a few yards of them; we were stopped by the Pirron Yalloak. At night we could not find a ford so we camped in the centre of a small plain tethering our horses close around us and kept a watch about all night - there were seven of us. The natives were talking close to us the whole night within 100 yards. At daylight two men came to us when we made signs that we would not harm them. They came to ask for the black boy - Billy Clarke. As it was about three weeks after Dr. Clarke had taken him they wished to know if we had eaten him and said his mother was very sorry and cried very much.  In October I took up my station on the River Moorabool (Borhoneyghurk) 35 miles from Geelong. Mr. George Russell then lived on the Moorabool 12 miles from Geelong but had an out-station on the Leigh where his house now is; but about November the natives drove three men (two shepherds and a hut-keeper) from their hut notwithstanding the men having shot two of them. They robbed and burned the hut to the ground so that Mr. Russell vacated that river for some months. In January 1838 G. F. Read took up his station on the River Leigh; next came the Learmonths Henry Anderson (occupying what is now John Winter's station) and the Yuilles near Buninyong I think about March or April.  About the same time Stead Cowie and Robert Steiglitz came above me on the Moorabool and about twelve months after John Wallace and Egerton. In October 1846 my brother Hugh and I took up Benyeo on the South Australian boundary where he now resides about 100 miles from Portland on the border of the mallee scrub. There never were many natives in that part. What few there are have been very useful but they are dying off fast as in all parts; there seldom is a child born and when such a thing does happen it soon dies. [149] The first natives I saw after taking up my station on the River Moorabool was a party of about 20. I was shepherding my own sheep at the time as all my men were shearing. I was two miles from the hut but as I had my double-barrelled gun with me I signed to two of them to come and speak to me as I wished to tell them they must not come too near the hut; and it was many months before I did allow any to come but sent their provisions to them when they worked for me. I have counted 340 together at their meetings in 1843 and 1844. Since I came to the Wannon I have never seen more than about 70 together. I know of 12 quite young men who have died in this district within the last two years. I had two young men with their wives all last winter nursing them - at least three of them. One of the women (or rather she was quite a girl of about thirteen) got the provisions and cooked for the others who could hardly move and appeared in great pain indeed. From being in the summer fine strong young men they became perfect skeletons and they are now perfect wrecks although quite recovered. You are perhaps aware that I had one constantly with me for nine years; his father and mother gave him to me when about ten years of age and he as well as his parents appeared to at once consider him my property. He followed me wherever I went was in Sydney and V. D. Land and was very much attached to me. He grew a very fine man and his tribe forced him to leave me. Fearing you may be in a hurry for an answer I send this as it is having received a kick in the hand from a colt to-day. I hope you will therefore excuse the roughness of it.  In November 1836 I had shipped six cargoes of sheep from V. D. Land for Port Phillip and landed myself early in December at Williamstown and finding the country almost totally unoccupied I took up the Greenhill Station about 25 miles north and posted an out-station at what is now called Bacchus Marsh - then without a white inhabitant. Soon after my occupation say early in 1837 Messrs. James Clarke Bacchus Whyte Brothers and I believe Messrs. Powlett and Green took up country beyond me to the west called the Pentland Hills and in an exceedingly short space of time that whole country was stocked with sheep from V. D. Land as the arrivals at Geelong with sheep pressed up the Moorabool till they came in contact with the pioneers of Williamstown. In 1838 the Whyte Brothers travelled west with their stock in search of another run and took up a country about the Wannon but met with great difficulties from the determined ferocity of the aborigines which ended in a conflict and great loss of life to the latter. [152]  The Messrs. Wedge the same year took up a run called the Grange south of the Whytes; and also like them experienced great annoyance from the natives. In 1839 they sold to William Forlonge who sold to me in 1840. At that period the country between that and Geelong was very thinly peopled - many parts being unoccupied and that that was taken up was thinly stocked.  The aggressions of the aborigines in that quarter at that time were such as to call for the interference of the Crown Lands Commissioner Captain Fyans.  In October 1843 I took my family to a station on the north of W. Mollison's which was taken up by Messrs. Dutton Simson and Darlot in 1841 or 1842 who sold to Rule a builder in Melbourne from whom I purchased and called it Tourbouric after the aboriginal name of a large hill there. This station was in a state of nature and on it I erected very considerable improvements which are now used as an inn called the Pick and Shovel.  The country down the Campaspe to the Murray and down that river was first I believe settled in 1840 but I cannot speak positively as I did not visit it till 1846 when I selected some unoccupied country (which I named Pine Grove from the number of pines in that locality) on the plains to the south of the Murray and east of the Mount Hope Creek. At that period the country round was but lightly stocked.  Moorabee the station on which I now reside was taken up by Captain Hutton about 1838 or 1839. He sold to Daniel Jennings who sold to C. H. Ebden who only held it about three months when I purchased it in August 1851 at a very high rate under the firm conviction that the orders of Her Gracious Majesty would be carried out in the fullest integrity towards the occupants of Crown Lands termed "squatters." [153]  The aborigines have invariably shown themselves hostile to the settlement of new country but became more reconciled as their intimacy increased with the Europeans. I have always been favourably disposed towards them and tried to encourage those that visited my stations in habits of industry by rewarding them well when they did exert themselves and I would have been most pleased had I succeeded in ameliorating their condition; but I regret to add I found all my endeavours fruitless and extraordinary to say with civilization they are so fast decreasing from a constant warfare kept up amongst them together with disease that in an extraordinary short space of time I believe the race will become extinct.  In the first week of May 1836 I left George Town Van Diemen's Land with a small flock of sheep in the brig Henry. Five days after embarkation they were landed at Williamstown Port Phillip where I found several if not all of the first settlers with their flocks all of which had been brought from Van Diemen's Land within the five or six previous months and which were left in charge of the shepherds near the beach until suitable runs could be procured. I have no recollection of any serious depredations having been committed by the aborigines at this time. The wild dogs were very numerous and troublesome and destroyed several sheep. Their howling at night was terrific. While at Williamstown a Mr. Franks and I agreed to take up a run together; Mr. Franks was to select it. After making these arrangements I left my sheep and shepherd and returned to Van Diemen's Land. About six weeks after I received the melancholy intelligence of the murder of poor Mr. Franks and my shepherd both of whom had been struck on the head by the blacks with a tomahawk while making a bush fence for yarding the sheep on the new run they had selected on Mount Cotterill near the River Exe. [173] Shortly after during the day my son Thomas on riding up to assist in making the yards found the unfortunate Mr. Franks and the shepherd lying on their faces with the back of their heads split open. About this time there were other murders - one at Indented Head. Captain Flat a manager for Dr. Thomson after being dreadfully beaten and left for dead recovered. Several other murders and robberies were committed by the blacks but I cannot particularize them. After this my sheep were put into a flock of Judge Pedder's in charge of Mr. Darke where they remained until the unfortunate circumstance of the loss of Messrs. Gellibrand and Hesse. These gentlemen had been missing some time and doubts being entertained of their safety my son who was an articled clerk to Mr. Gellibrand went with four or five others in search of the missing explorers in the direction where from the information they had received they hoped to fall in with their tracks. After searching and following the Barwon River in a westerly direction about thirty miles from Geelong they found the tracks of the lost party and followed them until they reached the place where Mr. Gellibrand and Mr. Hesse had camped. On this spot the searching party stayed during the night. Next morning they continued following the track up the river until the country became so stony and rough that they could not trace the party further; consequently they struck off from the river towards Lake Colac; and therefore it was at this time and by this party Lake Colac was first discovered and also Buninyong Stony Rises and other places.  After the party returned my son took the sheep to the spot where he first found the track of Gellibrand's party and where we have been ever since. This part of the country has since been surveyed and marked off into counties and parishes. Our station named Ingleby is in the parish of Yan Yan Gurt county Polwarth. The eastern side of my Ingleby station was taken up by Mr. Henry Hopkins of Hobart Town and is now the property of his son John Hopkins and called Wormbete. [174] This property is considerably improved. The station on the north side of Wormbete was first taken possession of by Mr. W. Roadknight whose son is now in possession.  The station south of Ingleby was taken up by William Road-knight and is now occupied by Mr. Thomas Vicary Mr. Roadknight's son-in-law. This station is called Yan Yan Gurt. The station adjoining this on the west was taken up by Thomas Crutch who sold to Matthews who sold to George Vicary who is now in possession. The original occupiers of the country adjacent to and lying W.S.W. further up the Barwon River were Messrs. Austin Roadknight Ricketts Dennis and myself all of whom in 1840 were removed by the Government to make room for the Wesleyan missionaries who if I am correctly informed brought an order from the Home Government to occupy ten miles square of land for the purpose of maintaining and civilizing the aborigines. This mission failed and the land has since been sold and let to the highest bidder. Nearly the whole of it is now in possession of Mr. James Austin and myself. North. west of the Mission Station was originally occupied by a Mr. Matheson who sold to the Messrs. Dennis the present occupiers. The original occupiers of the land lying westerly from Messrs. Dennis in the Colac district were Messrs. Murray Lloyd Dr. Morris Pollock Dewing and Captain Fyans the whole of whom sold their right of runs excepting Mr. Murray and Captain Fyans in consequence of the great expenses and many difficulties they had to contend with. About five miles in an easterly direction from Dennis Brothers and north from Ingleby about three miles are two small mountains supposed to be of volcanic production. They are named after the two unfortunate gentlemen Messrs. Gellibrand and Hesse. Between Mount Gellibrand and Dennis Brothers' station is situated a station selected and originally occupied by Airey and Darnell who made considerable improvements. [175] These gentlemen dissolved partnership. Darnell sold to Airey who has since died; the property is now rented to Messrs. Beale and Trebeck. The station lying east of the last-mentioned called Hesse Mount is part of a station originally occupied by Messrs. Highett and Harding; they having separated Highett sold to Mr. Hopkins of Hobart Town whose son Arthur is now occupying it. Mr. Harding still retains possession of his half. My son Thomas who has been previously mentioned in this letter lost his life by a cold caught in crossing the Barwon before there were any bridges.  P.S. - Most substantial improvements chiefly stone have been made on nearly all the stations herein mentioned. They are fully stocked with sheep cattle and horses and there are cultivated fields well fenced on nearly every station. On our station there are 40000 sheep 2000 cattle and horses &c. The aborigines occupying the country adjacent to the Barwon River from the sea to its source were supposed to be about 300 in all - the Indented Head Barrabool Hills Colac and Yan Yan Gurt tribes. Their chief support was fish caught in the river in the summer and autumn seasons and in winter and spring they depended on their success in hunting together with the root called "murnong."  Arrived by order of General Sir Richard Bourke at Geelong in 1847 where according to the General's directions I was to take an absconded felon on my staff. This man had been a resident near Geelong for 33 years and was therefore well acquainted with all the natives in that locality. My orders from the General being to assemble as many of the natives as possible for the purpose of knowing their numbers in this part due notice was given and we succeeded in making a large muster of 275 of all classes - men women and children. [180] The General sent bales of blankets slop clothing dresses for the females shoes and a large quantity of flour and tea and two dozen of tomahawks (not issued but thrown into Moorabool River). These articles were all divided amongst the natives. Unfortunately a few blankets were deficient whereupon the native men unprovided set up a yell and became almost frantic a state of things which instantaneously became general and the assembly demanded more and more every minute. Fearing bad results from my visitors from their general demeanour and manner and becoming somewhat apprehensive I ordered my two constables to load and my ten convicts to fall in close to my hut. The natives saw this preparation and I kept some distance from them with my double-barrel gun accompanied by Mr. Patrick McKeever district constable also armed; it had the effect of making the natives retire the interpreter Buckley telling them to do so. I was exceedingly happy at the result not having the slightest trust in Buckley; and I may now add my conviction is that the natives assembled wishing an opportunity to murder every person in the place. After this escape I never permitted more than a few to approach the place when they were kindly treated and provided with some salt pork which was not such a delicacy as mutton but fresh meat was not to be had and sheep were extremely dear and scarce.  A few days followed. I saw a native in a rage take a child giving it many blows and eventually catching it by the leg and battering its head against a gum-tree. This was on the opposite range of the river. On my arrival at the spot (which took some considerable time on account of the river winding so much) when I reached the tree I found evident marks that the child had been killed and taken from the place but there was not one native to be seen.  A station at the Leigh was attacked; two men in charge defended a few hundred sheep driving them before them to another station. [181] I saw some four natives that had been shot dead. I investigated the affray and gave much credit to the men for their good conduct.  Buninyong only 50 miles from Geelong was thought a great discovery. Some few of the settlers removed to that locality where many disturbances took place. Shepherds were murdered and sheep stolen. On numerous occasions I have had to visit the place on complaint of the settlers and also that I might have it in my power to gain information as to the reported depredations of the natives. I felt convinced of these depredations and generally found the origin of theft and murder was from an over-intimacy on both sides - the women ruling depraved and bad; so much of this existed that there was hardly a shepherd without disease. Large families of natives - husband wife boys and girls - were eaten up with venereal disease. The disorder was an introduction from V. D. Land and I am of opinion that two thirds of the natives of Port Phillip have died from this infection.  During 1837-8-9 as the country began to be occupied I had many journeys to stations of from 40 to 50 miles Colac and Buninyong being the most distant. In all my investigations I found where life was lost that blame was attributable to both sides - to the jealousy of the native and over-intimacy of the hut-keeper or shepherd who was one day feeding the natives and the day following beating and driving them from the place.  In 1840 I was made Commissioner of Crown Lands. I had eighteen troopers. These men were soldiers who were sentenced by court martial (when serving in America) for desertion to transportation to N. S. Wales. I never met with a more orderly or steady set of men; they had their horses always in good order and were ready and willing to perform their duty. No pay was allowed by Government and their only remuneration was the common ration. For the seven years I held the office of Commissioner of Crown Lands I had only one man who left me. He deserted to Adelaide. [182] Every man I had could have followed him and that too well mounted. I am glad to say to their credit not a man followed his example.  In 1839 the squatters in Portland Bay District were very limited in number not exceeding a dozen. In 1840 very few joined them and the revenue in licenses did not exceed £150. In 1842 the district began to become of some notice and a vast number of most respectable establishments appeared. In 1843 and 1844 the district was rapidly filling; and during 1845 and 1846 there were four hundred licenses granted in a country almost without a European in it in 1839 - and nearly as large as England. Mr. Gisborne was the Commissioner of Crown Lands for Port Phillip which was divided when I was appointed. I may remark on the Portland Bay District - knowing it for years and having ridden over it some thirty-four thousand miles - that a finer or a more beautiful country cannot be. There are parts sandy and barren but generally the ground is useful many parts possessing great advantages for pastoral purposes and many bits of ground being fitted for immediate agricultural purposes I may safely say without an outlay for grubbing a tree - so different from New South Wales where every one cleared is attended with a serious expense. The district is exceedingly well provided with water; many of the waterholes are everlasting and there are besides reaches of rivers and many fine and valuable springs.  In 1839 by order of Sir George Gipps I left Geelong to proceed to Portland Bay. I was allowed three mounted police and seven horses. Mr. Smyth of the Survey Department had orders to attend me. The distance is about 220 miles. At that time the squatting stations were chiefly about the towns. We proceeded bringing provisions on a pack-horse. We experienced great difficulties and obstructions. In many instances we had to return for miles the country being impassable and seek another route. We were two days endeavouring to cross a stony range and had to return to Mount Eeles without water. We found ourselves surrounded by I suppose 150 natives following us with their spears yelling and brandishing their waddies. [183] On leaving the range we halted at a tea-tree scrub where we found water. We were cooking some pannikins of tea when we heard the native cooey in every direction; this subsided; I suspected that the natives were close to us. I walked down the creek with my gun first ordering the men to stand to their horses. I returned and told Smyth that the creek I thought was full of natives. We took some tea mounted and rode about 50 yards when a formidable number at least 150 natives jumped from the brush-wood in the creek making after us for some miles. We escaped them and we met others but none would approach us. No inducement could persuade them. We chased one to endeavour to make him find water for us near Mount Rouse; he ran fast and got to a tree climbing it like a monkey and letting fly behind on some of the party as he ascended to his utmost satisfaction. We were eighteen days before we reached Portland after leaving Port Fairy. On our left we met many obstructions on the flat grounds and large swamps in that part of the country which is intersected so much by two small rivers that with difficulty after some days of consultation as to what we should do (as our stores were all expended) - whether to push on or return we came to a determination to endeavour to gain the high ground which we fortunately did on that evening. After spending a truly miserable night with nothing to eat plenty of rain and a good fire we were glad at daylight to proceed again when to our great joy we saw a vessel at anchor in the bay. We descended towards the beach when our hearts failed us. We were pulled up by a large river in front of us. Another consultation took place when one of the policemen said "Let us go on to the sea." In the former instance Smyth thought to keep up the river was our only plan which we did. Smyth swam across with a sabre in his mouth and got on the sand-hills whence he could see the river which close to the sea became a large lagoon. On returning he explained it was useless to follow down; therefore the party kept up following the river and rounding some large lagoons. [184] In the second instance we took the advice of an old policeman; we reached the beach where a hard sand answered as a good road. Had we in the first instance travelled down to the beach we could have crossed in like manner for the river in this neighbourhood has an entrance into the sea. We reached Portland in a few hours receiving a hearty welcome from Messrs. Henty who kept a whaling establishment and were the only residents in the place. I had His Excellency's order to make some investigations and after a rest of three days our party proceeded towards the Glenelg to a station held by Messrs. Henty and the Messrs. Winter on the Wando River. After finishing my business in two days we purchased some provisions to carry with us on our return home. After crossing the Wannon River we made a new route almost east; and we met with no kind of obstruction and were only one day without water. We reached Geelong on the fifth day after leaving the Glenelg. I may remark during this journey we did not meet with any natives; the country was desolate and uninhabited and was covered with rich kangaroo grass three and four feet high. At that time I considered the country beautiful particularly in passing Mount Sturgeon and the long range of conical hills for many miles towards what is now called Mount William. We passed Terrinallum Hill now called Mount Elephant. Since the journey I have again visited all these parts. On the hill - Mount Sturgeon - a large stone sits in a cradle; one or two of my policemen moved the stone; it is nearly round. Terrinallum has a large crater like every other hill in this part; also basins some of them of great depth and two and three miles in circumference. Three great beauties of the kind are close to Timboon. The country between Timboon and the Hopkins River would remind any person lately from home of a nobleman's park with the expectation of coming soon to a magnificent house. Many a dreary ride I have had over this magnificent splendid country lying waste and idle with an odd flock of sheep here and there and fine fat bullocks with hundreds of square miles to roam over. [185] This land for agricultural purposes none can surpass and it would maintain thousands and thousands of people by common industry with a yearly surplus of grain enough to feed the entire population of Victoria to this 17th day of August 1853. It lies as formerly for years in the hands of a few squatters at the nominal yearly rental of a squatting license which is nothing like the value of the ground.  The country for many miles about Colac nothing can surpass in its fine rich soil. The lake is in circumference about I suppose 14 miles. A few years ago it became almost dry. On visiting it it was my opinion that it would in a few years become a large swamp. Of late years it has regained its waters so much so in May 1852 that its banks were overflowed - the water rushing over the plains into the Barwon and Leigh and causing the wonderful flood on the 20th May 1852. At Geelong the Barwon River rose about twelve feet higher than the highest flood experienced since my arrival in 1837 destroying a vast deal of property and carrying the bridge away on Barwon River Geelong and also several others.  The squatting population consists of such various classes of persons that it is impossible to speak of it as a body. Many of the squatters are gentlemen worthy and excellent men of undoubted character and well connected at home. Mount Emu is a beautiful country. A noble pack of hounds was kept up by gentlemen squatters who met every season hunting twice and thrice a week and meeting at each other's houses where good cheer and good and happy society were ever to be met. I have sat down with thirty gentlemen at Mr. Goldsmith's to an excellent dinner given by that gentleman. There was an ample provision of all that was good set before his guests who one and all had hearty and joyful faces talking of to-morrow and the day's sport before them. We retired to rest on our shakedowns on the floor at eleven o'clock; at daybreak the master of the hounds a squatter sounded his bugle; shortly after his second for breakfast; and in half an hour his third bugle when a fine pack of dogs let loose from the kennel appeared full of life and glee led away by the well-known master of the hounds Compton Ferrers followed by thirty well-mounted gentlemen squatters. [186] The game was not far distant. In half an hour we came on the scent of a native dog; he had a long start; the pack took up the scent and followed breast high; the ground was rather moist; some horsemen were thrown out; but there were twenty in at the death after passing over sixteen miles of ground without one check. The wild dog is noble sport; and as to the day I speak of I doubt even if Leicestershire ever turned out a better pack or a better set of sportsmen in a field during a season.  On the following day I had the pleasure of again meeting the same party and on many occasions after this. I may now remark in a country like this where dissipation prevails among this class of gentlemen squatters in no instance did any man exceed or forget that he was a gentleman.  Another class of squatters is a kind of shop-boys. A plain man can barely approach them. They have wonderful sources of wealth and comfort with dirty huts and no comfort but with plenty of pipe-smoking grumbling and discontent. For seasons a hut would be just the same - on one side of the door you will see an aged tobacco plant; there is no garden - no vegetables but bones rotten sheep skins and filth in plenty. Inside the door there was often a large hole in the mud floor worn by the heels of persons going in and if not aware of this ten to one that you had a chance of upsetting the table tin-dishes and greasy mutton chops. As to beds this gentry are not particular. I lay on one for hours in great torment tired and wishing for sleep; I envied five or six who were snoring close about me. Sleep I could not from something hard and long under my loins. I took my knife cut the sacking when I pulled out the leg of a sheep with a long piece of the hide as crisp as a toast. [187] Here is a country yielding all that man can require for only a little labour. It abounds in a class who care for nothing excepting self-interest. For years they have the same hut; not so much as a drop of milk; for breakfast hysonskin mutton chops swimming in fat and damper; damper and fat chops for dinner; hysonskin and the same for supper. No deviation even in lent.  Another class consists of old shepherds. I have known this class to grow rich the master poor and in time the worthy would become the licensed squatter. I have known many of them to become wealthy and some who did not forget themselves; but most were out of their places and it would have been better for the community had they remained shepherds rather than become masters. Litigation is a favourite rule and almost anything can be gained by an overwhelming evidence.  I stated that on my arrival I mustered 275 natives. So many years have passed over that at the present day August 22nd 1853 I feel assured that not more than twenty aborigines are living about Geelong. Some were children when I came and within the lapse of these few years have become aged and decrepit. The life of the aborigines cannot be of long duration; and I am of opinion longevity is unknown. Balyang was held up to be more respected than any native in this place; he was remarkable for his good conduct decency and good order; he was very polite constantly sending presents of oysters and bustards. He was a particular friend of mine. By some means he became possessed of an old musket of which I on many occasions told him to be careful or he would shoot himself urging that it would be better for him to use his spear and boomerang. He laughed saying the gun was better. This remarkably fine old man went to the Werribee River to shoot bustards. As he was one morning leaving his miam on pulling the gun the lock went off and the contents of the charge went through his body. He died in a few minutes leaving some three wives and four young boys. One of the boys is still living in Geelong or the neighbourhood. He cannot be more than nineteen or twenty years of age; but for a stranger to look at him he must consider him an old man. [188] Woolmudgen was always with his relative old Balyang until the latter died when he lived with Mr. Fisher for some years. He was taken care of and well provided for on the establishment his father having been killed and his old friend Balyang gone so that he remained almost an inmate. As he grew rapidly he became a man in a few years; his habits changed; he withdrew himself for weeks; on returning he would only laugh at all questions put to him saying "The bush better than house plenty of grub good as mutton." Of clothes he had always a good supply but when he left in the morning well dressed if he returned in the afternoon he was always naked. He placed no value on anything. The latter days of this youth (he was about twenty years of age) were spent in drunkenness and riot. He was nearly six feet high a powerful and strong man but disease and filth gave him the appearance of age. He died near Geelong from inflammation. Bon Jon another of old Balyang's tribe lived with me for some four years. He was a stout lad very civil and useful. He always attended me in the bush and was often with me for a space of three or four months going from one station to another and during that time never seeing one of his tribe. I was passing Colac and remained at Mr. Murray's for the night. The Colac tribe had a camp near at hand. Some seven men accompanied by a couple of women came to us covered with white paint - a death warning the women's faces torn and bleeding the men carrying spears langeela and waddies. One spoke to Mr. Murray. Mr. Murray immediately told me their intention viz. "to kill my boy Bon Jon." Pointing to the men I told the boy who in a cool way replied "I know it; I am ready for them" letting out a volley of abuse at the party.   Taking his pistol and cocking it "Come on Merrijig" he cried to the doctor who came for the purpose of extracting Bon Jon's kidney fat. He defied all. For safety I made my boy stay inside the house all night. [189] The natives remained lurking about for an opportunity to murder him. This animosity was caused by the death of a Colac native which happened at a corrobboree near Geelong; it was therefore needful that a Geelong native should die. On the following morning a numerous collection presented themselves demanding Bon Jon with a promise not to kill him but merely to extract the kidney fat. I asked him if he would be satisfied to undergo the operation. "Me give" said he "if you wish it" showing his pistol's clean new flints and his sabre as bright and sharp as a razor. All he required from me was liberty to have a quarrel on the ground. We mounted and left. About two miles from Colac we met some natives on their way to Colac from the Mission Station. Approaching us and seeing Bon Jon they were quite taken aback and ran from us immediately; in fact the party were on their way to partake of Bon Jon's kidney fat and femoral bits. The boy was very brave; in fact he had no fear; he begged me to let him "only kill one with the big knife" stating that he would not fire and pointing out one who had a fine lubra saying "If you let me kill him I'll get his wife." I had on many occasions tried the courage of this savage boy. Near Port Fairy in 1843 a shepherd was most barbarously murdered by natives which attracted the attention of the police. I was out for many days with a party of seventeen mounted border police. The weather was cold and wet and we suffered in many ways. We were on horseback from daylight to night examining all the creeks and stony lands between Port Fairy and Eumeralla. We spent ten days in this way and not a black did we fall in with. We were compelled to give up owing to want of provisions and sickness. On the following morning accompanied by Bon Jon we set out to seek a passage for our dray in order to get away. We went about seven miles and meeting with great obstacles returned in another direction finding a far better country. When we came within two miles of our camp on turning a tea-tree copse we met a most powerful native and on asking questions he related to Bon Jon that the clothes he had on belonged to the dead man at Mr. Ritchie's. [190] It was a wet day. Bon Jon said "This is the fellow that we have been looking for." Again asking him if he had been at Mr. Ritchie's and inquiring about the man and clothes we are confirmed; we threw our cloaks off; the native dashed his spear through and through Bon Jon's. Bon Jon pulled out his pistol snapped it and missed fire; pulled out his sabre and dashed after him when horse and all fell among the rocks and stones in a deep gully. We did all in our power to apprehend this savage but we could not; he had four spears langeel and shield; with one blow he dashed the sharp end of the langeel through my horse's nose; as we came up with him the tribe threw many spears at us making off; the man was left to us. Jumping on a large mound of rocks and loose stones he howled out "Come on white b-- " at the same time throwing his last spear at Bon Jon. He was not to be seen in a second. This native went into Port Fairy some days after showing his shield with the sabre cuts on it. Some months after this at Geelong Bon Jon became quite changed; he no longer had a wish to follow me or wear his dress. Away with his tribe constantly he came to me occasionally; he still had a strong grudge against the Colac tribe; he came to me one day saying "One Colac fellow down here with a gin" and that he would kill him. I desired him not. He was as good as his word.   He loaded a carbine followed the unhappy black with his gun and shot him dead. Bon Jon and the gin who was now occupying his time and attention came back and eat drank and were merry. Hearing of the murder I had Bon Jon apprehended; he was quite indignant asking me if I had forgotten the tribe at Colac that wanted his kidney fat. Bon Jon was tried before Judge Willis a most disreputable old rip who I think was in consort with the devil for though the evidence was clear Bon Jon was most honourably acquitted and handed over to another booby of fame old Robinson a Native Protector to be educated and told not to break the commandments. [191] Bon Jon was killed shortly after this in a scurry with some natives at a corrobboree. Over the body of the Colac native an inquest was held. I took Woolmudgen to see the remains. On showing him the head the back part of the skull being carried away he wept bitterly and threw himself on the ground roaring and screaming; for many days he appeared in sad distress and long and many a time he spoke of the deed to me always repeating the words "poor blackfellow." These natives are all dead now and as far as I can learn only one remains of poor old Balyang's friends. From long experience particularly in Portland Bay District I am convinced that the number of aborigines in 1837 in this district could not exceed 3000 and I feel thoroughly convinced the race will be extinct in 20 years or less. In the district I met a native his breast arms and body muscular and in fine proportions; his legs were like fins and not larger than those of an infant. This poor cripple followed his tribe travelling many miles during the day; he sat in a piece of bark tied round his loins.  Emus and kangaroos on our arrival were plentiful in all parts of the district; also bustards in large flocks of from ten to thirty or forty or perhaps more. The bustards now are scarce and only met with in distant places. The kangaroo and emu are nearly extinct in the district; the country is almost void of game. Quails in years gone by were plentiful but I think are fast disappearing; snipe we have in the season but not in the same abundance as in other countries; we have also the painted snipe the same bird that is met with in all parts of India; black ducks large and a delicacy; also various small ducks and wood ducks &c.; the bronzewing pigeon a fine game bird fully equal to an English partridge; black swans - useless and ugly; snakes of many descriptions and some exceedingly bold - more so than I have known them in India. The longest snake I have met did not exceed six feet. For an idler or a sportsman this country affords nothing and for a military officer it is the moat damnable quarter in the world. [192] There is nothing in the shape of sport except in the season a few snipe and quail; then it ends until the next September. At the approach of the snipe season when you seek your "Forsyth" or "Joe Manton" to brush it up for the sport it is more than probable that you will seek in vain for some good and trusty servant has made it his own. Borrowing (as it is termed) these implements is common but once taken by this class of gentry from your house they are never regained.  Of all the impositions inflicted on mankind an inn in the district is the most dreadful abomination. It appears to me the licensee considers only one duty that is to persecute and victimize the traveller. The law makes provision for decency but the landlord disregards it after a license is granted; his sole object is money - not to make it honestly by a return of common comfort; his bill is the object and pay it you must though five hundred per cent. is overcharged. What could a man have in any part of England staying at a hotel for a night if he expended £2? I should think such an outlay amongst the middle classes would be unknown but in Victoria the £2 would not afford you a "nobbler." You have to put up with the curses of an ill-looking ruffian - the landlord - who heartily wishes that you never again trouble him as he is not over-fond of gentlemen beggars. The landlord is generally to be seen playing quoits in front of the hut with a pipe in his mouth cursing and swearing and surrounded by half a dozen idle drunken men - the stable-keeper always sticking close to his master to swear by him right or wrong for a nobbler. These games amuse some travellers for a fight is generally the result; and in almost all instances as one passes through the country the landlord sports a black-eye or two. The interior of the hut is generally built of wood and weatherboards; the floor is boarded and a fine rattling breeze rushes in at all parts. Your company is not very refined - all smoking spitting singing loudly and rioting; cursing and damning Governors and formerly Crown Lands Commissioners. Horse races for saddles and bridles and cockfights are got up; you are told of fine bullock-drivers and that Tim was the fellow to shear sheep with flat contradictions now and again which nearly lead to a bout but often to the destruction of the landlord's all in the shape of half a dozen wine glasses and his large assortment of tin pannikins. [193]   Memorandum of Trip by A. McMillan from Maneroo District in the year 1839 to the south-west of that district towards the sea-coast in search of new country.  Start from Maneroo. - On the 20th of May 1839 I left Currawang a station of James McFarlane Esq. J.P. of the Maneroo district having heard from the natives of that district that a fine country existed near the sea-coast to the south-west of Maneroo. [203]  Accompanied by one Black only. - I was accompanied in my expedition by Jemmy Gibber the chief of the Maneroo tribe. After five days' journey towards the south-west I obtained a view of the sea from the top of a mountain near a hill known as the Haystack in the Buchan district and also of the low country towards Wilson's Promontory.  On the sixth day after leaving Currawang the blackfellow who accompanied me became so frightened of the Warrigals or wild blacks that he tried to leave me and refused to proceed any further towards the new country. We pressed on until the evening when we camped and about twelve o'clock at night I woke up and found Jemmy Gibber in the act of raising his waddy or club to strike me as he fancied that if he succeeded in killing me he would then be able to get back to Maneroo. I presented a pistol at him and he begged me not to shoot him and excused himself by saying that he had dreamt that another blackfellow was taking away his gin and that he did not mean to kill me.  Omeo. - Next morning we started for Omeo where we arrived after four days' journey over very broken country. There were three settlers at Omeo at this time viz. Pender McFarlane and Hyland.  Numbla-Munjee. - On the 16th September 1839 I formed a cattle station at a place called Numbla-Munjee on the River Tambo 50 miles to the south of Omeo for Lachlan Macalister Esq. J.P. A Mr. Buckley had previous to my arrival here formed a station ten miles higher up the River Tambo from Numbie-Munjee.  On the 26th of December 1839 I formed a party consisting of Mr. Cameron Mr. Matthew Macalister Edward Bath a stockman and myself with the view of proceeding towards and exploring the low country I had formerly obtained a view of from the mountain in the Buchan district alluded to in my first trip from Maneroo. After travelling for three days over a hilly and broken country one of our horses met with a serious accident tumbling down the side of one of the steep ranges and staked itself in four or five places. [204] In consequence of this accident we were compelled to return to Numbla-Munjee.  On the 11th of January 1840 the same party as before with the addition of two Omeo blacks - Cobbon Johnny and Boy Friday - started once more with the same object in view namely that of reaching the new country to the south-west and if possible to penetrate as far as Corner Inlet where I was led to believe there existed an excellent harbour.  Meet with the Aborigines. - After a fearful journey of four days over some of the worst description of country I ever saw we succeeded in crossing the coast range leading down into the low country. This day we were met by a tribe of the wild blacks who came up quite close to us and stared at us while on horseback but the moment I dismounted they commenced yelling out and took to their heels running away as fast as possible; and from the astonishment displayed at the circumstance of my dismounting from the horse I fancied they took both man and horse to constitute one animal.  Lake Victoria. - On Wednesday the 15th of January our little party encamped on the River Tambo running towards the sea in a south-easterly direction. On the morning of the 16th we started down the Tambo in order if possible to get a sight of a lake we had previously seen when descending the ranges to the low country and which I was certain must be in our immediate vicinity. The country passed through to-day consisted of open forest well grassed the timber consisting chiefly of red and white gum box he- and she-oak and occasionally wattle. At six p.m. we made the lake to which I gave the name of Lake Victoria. From the appearance of this beautiful sheet of water I should say that it is fully 20 miles in length and about 8 miles in width. On the north side of this lake the country consists of beautiful open forest and the grass was up to our stirrup-irons as we rode along and was absolutely swarming with kangaroos and emus. [205]  The lake was covered with wild ducks swans and pelicans. We used some of the lake water for tea but found it quite brackish. We remained on the margin of the lake all night. The River Tambo was about one mile north-east of our camp. The River Tambo where we first made it appears to be very deep and from 20 to 30 yards wide. The water is brackish for the distance of about five miles from its mouth where it empties itself into Lake Victoria.  Nicholson River. - On the 17th January started from the camp and proceeded in a south-westerly direction. At ten a.m. came upon another river to which I gave the name of the Nicholson after Dr. Nicholson of Sydney. This river seemed to be quite as large as the Tambo and as deep. Finding we were not able to cross it in the low country we made for the ranges where after encountering great difficulties we succeeded in crossing it - but not until sun-down - high up in the ranges and encamped for the night. This evening we found that from the great heat of the weather our small supply of meat had been quite destroyed. We were however fortunate enough to obtain some wild ducks upon which we made an excellent supper.  River Mitchell. - 18th January. - Started again upon our usual course (south-west) and after travelling about seven miles came upon a large river which I named the Mitchell after Sir Thomas Mitchell Surveyor-General of New South Wales.  Clifton's Morass. - We followed this river up until we came to a large morass to which I gave the name of Clifton's Morass from the circumstances of my having nearly lost in it from its boggy nature my favourite horse Clifton.  General View of Country from a Hill. - Having crossed this morass we again proceeded on our journey for three miles when we came once more upon the Mitchell River higher up and encamped for the night the country improving at every step. In the evening I ascended a hill near the camp from the top of which I obtained a good view of the low country still before us of the high mountains to the north-west and the lakes stretching towards the sea-coast in a south and south-easterly direction; and from the general view of the country as I then stood it put me more in mind of the scenery of Scotland than any other country I had hitherto seen and therefore I named it at the moment "Caledonia Australis." [206]  On the morning of the 19th January we crossed the Mitchell and proceeded in a south-south-west course through fine open forest of the she-oak and red and white gum for about sixteen miles and encamped upon a chain of ponds in the evening.  20th January. - We proceeded in a south-west course and at ten a.m. came upon the border of a large lake which I believed to be a continuation of the same lake we had been previously encamped upon.  The Aborigines. - While at dinner on the banks of the lake a tribe of blacks were walking quietly up to where we were encamped but as soon as they saw us on horseback they left their rugs and spears and ran away. They never would make friends with us upon any occasion.  The River Avon. - 21st January. - Started upon our usual course (south-west) and after travelling about four miles came upon a river flowing through a fine country of fine open forest with high banks to which I gave the name of the Avon. We followed this river up all day and crossed it about twenty miles from the foot of the mountains. It appears to be a mountain stream generally not very deep and runs over a bed of shingle. The country around and beyond the place where we crossed the Avon consists of beautiful rich open plains and appeared as far as I could judge at the time to extend as far as the mountains. We encamped upon these plains for the night. From our encampment we had a splendid view of the mountains the highest of which I named Mount Wellington and also I named several others which appear in the Government maps (published) of Gippsland. [207]  22nd January. - Left the encampment on the plains and proceeded on our usual course of south-west and travelled over a beautiful country consisting of fine open plains intersected by occasional narrow belts of open forest extending as far as the lakes to the eastward and stretching away west and north-west as far as the foot of the mountains.  Macalister River. - After travelling about ten miles we encamped in the evening on a large stream which I named the Macalister. This river appears deep and rapid and is about 40 yards wide. Here we saw an immense number of fires of the natives.  23rd January - Started early in the morning and tried to cross the river but could not succeed and followed the River Macalister down to its junction with another very large river called the La Trobe which river is bounded on both sides by large morasses.  Meet with Aborigines. - In the morass to north-east of the river we saw some 100 natives who upon our approach burnt their camps and took to the scrub. We managed to overtake one old man that could not walk to whom I gave a knife and a pair of trousers and endeavoured by every means in our power to open a communication with the other blacks but without success. It was amusing to see the old man. After having shaken hands with us all he thought it necessary to go through the same form with the horses and shook the bridles very heartily. The only ornaments he wore were three hands of men and women beautifully dried and preserved. We were busy all the evening endeavouring to cut a bark canoe but did not succeed.  On the morning of the 24th January the provisions having become very short and as some of the party were unwilling to prosecute the journey upon small allowance I determined upon returning to the station and bringing down stock to the district We then returned to Numbla-Munjee which place we made in seven days from the 24th and were the last two days without any provisions at all.  I may add that I was the first person who discovered Gippsland and when I started to explore that district I had no guide but my pocket compass and a chart of Captain Flinders. [208] We had not even a tent but used to camp out and make rough gunyahs wherever we remained for the night.  On the 27th March 1840 Count Strzelecki and party left our station at Numbla-Munjee for Caledonia Australis. He was supplied with some provisions and a camp kettle and Mr. Matthew Macalister who was one of my party in January of the same year accompanied them one day's journey and after explaining the situation and nature of the country about the different crossing-places left them upon my tracks on the coast range leading to Gippsland and which tracks Charley the Sydney black-fellow who accompanied Count Strzelecki said he could easily follow.  On my return to Numbla-Munjee on the 31st January after having discovered the country of Gippsland as far as the La Trobe River I proceeded immediately to Maneroo and reported my discovery to Mr. Macalister who did not publish my report at the time. I had also written another letter to a friend of mine in Sydney containing a description of my expedition; at the same time I wrote to Mr. Macalister but it unfortunately miscarried. In October 1840 I arrived in Gippsland with 500 head of cattle and formed a station on the Avon River after having been six weeks engaged in clearing a road over the mountains.  After four attempts I succeeded in discovering the present shipping place at Port Albert and marked a road from thence to Numbla-Munjee a distance of 130 miles.  After having brought stock into the district and formed the station in about the month of November 1840 the aborigines attacked the station drove the men from the hut and took everything from them compelling them to retreat back upon Numbla-Munjee.  On the 22nd December 1840 I again came down and took possession of the station when the natives made a second attack.  I arrived in Port Phillip with stock from the Sydney district in May 1837 in company with Messrs. Hughes Farquhar McKenzie Murdock and Colonel White.  I took up a station on the Muddy Creek and Goulburn River. Mr. Hughes located himself on a creek known as Hughes's. Mr. McKenzie took up a station on the King Parrot Creek. Mr. Murdock occupied the country immediately below me on the Goulburn; and Colonel White formed his station on the Sunday Creek. At that time the only person living on the river was Mr. John Clarke who was resident at that part known as "the old crossing-place"; he had arrived there in the previous February.  There were no residents to the north of the Goulburn with the exception of two houses of accommodation at the Murray and Ovens rivers. About two years subsequently Messrs. Colburn and Fletcher took possession of the country above me on the Goulburn Acheron and Rubicon rivers. Dr. Patrick first occupied the station now known as Cathkin in the occupation of Mr. Maxwell and Messrs. Watson and Hunter occupied the Devil's River.  The first occupants of the Goulburn below Seymour were: - Colonel Anderson who took the country immediately adjoining; Messrs. Mantons who occupied both sides of the river including almost the whole from thence to the Murray; and Mr. Macgregor who located himself near the junction of the Broken River and Seven Creeks with the Goulburn; Mr. Gideon Stewart occupied the country on the Sunday Creek contiguous to that part now known as the township of Broadford; Dr. Hamlyn the land around Kilmore; Mr. Archibald Thom Beveridge's Flat; and Mr. Malcolm Kinlochewe. [216]  It is beyond my power to state precisely at what time each station was taken up but the whole of the above parties were in occupation of them in the year 1840.  The number of the aborigines on the Goulburn and its tributaries at the time of my first settling there was probably about five or six hundred. They were generally scattered about in small tribes in various parts on the rivers and creeks but occasionally collected in large numbers. At first they killed several of the men in the employment of the settlers and some of their sheep and cattle; but by using conciliatory measures they gradually became well disposed towards the white inhabitants. From the statement of the natives themselves they seem to have been much more numerous some few years before our arrival amongst them but they suffered severely from the small-pox of which disease many of them bore evident marks; in fact individuals may be seen to this day who have plainly suffered from that malady. From their first acquaintance with the white population their numbers have diminished from disease and other causes until there are perhaps scarcely one-fifth of the number above stated and it seems probable that in a few years they will become extinct.  It was in February 1838 that I first determined to remove my stock from the colony of New South Wales to the famed land of Port Phillip.  It was known for years prior to this time that much fine land lay in this neighbourhood and extended from the Murrumbidgee to the Bay of Port Phillip. Hume and Hovell were the first discoverers of this fine country but Sir Thomas Mitchell some years afterwards in tracing down the Darling opened up the great country to the westward which gave the stimulus to the proprietors of stock in New South Wales to migrate with their flocks and herds from a land at that time suffering from severe drought "unto a land which is the glory of all lands."  Many persons and numerous flocks and herds were on the line of march when I was but none tarried or turned to the right hand or to the left; all were hastening on to the lands so highly pictured by the discoveries before mentioned. [219]  When I arrived at the Ovens I knew from Hume's description that there were plains called after the former Surveyor-General Oxley. I determined to turn out of the beaten road and visit Oxley Plains where I finally determined upon leaving my horned cattle sending on my sheep to the finer lands spoken of by Sir Thomas Mitchell. It was at this juncture that I sent on my brother's sheep under charge of his overseer to the Broken River to await my coming up. Unfortunately within a few days after their arrival there they were attacked by the aborigines many of his men murdered the stock scattered through the country and about £200 worth of property then in the drays taken away.  My brother having arrived shortly after the massacre of his men and destruction of his property we determined for the sake of more fully protecting each other to settle on the Ovens. Some few months passed on when I had Messrs. Bowman Reid Chisholm and Docker as neighbours. The country was left to us for some years in consequence of the hostility of the blacks which became so unbearable that I could not keep shepherds although well armed without employing a horseman in addition to myself to keep continually perambulating the woods lest the natives might cut them off. During my employment in this way my cattle were destroyed in numbers within the short distance of only six miles from my hut. I once found fourteen head of slaughtered cattle in one pond of water. They had been driven in by the natives it being an ana-branch of the river and from the depth of the water and the boggy state of its banks they were destroyed with the tomahawk in endeavouring to get out. Thus I and my men were kept for years in a perpetual state of alarm. We dared not move to supply our huts with wood or water without a gun and many of my men absconded from my service throwing away their firelocks and in some cases destroying the locks and making them wholly useless from sheer terror of the blacks. This may appear too absurd for belief; nevertheless it is a fact. [220] At last it so happened that I was the means of putting an end to this warfare. Riding with two of my stockmen one day quietly along the banks of the river we passed between the anabranch of the river itself by a narrow neck of land and after proceeding about half a mile we were all at once met by some hundreds of painted warriors with the most dreadful yells I had ever heard. Had they sprung from the regions below we could have hardly been more taken by surprise. Our horses bounded and neighed with fear - old brutes which in other respects required an immense deal of persuasion in the way of spurs to make them go along. Our first impulse was to retreat but we found the narrow way blocked up by natives two and three deep and we were at once saluted with a shower of spears. My horse bounded and fell into an immense hole. A spear just then passed over the pummel of my saddle. This was the signal for a general onset. The natives rushed on us like furies with shouts and savage yells; it was no time for delay. I ordered my men to take deliberate aim and to fire only with certainty of destruction to the individual aimed at. Unfortunately the first shot from one of my men's carbines did not take effect; in a moment we were surrounded on all sides by the savages boldly coming up to us. It was my time now to endeavour to repel them. I fired my double-barrel right and left and two of the most forward fell; this stopped the impetuosity of their career. I had time to reload and the war thus begun continued from about ten o'clock in the morning until four in the afternoon. We were slow to fire which prolonged the battle and 60 rounds were fired and I trust and believe that many of the bravest of the savage warriors bit the dust.  It was remarkable that the children and many of the women likewise had so little fear that they boldly ran forward even under our horses' legs picked up the spears and carried them back to the warrior men. We at last beat them off the field and found that they had a fine fat bullock - some of it roasting some cut up ready for the spit and more cattle dead ready to portion out. [221] The fight I have described gave them a notion of what sort of stuff the white man was made and my name was a terror to them ever after.  I picked up a boy from under a log took him home and tamed him and he became very useful to me and I think was the means of deterring his tribe from committing further wanton depredations upon my property; my neighbours however suffered much long after this.  The Government during all this time gave no help no assistance of any kind and at last threatened to hang any one who dared to shoot a black even in protection of his property and appointed Protectors to search about the country for information as to the destruction of the natives. These gentlemen resorted to the most contemptible means to gain information against individuals whom the trumpet-tongue of falsehood had branded as having destroyed many of these savages. This instead of doing good did much evil. People formed themselves into bands of alliance and allegiance to each other and then it was the destruction of the natives really did take place. I however never troubled myself to go off my own run. I had no need of help and had no desire for the destruction of the wretched race but I would not undergo the same injuries annoyances and anxiety again for ten times the quantity of land I hold. No sooner was all fear of the blacks dissipated than the whites became almost as great a nuisance in edging in their applications and claims for portions of our runs (and let it be remembered that we were the first squatters and pioneers of the district). Unfortunately the Government gave too willing an ear to them as we were all branded as murderers of the blacks; they readily deprived us of portions of our runs to give them to the other squatters who were considered peaceful men as they well might be after the war was ended. Ours was the danger theirs the reward.  I need hardly carry my short and necessarily imperfect account further. [222] Your Excellency is fully aware of the history of the squatters since. No sooner did the Home Government give to that class an interest in their stations for the wholesome purpose of encouraging them to open up the wild lands of the colony to raise the wool so necessary for the use of the world at large to make themselves comfortable and become the purchasers of some portions of these wild lands than the gold-digger the ephemeral grubber of a day sets up his claim to the right not only of the auriferous metal in the bowels of the earth but to the grass upon the earth and that too free from all restraint tramping under foot the rights of the pioneer squatter - rights gained by discovery and by conquest and which are acknowledged by our Government. Because the land was God's land made for all men to enjoy in common therefore things in the earth and above the earth are theirs also in common - ergo the cattle will shortly be theirs as the cattle eat the natural grasses of the earth and breed upon the earth and require no more tending than the kangaroo and why should one man enjoy monopolize flocks and herds sufficient for thousands because he may choose to put his brand upon them. This is the next argument I expect to hear from these men.  In October 1838 I took up the station known as Seven Creeks situated close to the Sydney road about 35 miles from the River Goulburn. At that time there were only two stations occupied between the rivers Ovens and Goulburn viz. one by Mr. H. K. Hughes at Avenel and the other at Mangalore River Goulburn by some person on behalf of Major Anderson. [251] Both those stations were taken up about June 1838.  In the beginning of 1839 a police-station was formed at the crossing-place of the Broken River and in the latter part of that year and the beginning of 1840 the country in the neighbourhood of that river was occupied by different settlers.  In the beginning of 1840 the country now known as the Devil's River country was taken up by Messrs. Watson and Hunter; and about the same time the country in the neighbourhood of the Upper Goulburn was occupied. In the end of 1840 and the beginning of 1841 the country on the River Goulburn below Major Anderson's station began to be occupied and soon afterwards the banks of the Murray below the junction of the Ovens.  I know personally very little of the first occupation of the country lying between the rivers Ovens and Murray but may mention the names of Dr. Mackay and Mr. G. Faithfull both still residing on the Ovens as original occupants of that portion of the district and as likely to be able to afford you every information with regard to its first settlement.  In the months of July and August 1838 I saw a good deal of that part of the Western Port district lying between the Sydney road and Major Mitchell's homeward track; the country on the Melbourne side of the track appeared to be pretty well occupied but there was at that time only one station on the other side viz. that occupied by Captain Hutton near Mount McIvor.  With regard to the aborigines my means of information are very meagre. I have no means of even guessing at their numbers when I first settled in Port Phillip as for three or four years they very seldom appeared at my station and then only in small numbers.  I am glad to say that I never had any collision with them nor in fact suffered any serious annoyance from them. I am aware that in several parts of the Murray district they proved very troublesome in the years 1838 and 1839; but I have reason to believe that if the settlers had used proper precautions in the generality of cases they would not have suffered. [252]  Middle of 1836. - A. F. Mollison came to Port Philip in a vessel from Hobart Town to view the land having gone from Sydney to Hobart Town as there were no vessels sailing from Sydney to Port Phillip at that time. (Major Mitchell had not returned from his journey through Australia Felix at this time.)  John Batman McKillop Fawkner and others had been settled at Port Phillip two or three months when A. F. Mollison arrived.  Sheep (breeding ewes) were being brought over from Van Diemen's Land for the first settlers - price 20s.  Having seen the country he returned to Sydney via Van Diemen's Land and started (April 1837) from a station on the Murrumbidgee which he had bought a year before with 5000 sheep (collected from various quarters price 25s. to 31s. 6d.); 600 cattle; 20 horses. [257]  End of 1837. - After a long and harassing journey wintering at Bontherambo by the way he reached Coliban and formed that station.  Ebden had reached Carlsruhe six weeks before with stock and shortly afterwards Yaldwyn came down and took up (what is now W. H. F. Mitchell's) country.  I joined A. F. Mollison in 1838. We lived in reed mia-mias and tents comfortably enough for some time. The winters were much drier. The Coliban now a formidable stream when flooded was crossed on a plank during the first winters.  1838. - Pyalong was occupied as a cattle station. W. Hamilton Mundy & Smythe and F. A. Powlett followed in this quarter.  1839-1840. - The head of the Loddon - present aboriginal station - was first occupied by A. F. Mollison. The country north of this river had been frequently explored before but was called the "barren plains" and supposed to be without water. Look at them now.  1840. - Lyon Campbell followed and then L. Mackinnon and others.  Early part of 1841. - Parker occupied our station on Loddon as a reserve for the aborigines and settling there attempted to carry out the Exeter Hall views for their civilization with but slight success as was to be expected.  The aborigines in our neighbourhood (afterwards known as the "Jim Crow" tribe) were from the first peaceable. They were a small insignificant tribe frequently spoiled and oppressed by the more numerous and warlike tribes from the Goulburn Murray River and westward who used to carry off their women &c.  There is a tradition of one if not two bloody encounters between parties of these last tribes and Hutton's men. Hutton was then the furthest out to the north-west and it is pretty well known that several white men getting lost in the bush were cut off by the natives as they were never heard of afterwards. [258] At any rate the shepherds felt or pretended so much alarm that at the request of the settlers about and beyond Mount Alexander a small party of the 28th Regiment was stationed on the Campaspe during 1838 and 1839 to protect both whites and blacks. The squatters or rather their men should be in fairness freed from the imputation cast upon them by the Protectors and Missionaries of corrupting the native women. From the first I know that the use of the women was offered by themselves and their husbands indifferently for a very trifling gratuity.  It was always believed that they were cannibals - that is that now and then under particular circumstances they ate portions of the human body rather as a rite perhaps than to make a meal.  There are traditions of portions of the body usually hands or fingers being observed in the lubras' bags but of doubtful authenticity I think.  Certainly in conversation they admitted the fact; but this does not prove it because we know that they will at any time admit or say anything which they think will please their interlocutor - witness the bunyip and (Mr. Powlett's?) great serpent of the interior both of which have been accurately described in fifty different shapes; also the volcanic eruptions of Jim Crow &c. &o.; in short if leading questions are put to them as is usually done by enthusiastic inquirers who are following up their own ideas they (the natives) may as I think be made to say or to describe anything.  1839. - Sheep were in this and the following year taken hence to Adelaide - considerable numbers by sea. Price paid here in 1839 by McFarlane and others for the purpose of sending to Adelaide 27s. 6d. for breeding ewes. Wheat sold at the Coliban at 20s. the bushel. [259]  January 1840. - The first shipment of cattle hence to New Zealand by Welsh and others. Cows £10; steers £12.  1841. - The first mill for grinding corn by water-power was erected at the Coliban about this time.  1842. - Fat wethers this year from 8s. to 12s.  1842-45. - In these years there was a great depression of the pastoral and agricultural interests. Yet the colony continued to advance slowly in point of comfort and property although there was but little money. Many squatters who in their earlier operations had become indebted to the merchants were obliged to surrender their stations and were left penniless. The new men who bought at this time have become rich escaping the privations and anxieties of the first pioneers their predecessors. They have been floated on to wealth by the tide of general prosperity but of the older settlers who held on many pressed down by the unfavourable terms on which assistance was granted to them have only recently after a struggle of years found themselves freed from their difficulties.  Now in the pride of wealth consequent on the wonderful gold discoveries the early squatters their sufferings and their services to the colony are alike forgotten and men seem to regard them as the new heir regards the furniture and portraits of the distant relative to whom he has succeeded as something to be at once quietly consigned to the lumber-room or the auction marts.  1845-53. - From this period there are printed records of the progress of the colony and its general statistics which it will be at once more easy and more satisfactory to consult than somewhat loose memoranda.  Muster Cattle on Maneroo. - In the year 1840 I assisted in mustering on the plains of Maneroo a herd of cattle belonging to a Dr. Shirwin and purchased from him by a mercantile firm in Sydney to send to Port Phillip as a speculation.  Start for Port Phillip. - Thirteen hundred mixed cattle were gathered with which our party started in August for Port Phillip by way of Yass.  Many other Herds on the Road. - There were several other herds travelling on this road at the time. [262] It was said that there were 20000 cattle between Yass and Melbourne. However this may have been there were so many different parties moving with stock in the same line as ourselves as made it necessary that great care should be exercised to prevent the mixing of herds and consequent annoyance and confusion.  The Crossing-places over the Rivers. - This was particularly the case at the crossing-places over the rivers where sometimes from accident bad management or from the cattle proving refractory one party would occupy the ford for two or three days. It was usual for the parties which might be a day's stage or even more in front or behind to send all their men that could be spared to assist at such times.  The intermediate district through which the road lay was very thinly settled and stocked but still it was all nominally taken up. There was however abundance of grass and water for travelling herds without interfering with the resident stock.  The "Major's Line." - In approaching the district of Port Philip we understood that the line which we followed was that struck out by Major Mitchell on his return from Portland Bay.  Finding when we reached the Goulburn River that the cattle market in Melbourne was overstocked it was determined to place the herd on a run if it could be found.  Campaspe. - With this view the country was explored to the north of Major Mitchell's return line first down the Campaspe; but though there was no station below what is now Mr. Lynott's (one formed below it having been abandoned on account of the attack of the natives) the country looked so parched up and uninviting that it was not taken up.  Lower Loddon - The same cause deterred us from occupying the Lower Loddon which had been already passed by others as worthless the value of it and the country to the north generally as a winter run for stock not having then been ascertained.  Halt the Herd at Glenmona. - In order more perfectly to prosecute the search for available country the herd was halted at the creek lately occupied by McNeill and Hall near Burnbank whence excursions were made in various directions. [263]   Dutton Simson and Darlot. - This creek was then occupied by an out-station of Messrs. Dutton Simson and Darlot who had recently arrived from the Sydney district with one of the largest establishments that had ever come overland. It formed the western portion of their run their eastern boundary being forty miles distant near Mount Alexander. On this same creek to the southward nearer to the Maiden Hills the Messrs. Hodgkinson were established the southern portion of their run having been previously held by Messrs. Lang and Griffin who had moved from it to Mount Elephant and prior to them by a Mr. Bowman (or Borman) who I understood was drowned in going by sea from Melbourne to Sydney. At this time there were no stations to the north of this part of the country.  Avoca River. - The Avoca was also unoccupied except at its source in the Amphitheatre among the Pyrenees where Mr. Irvine had a sheep station. There had been a station taken up about ten miles below this by a Mr. Oliphant but one or two of his shepherds having been killed by the natives it was deserted and occupied afterwards by Mr. Irvine. Mr. Briggs who finally settled at the Grampians had halted hereabouts for some weeks on his way down from Bathurst with sheep.  Southerly from this neighbourhood the country was held by Messrs. Donald and Hamilton (west from Mount Misery); by Messrs. Learmonth (north-east and south from the same hill); by Mr. McCallum (north from Mount Beckwith) he having purchased from Mr. Hawdon; in the same line proceeding easterly by Mr. Donald Cameron and further on by Captain McLachlan to the north of whom were Mr. Lachlan Mackinnon who afterwards sold to Mr. Hunter; and Mr. Colin Mackinnon who disposed of his station to the Messrs. Joyce and moved on to the Pyrenees. [264]   River Wimmera; Mount Cole. - Proceeding west past the Avoca we found the Mount Cole branch of the River Wimmera occupied at the upper part; first by Mr. Irvine with sheep; next to him by Mr. Lynott with cattle of Dr. Imlay's of Twofold Bay; and below him by Mr. Francis.  Mr. Francis was killed in 1842 by a wound inflicted by a madman whom he had imprudently employed.  Mr. Lynott about the same time sold his station to Mr. J. A. Cameron for £1300 who later disposed of it to Mr. C. Williamson of Melbourne for £30000.  Want of Water to the North. - On exploring the unoccupied country to the north we found it without water. Places to which we were taken by the natives with assurances that there would be plenty of water we found quite dry. This was particularly remarkable in the channel of the Wimmera which looked as if it had not run below the stations of Mr. Clarke of Dowling Forest (then managed by Mr. Francis) for some years.  Mount William Wimmera. - From this district to the Mount William branches of the Wimmera there were no settlers; though Mr. Blow shortly afterwards came in upon the intervening space with sheep of Mr. Sinclair's (of Van Diemen's Land) occupying country which is now held by Dr. Blundell and Dr. Thomson it having first passed through the hands of Mr. John Allan and thence I believe into the possession of the Bank of Australasia.  Near to Mount William Mr. Horace Wills from the Murrumbidgee River was settled. He had sold a portion of his run to Captain Bunbury. Mr. Kirk was superintending a station east from Mount William on the Hopkins River; this was afterwards sold to Messrs. McGill and Ross and by them recently disposed of to Messrs. Richardson and Wright and Rodger. From these stations north for twenty miles following the course of the Wimmera there was no one; beyond this distance Captain Briggs was settled with sheep brought down from near Bathurst the property of the Redfern estate there. These were sold to Mr. Boyd of Sydney notoriety and next purchased I believe by the present proprietor Mr. Carfrae. [265]  Plains and Northern Wimmera. - North of this place the plains and River Wimmera itself were totally unoccupied little known and supposed to be worthless for stock.  Progress and Cause of Settlement of the Inferior Northern Country. - At this time the richer portions only of the colony found favour in the eyes of intending settlers as only being calculated to afford marketable stock. Afterwards when melting down had been established into a system rendering settlers independent of the limited market of Melbourne and giving a value to lean stock in consequence of their being in demand to replace stock boiled down from the richer runs country till then despised was greedily taken up. The northern plains and the parts more immediately watered by the Wimmera and its tributaries were occupied under these circumstances. Then it was discovered that tracts which had been passed over as barren in summer had a peculiar value in winter and in fact it gradually became apparent that they were second to no district in their capacity for producing fat stock the fattening seasons however being different.  Water becoming more permanent. - Their condition also of being in a great part without water seemed to have altered and creeks which had formerly been dry for long periods now filled with the regular rains.  We take up a Run. - Finding the vacant country between Captain Bunbury's and Mr. Briggs's stations in some respects suitable for our purposes we occupied it intending however to remain there only for a time during which search for a more favourable spot might be prosecuted.  The Station changes hands. - The station so formed remained permanent passing into the hands of Messrs. Rose and Jackson and from them to Mr. Horace Wills - Mr. Rose in 1843 taking up a run to the west of the Grampians between Mount Zero and the Victoria Range. At this time following the Grampians round the south-west there was no station beyond that of Captain Bunbury till Mount Sturgeon was reached where Dr. Martin of Heidelberg had a herd of cattle in charge of Mr. Knowles. [266]   Shortly after I settled however Mr. Chirnside took up a small creek flowing on to the plains from Mount William.  To the south-east Messrs. Stevens and Thomson had arrived overland with sheep from Yass and occupied the Fiery Creek. East of them were the Messrs. Campbell who had settled at Mount Cole about a year before.  Between the Grampians and Victoria Range a Mr. Dwyer took up in 1842 some country at the back of Dr. Martin's run.  River Glenelg upper part vacant. - The Upper Glenelg at its rise amongst the ranges was unoccupied nor am I aware that any country for a considerable distance west from its source was taken up till later and all towards Mount Arapiles and on the waters running to the Wimmera from the western side of the Grampians was yet vacant.  River Norton. - It was not till 1843 that Mr. Rose took up a run on the head waters of the Norton (or McKenzie) which I had explored much earlier for a heifer station reaching it through a wild and beautiful pass now called "Rose's Gap" but which I did not then think worth occupying.  Victoria Range. - It was about 1843 that Mr. D. C. Simson took up country lying immediately beneath the Victoria Range to the west and various stations were quickly formed on the Wimmera and Upper Glenelg Mr. Sherratt establishing himself on the latter river below Mr. Simson having removed from near Mount Alexander.  I leave the Grampians. - At the end of 1842 I left my residence at the Grampians and purchased a station from Mr. Simson on the creek which now forms the western boundary of the county of Talbot. My acquaintance with the former neighbourhood consequently ceased to be kept up except by casual visits.  Loddon. District &c. - The Mindai. - Being thus settled in the Loddon district in 1843 I formed one of a party consisting of Mr. McNeill Mr. Darlot and myself with two natives to explore the plains to the north of the Pyrenees induced thereto by the accounts the blacks gave of a large lake there which we were anxious to see in spite of the "mindai" which they gave us to understand infested it making a prey of emus and black-fellows and which the old lubras of the tribe asserted would never allow us to return an imaginary fate which they bewailed with much lamentation and weeping endeavouring to deter us by picturing the immensity of the monster. [267]  One old and hideous hag in particular dabbed her yam-stick into the ground dramatically and affirmed that "Cobra belonging to mindai along o' this one station tail like it along o' Mr. McCallum!" (thus indicating a length of about eleven miles only!).  The notion of discovering two such wonders as a lake in a waterless country and a serpent of such magnificent dimensions only stimulated our determination; so crossing the Avoca in April 1843 we struck into a dry creek (the Avon) running north from the Pyrenees. Finding it without water throughout its course which we followed for a day and a half till discerning no sign of moisture in its channel and being in great doubt how far the blacks were to be depended on as to their knowledge of any permanent water thereabouts we turned towards the Wimmera.  This by travelling all night - steering by a star - we reached early on the third morning. Our horses had been two days and three nights without anything to drink except a quart of water to each which we gave them from our keg pouring it into the crown of a cabbage-tree hat into which the fold of a mackintosh cloak had been first fitted to make it hold water.  The winters of 1843-4 proving wet these various northern creeks filled up and the country near the Lake Bainenon was reached and occupied by Messrs. J. and W. Donald and the Messrs. Wedge who sold to Mr. Robert Macredie.  The Lower Avoca was also taken up first below the station of Mr. Irvine by Mr. J. L. Foster and Mr. Archdale (since dead) near Bealiba; next by Messrs. Ellis Shore and Elliott followed by others down its whole course. [268] Nearer the Pyrenees on a branch of the Avoca were Mr. Colin Mackinnon (removal from the Loddon) and Mr. James Campbell.  Avon River. - On the sources of the Avon among the northern spurs of the Pyrenees a large tract of country was taken up about this time by Mr. Laurence Rostron.  Pleasure of exploring. - There was a wonderful charm in exploring country thus uninhabited except by the natives and wild birds and animals.  These occupied without altering the face of nature which heterodox as the opinion in these days may seem was to my eye more beautiful than in its present aspect of national pretensions and "magnificence." Herds of kangaroo abounded in the forests and emus grazed over the plains in some cases so tame as to approach the rider with a strange gaze of curiosity.  The creeks were then all fringed with reeds and rushes undevoured by hungry cows and gaunt working bullocks. These reeds and rushes formed a beautiful edging to the dark solemn pools overhung by the water-loving gum-trees where wild fowl abounded as the plains did with quail and turkeys.  Abundance of Game. - About the Grampians in particular game was most plentiful. My stockman repeatedly brought in young live emu which he had ridden down; and kangaroo-tail soup in its abundance ceased to have any attraction for us. I had tame emu chickens performing their strange juvenile antics round my reed mia-mia - yellow-striped and downy little objects difficult to be recognised as the sources from which future mature emus were to grow. A female kangaroo was a familiar intimate of my hut and on excellent terms with the dogs that had murdered its poor mother. Wild ducks geese and swans were constant visitors upon the water-hole opposite my door and occasionally a pelican or spoon-bill appeared as a rarity. [269]  Hostilities. - At the period of my entrance into the colony of Australia Felix in almost every part of it the mutual relation of the natives and settlers at first was one of distrust and violence. This it was stated arose from the attempts of the blacks to steal sheep or other property of value from the settlers. These robberies were often accompanied with violence and murder committed in the treacherous manner common to most savages.  Such occurrences naturally led to reprisals in which the superior arms and energy of the settlers and of their servants told with fatal effect upon the native race.  Instances of this deplorable result might often be observed by the explorer in the early days of the settlement of the colony.  Native Skeleton in a Waterhole. - When I was passing with the cattle over the Eastern Wimmera a shepherd came up and entered into conversation with me. He held a carbine in the place of a crook and an old regulation pistol was stuck in his belt instead of the more classic pastoral pipe - pastoral pursuits in Australia being attended at this time with circumstances more calculated to foster a spirit of war than one of music. After some conversation he led me to a waterhole where the skeleton of a native - exposed by the shrinking of the water in the summer heat-lay on the mud. There was a bullet-hole through the back of the skull. "He was shot in the water" the man told me "as he was a-trying to hide hisself after a scrimmage! There was a lot more t'other side."  Bones under a Gum-tree. - "I might see the bones a-sticking up out of the ground close to the big fallen gum-tree where they'd been stowed away all of a heap" - a grave good enough he took occasion to assure me for the "sneaking murdering black cannibals."  Bones under the Logs of a Bush Fire. - On another branch of the Wimmera when looking for the horses one morning after camping out my black boy came back his complexion changed to yellow with fright; taking me away to a short distance he showed me three or four bodies partially concealed by logs. [270]   There were numerous tracks of horses round about. He explained the occurrence in his way - "I believe blackfellow bimbulalee sheep all about. Then whitefellow gilbert and put 'em along o' fire."  Every station had some tragic tale connected with this subject. At one a paroquet was pointed out as it ran about the floor of the hut quite tame. It had been the only thing left at an outstation by the blacks after murdering the hut-keeper and stealing the utensils and rations. It had been found perched on a tie-beam over the dead body and brought in to the home-station.  Hut-keeper left for Dead. - At another the servant who brought in the tea and damper had his face distorted. He had once been a good-looking man but the blacks came on him one morning when he was shifting the hurdles battered his face in left him for dead and robbed the hut.  Spears taken out of Cattle. - At a third there was a heap of pieces of spears piled up on the rough slab mantlepiece. These had been taken out of various cows and bullocks on a cattle run where the natives had attacked them in the ranges killing many and driving the rest away. The place was shown where they had had their corrobboree to celebrate the triumph. The ground was beaten smooth and hard where they had danced and bark plates lay about on which the choice morsels had been heaped.  Cattle driven off the Run. - On this run out of 1500 head of cattle all had been driven off but about 30 "crawlers." It was many weeks before they were re-mustered.  Sheep driven away; legs broken. - From another station a whole flock of sheep had been taken away far to the north; a few only were recovered numbers being found by the pursuers with their legs broken a cruel sort of tethering resorted to in those days by the natives under these circumstances. [271]  Settler speared. - Again at another station a stockyard was pointed out in which one of the earlier proprietors had been speared while milking a cow.  Natives made useful. - Yet with all this the natives generally were welcomed at the stations for the most part and they made themselves useful in many ways as for instance in stripping bark finding lost horses and in acting as guides and messengers; but they seem always to have availed themselves of any opening for attack left by incaution - at least for a long time after the first occupation of the country.  Numerous about the Grampians. - Fish Weirs. - About the Grampians they were numerous at the time of my residence and had apparently been much more so judging from the traces left by them in the swampy margins of the river. At these places we found many low sod banks extending across the shallow branches of the river with apertures at intervals in which were placed long narrow circular nets (like a large stocking) made of rush-work. Heaps of muscle shells were also found abounding on the banks and old mia-mias where the earth around was strewed with the balls formed in the mouth when chewing the farinaceous matter out of the bulrush root.  Bird Catching - They had the art here of catching birds with a long slender stick like a fishing rod at the end of which was a noose of grass twisted up. With this apparatus and a screen of boughs they succeeded in putting salt on birds' tails to some purpose.  One old villainous-looking black of my acquaintance used to catch large bundles of quail which he would barter freely for suet. The kidney fat of a sheep would purchase a dozen brace.  Crawfish. - The lubras fished up crawfish from the shallow muddy water-holes with their toes and yam-sticks and exchanged them for the dainties of civilized life. A large tin-dishful might be obtained in barter by a small expenditure of tea and sugar and when treated with a certain degree of gastronomic science formed a not unwelcome change of diet from mutton chops or salt beef which in those days was the almost unvaried food of the "cormorant squattocracy." [272]  Native Tracks. - I here first saw the tracks formed by the natives in travelling over any particular pass. There was one across the Grampian Range about 15 miles north of Mount William leading up a wild romantic glen and over on to the source of the Glenelg. I found another through the tea-tree scrub of the Wannon near Mount Sturgeon from which on each side of the river other tracks diverged over the open ground; they were much like cattle tracks except that they passed over places which cattle were not likely to attempt.  Grass-tree. - One variety of food was in use among the natives here which was new to me at the time. It was a portion of the grass-tree top. This was first pulled out of the stem a few preliminary taps being made with the back of the tomahawk and then a length of soft white succulent matter neatly twisted off the lower extremity where it had been embedded in the rugged trunk; it reminded me of asparagus in the proportion of tender to tough.  I also observed them take a red grub out from the grass-tree which I was informed was "merrijig" and "likit sugar" with an assurance further that I was a "stupid fellow" for not adopting it as an article of diet. I cannot confirm the character given of this eatable however not having been induced by the scorn and wonder of the aborigines to test their bill of fare further than by trying the crawfish and grass-tree. I conceive it quite possible however that an unprejudiced person might pronounce grubs - red or white - less repulsive in appearance as food than a fat delicious oyster.  I am by no means convinced that while in our self-satisfied horror at seeing fellow-men black and savage though they be eating things certainly not unlike worms we abstain from Australian grubs we may not be losing the enjoyment of a delicacy second only to white-bait. [273]   How the Blacks eat Emu Skin. - When endeavouring to find the lake called Bainenong before spoken of I shot an emu which the blacks who were with us received as a great prize. They cooked and eat it in a style which amused us much. Having first roughly plucked it they took off the skin which they stuffed with tender gum twigs; thus prepared it was delicately toasted at a slow fire and then rich yellow oily lengths of what looked like the thickest of the fattest possible goose-skin were trimmed off and swallowed as the Lazaroni of Naples are said to suck down macaroni.  Places of Interment. - From one or two instances which came before us I am inclined to believe that the blacks about the Grampians used to bury their dead in hollow trees. On one occasion I discovered my stockman manifesting a mysterious dislike to a particular vicinity and on questioning him ascertained that at the foot of a hollow tree at the place in question were the half-burnt remains of a human being. At another a dead body was plainly perceptible high up the hollow of an old gum-tree.  Superiority of the Loddon and Marrable Natives. - The natives at the Grampians were generally speaking a much inferior tribe in appearance to those of the more fertile districts such as the Loddon and Marrable. It seemed as if they depended physically upon the nature of the country which they occupied the richer portions of the colony nourishing its inhabitants into better grown and handsomer men and women than the less fertile parts. About the Loddon and Marrable I have seen men who might have served as models of symmetry and strength and whose figures were perfection as regards the animal man. The lubras also here were often found tall well-shaped and good-looking as far as could be judged of through a coating of grease and various pigments and filth - white black and red.  Inferiority of the Grampian Blacks - At the Grampians both sexes were distinguished by pre-eminent ugliness and dirt as far as I had opportunites of judging. [274]  Absence of Feeling of Revenge. - In all parts of the colony in which I have been the character of the natives seems to be free from the inclination to vengeance so common among most savages; at least to vengeance towards the civilized intruder upon their country.  Their murders of and thefts from the white population seem generally to have been prompted by mere acquisitiveness the objects of their desire being different from those which tempt the criminals of civilized communities.  The diplomatists of their tribes may even perhaps have pleaded justification - that their kangaroos and emus were driven away by the flocks and herds of the settlers - for reprisals upon an invading enemy stimulating a sort of guerrilla warfare not indeed with the war cry Pro aris et focis but for a reason no less cogent to men whose undisciplined appetites may be presumed to have been keen enough. Their cannibalism and cutting out of warriors' kidney fat were only manifestations probably of their religion or superstition as the rack and the faggot have been and the prison is now the means by which the dominant orthodoxy of the day is vindicated on the other side of the world.  Apart from these peculiarities I am of opinion that they may towards the whites at least in the main be considered a placable people; for let them be offended ever so bitterly and overtures then be proffered towards reconciliation through the medium of the cheap gifts which pervert their wisdom and their wrath evaporates like the morning dew.  I have known their dogs to be shot (an offence generally of the deepest dye against their social code) and the tribe depart in consequence shaking as it were the dust from their feet against the station where the offence had been committed the men jabbering all kinds of native imprecations as was supposed and the women howling ululations and hugging their dead mangy darlings in their arms. [275] In a month they have come back smilingly for tobacco protesting with the utmost amiability that "all gone sulky now."  I arrived in Sydney from London in the latter end of September 1839. The weather was very hot the glare very great the dust abominable. I knew no one and I was glad to get out of it without loss of time. I had read the treatises on sheep and cattle in the "Library of Useful Knowledge" and had endeavoured to gain some information respecting colonial life from Major Mitchell's "Travels in Australia" Mr. Waugh's "Three Years' Experience" and Dr. Lang's "New South Wales" all which works I had industriously perused on the voyage. Beyond this my general information regarding live stock was limited to a confused knowledge of sheep by their distinctive titles of rams wethers and ewes; and a vague idea of cattle as heifers cows bulls and oxen and as beasts that had horns and made a great bellowing; but I am not sure that I could have distinguished any of either description of animal on view. I had however acting under the advice of certain prudent relatives in England fully determined on entering on pastoral pursuits or what I found was called in the colony "going into stock" and had armed myself with letters of introduction to several gentlemen who had emigrated a short time before me with similar views. [283] Amongst these was one from Mr. Alex. Hunter of Edinburgh whom I had met in London to Messrs. Watson and Hunter who had sailed shortly before me and who were amply supplied with means to form large stations.  I had an indistinct idea that Port Phillip was to be the field of their operations and a much more indefinite one of how I was to get there. Some inquiries however in Sydney brought me the gratifying intelligence that Mr. Watson was himself in the Sydney district at the time though out of town at that moment; and I was further informed he was on the point of starting with an expedition for Port Phillip in which I made up my mind to join if possible. I accordingly purchased a horse off a Sydney dealer as a preliminary step; and in five days from my landing had made all the necessary arrangements with Mr. Watson for my forming one of his party. We left Sydney I think on the 3rd of October and travelled by easy stages till we reached Sutton Forest where we overtook Mr. Alick Hunter who had gone on before with the drays and horse-stock. From this place we went on to Lake George on the other side of which a property had been purchased for the sole purposes of procuring some assigned servants of whom we had twenty in the expedition. In this neighbourhood I bought about 300 head of cattle and made an agreement with Mr. Watson to run them with his stock giving him half the increase for two years and the benefit of my services during that time. I recollect nothing particular about the country we passed through except that the bush was very thick and that I was always afraid of losing myself if I left the road or was out of sight of my companions for a moment. [284] We had also about 400 head of cattle bought from a Mrs. Barton at Berrima with which we fortunately got a stockman "given in" named "Little Sam" which considering our intense "greenness" and the uselessness of most of the convict servants who were just "turned out of Government" was of great consequence. Paddy's River Yass and other well-known localities were passed and we eventually encamped on the Tumut where some 600 more cattle (with a run) had been purchased which to add to our trouble had the character of being the wildest brutes in the colony.  Here our party divided. Mr. Alick Hunter Mr. Tulloh and the Honourable Gilbert Kennedy went on to Melbourne with the horses. Mr. Watson returned to Sydney to wind up some incomplete arrangements whilst I remained with the cattle at the Tumut where we formed a station on the Gilmore Creek.  Here I added to my fortunes 100 picked heifers which were strongly recommended by the vendor Mr. Shelley and also by Mr. Watson whose interested motives in advising the purchase of female stock I was too "gullible" to see through at the time. My position at the Tuznut with my twenty "Government men" about 1200 head of cattle and about 30 horses in a country with which I was totally unacquainted may perhaps be conceived but is difficult to describe. I was very much afraid of losing my cattle and therefore tried to keep them within sight counting them regularly every day which considering that more than half were broken into the run was an absurdity which nothing but experience convinced me of; for when we wished to remove them about six weeks after it was found to be impossible with our insufficient help to drive them off the run and we consequently formed a permanent station at Gilmore Creek a tributary of the Tumut where we left the cattle till the next year. The vast herds which were travelling from the Sydney district and the probability of the Melbourne markets being overstocked coupled with the difficulties of the road from the flooded state of the rivers confirmed us in this decision. [285]  My troubles as a squatter commenced very early in my career. The great scarcity of flour during the summer of 1839 was felt all over the colony but in no part more so than in the interior where it was selling at £60 a ton. Even at Government House in Sydney it was said that Lady Gipps was restricted in her supplies for pastry. For some weeks our food at the Tumut was confined to beef and milk and a little rice; but the incessant grumbling of the men at last induced me to send a cart to Yass for flour. The Tumut was flooded at the time but I had seen a horseman cross and ventured over myself at the same place. A hurdle was lashed on the dray on which the bedding of the two men who were to accompany it was placed and with three horses harnessed to it it went boldly into the stream after me. The leading horse about half-way across turned down the stream and in a moment the cart was afloat and soon capsized drowning the two other horses and nearly drowning the two men on the hurdle. The one was a fine swimmer and swam out to the leading horse and eventually released him from his harness; the other clung to a log and was hauled ashore by a rope about ten minutes afterwards. A few days after this the river having partially subsided and the grumbling continuing unabated a second attempt was made but at another crossing-place and with only one horse. The same occurrence took place again except that the horse swam for a quarter of a mile down the river with the cart after him and was not drowned till a log turned the cart over and rendered him helpless - the driver who remained till then on his seat on the hurdle up to his neck in water calling out to me "he was done like a dinner." Three hundred pounds worth of horse-flesh went in these adventures. I then bought a team of bullocks and eventually procured a ton of flour from Yass which lasted the party till it reached Melbourne. An overseer was then engaged and the cattle delivered into his care and on the 24th December Mr. Watson and I started in a tandem for Port Phillip. [286] Near the Murray we broke both shafts and had to take to our saddles leaving the remains of the gig and several valuables (amongst others my writing case and journals) at an out-station hut of Mr. Cockburn's to be sent on by the drays. Of course I never saw any part of them again. On arriving at the Murray we overtook several expeditions which were waiting for a favourable opportunity to cross.  There were said to be 10000 head of cattle on its banks in various "mobs." Messrs. Bolden had crossed several hundreds that day and at night we camped with their party. On the Ovens we overtook others. The natives had attacked some parties in this neighbourhood during the previous summer and the places were pointed out to us where Faithful's men were murdered and where Snodgrass had had a "stand-up fight with the blacks." My own experience of the natives at this time led me to suppose they were a very inoffensive race; for all I had seen had been the Bogong blacks on the Tumut who came down in the summer from the ranges sleek and lazy from the grub or fly of that name which infests that part of the country. I think they were the handsomest natives I have ever seen; at all events they were the best conditioned. On the Ovens however we saw none. A party of mounted police was stationed at the Broken River who entertained us as they appeared to do all travellers for a consideration.  The country was all so far settled although we saw no signs of it either by meeting with human habitations or with sheep or cattle. If the country was stocked the stock fed off the road but we heard the names of Barber Mitchell Fowler W. A. Brodribb Faithful Mackay Docker Binney Speed and Anderson as occupants of the various runs through which we passed. At Templeton's at the Seven Creeks Mr. Watson left me to go up to the Devil's River which he and Mr. Hunter had occupied during the previous spring. I remained for a few days at Ballowra a station Mr. Hunter had formed on Templeton's Creek about three miles above him but which was about being abandoned for the better country of the Devil's River and Mount Battery. [287] I accordingly proceeded alone to the "Settlement" as the City of Melbourne was in those days called stopping at Hughes's Hamilton's at the Sugar Loaf and at a Mr. George's at Kinlochewe and eventually reached Keior where Messrs. Watson and Hunter had their head quarters at the time. There were no particular charms in Melbourne in those days beyond the champagne lunches which always accompanied the sales by auction and of which I partook with others though I never bought any land. One cannot help reflecting on the narrow escape from making a fortune which daily fell in one's way when we look at the properties which were to be had for a few pounds at the time now bringing in thousands per annum. However I was never destined to this and I soon returned to the bush and devoted myself to learning my trade as a squatter. A serious illness which attacked me at Mount Battery however threw impediments in my way. I was confined to my bed with bilious fever for several weeks and on my recovery went back to Melbourne from whence by the advice of the medical men I went by sea to Sydney. A few weeks' nursing at Parramatta restored me to health and in May I returned to Melbourne in the Cumberland chartered by Mr. Dutton. I was then about proceeding in her to Valparaiso to buy horses and had secured my passage when the news of a bad sale of South American horse-stock in Sydney deterred us from entering into the speculation and I went back again with Mr. Hunter to Sydney to make further purchases of horses and cattle taking some £16000 with us for the purpose. After a few days' delay I accompanied Mr. Terence Murray to his station near Queanbeyan to attend a large sale in which he was interested and to purchase cattle if I thought it advisable. Failing in getting what I liked (for I had by this time become a judge of stock) I went on to the Tumut to collect our leavings of the previous year where I was shortly after joined by Mr. Hunter and his cousins with more cattle and horses. [288] We had altogether about 2000 head and about 70 horses with which we again started for Port Philip and after many losses and crosses eventually formed our main cattle station on the upper part of the Broken River about four miles above the station at present in the occupation of Mr. John Moore. From the Broken River to the Devil's River crossing the Mount Battery plains a distance of about 20 miles the whole country was claimed and stocked by Messrs. Watson and Hunter. Messrs. Stevens and Thomson' were camped upon the Broken River about three miles above the cattle station but only remained till they had shorn their sheep when they moved towards the westward.  During the winter that I remained at the Devil's River I was a witness of the fatal effects of catarrh in sheep. The climate was very severe the frosts and fogs frequently lasting all day. The sheep could not be let out of the yards on many days till noon. How the disease came into that neighbourhood (if it is really contagious) I do not know but if any climate could produce it I am sure that of the Devil's River in 1840 was quite trying enough. I have seen as many as 500 sheep dead at the yards in a single night. There were some settlers who had come with a few sheep above us on the Devil's River. I think their names were McFarlane and Mitchell; their loss was more severe than Messrs. Watson and Hunter's. We used to fancy that the river was affected by their throwing the carcasses into the stream though this is not probable as they were 16 or 20 miles above us and the river was a considerable one.  During this year I formed one of a party consisting of Mr. Alick Hunter Mr. Archibald Jamieson an overseer and a blackfellow named "Pigeon" (who was afterwards drowned at the wreck of the Salthouse) that started to find a road into Gippsland for stock which Strzelecki's discovery had just opened as a field for Port Philip enterprise. We ascended what we took for a leading range to the south-west of Mount Buller but found ourselves in a most difficult succession of gullies in which we struggled for eighteen days and eventually camped on the head waters of the La Trobe. [289] My horse had met with an accident in falling down a steep bank and I remained with Pigeon at our camp on the river while my companions went on to see what they could of the new country. In three days they returned having reached a rich plain and fine herbage I conclude part of the run afterwards occupied by Mr. Reeve. On our return we got upon a leading range in right good earnest which in two days took us back to the head of the Goulburn; but the descent was considered too steep for stock and the idea of bringing a herd by that route was abandoned.  Mr. Tyers afterwards tried to follow on our returning tracks but lost his horses and gave up the attempt to reach Gippsland from that entrance and I am not aware that it has yet been considered practicable.  The time was now drawing near when my agreement with Mr. Watson was about expiring and I was most anxious for it as I found that cattle in halves was not a profitable speculation to the proprietor. An attempt had been made to muster the whole herd in March but it proved ineffectual and it was not till October that I eventually got delivery of my stock. I now made an agreement with Mr. Riley of the Wannon to put my cattle on his run he undertaking to hand his heifer station over to me if we did not continue to keep our cattle together; and early in November 1841 I left the Devil's River and drove my herd to Melbourne where I sold all the butchers would buy and after providing myself with a dray and stores started for the west with the remainder somewhere about 300 head. We passed by Lal Lal Buninyong Baillie's and Mount Emu which country was all occupied right and left of us and crossed the plains to Lake Boloke which was the only vacant spot I saw. Wyselaski was at the crossing place of the Hopkins where his station now is. [290]  Dr. Martin under the guidance of Mr. James Manning who had sold his cattle with the condition that he was to find a run for them had occupied Mount Sturgeon the station being at the time under the charge of Mr. Knowles. Beyond him to the west on the Wannon was Mr. Barnett now Chirnside's and next to him was Mr. Riley where my head quarters were for twelve months. During this time I saw a good deal of the surrounding country. At the Grange a police magistrate Mr. French was establishing himself; and in the month of June of the same year I had the honour of being appointed a magistrate and assisted him regularly on the bench. Mr. Riley's station had been occupied by a Mr. Gibson (whose wife was famous for some extraordinary journeys she made to Melbourne accompanied by a single male attendant) was abandoned by him and afterwards taken up by a Mr. Norris who suffered so severely from depredations committed by the blacks that he had also given it up. The natives had however by all accounts been taught some severe lessons and had learnt to be better behaved; but they were still what was usually termed in the bush "very troublesome." We had in the meantime occupied Englefield on the Glenelg as our heifer station and had erected the necessary improvements there; but we found that the natives continually intimidated the men and whilst absent from the hut had occasionally stolen their rations and it was eventually determined to give up the heifer-tailing scheme and the station was abandoned. Dr. Edward Barker who had come into that neighbourhood on my recommendation immediately occupied it. A few months' residence there and a partnership which he had in the meantime formed with Mr. Riley induced him to sell it back to me for the value of the improvements - £50 and in the summer of 1842 I again took possession of it. My cattle had in the meantime discovered other country for themselves on the head of Bryant's Creek but the arrival of Mr. Cadden previously an overseer of Mr. John Hunter Patterson's with sheep and cattle soon dislodged them. [291]  Mr. Archdale next came in between me and the Wannon with sheep and cattle of Mr. Hyde of the Green Hills near Bacchus Marsh and eventually under the orders of Captain Fyans the Crown Commissioner I was hemmed in within very moderate bounds.  The jealousy with which we heard of the arrival of any one in our neighbourhood notwithstanding the vast tracts of land that we each laid claim to was one of the remarkable features of our early settlement. I recollect my stockkeeper coming in one evening with a story of a dray-track across the Congbool Plains as it was called about eight miles to the southward and some coffee spilt along it and soon after finding we had a neighbour in a Mr. Mather a carpenter from Melbourne with a few sheep who was soon after killed by the falling of a tree near his hut. He was known in consequence as the "coffee merchant" till his death. There was no one at this time above me on the Glenelg; and the stringy-bark ranges came in upon the river so determinedly for many miles that we imagined for a long time there was no available country in that direction; but Mr. Cadden soon after discovered a small creek running into the river which would serve his purpose as a washing place for his sheep in the event of the water in Bryant's Creek failing which was considered more than probable. He soon however deserted the out-station he formed there which was then taken possession of by Messrs. Farquhart and Glendinning where they formed their head-station. It is now held by Mr. Mackintosh. Above him again Mr. D. C. Simson occupied both sides of the river immediately under the Victoria range and adjoining what is now Mr. Rose's station in the Grampians. This was not till 1843 in which year also Mr. Charles Sherratt who had come from a station of Messrs. Heape and Grice's at Mount Alexander arrived on the opposite side of the river to me and occupied the frontage to it for many miles. He politely came to my hut and asked me what I claimed and took what I did not want. Below me Mr. Desailly was in possession of the station now held by Mr. Armytage having occupied it with sheep from Van Diemen's Land for Sir John Owen. [292] About this time however the station got into Chancery and in 1842 was managed by Mr. George Farbairn who now has the adjoining stations of Mather and Affleck the latter having been admitted by me on to a part of my run during the winter of this year (as they were old servants of my friends the Hunters) on the express condition that they should return the station to me when the weather would allow them to look for another. They however sold it in spite of me to my neighbours for £50.  Below Desailly Ricketts (who had been removed from the Buntingdale Mission Station on the Barwon on its occupation by the natives) had in 1841 taken up the stations now held by Mr. Blair as well as those occupied on the opposite side of the Glenelg by Mr. Thomas Hamilton of Koot Narin and Mr. Donaldson of Longlands now Messrs. Whittaker's. Mr. Norris whose compulsory abandonment of the Wannon I have mentioned came next on the river taking up both sides with sheep belonging to Mr. Thomas Winter of Van Diemen's Land. This station comprising the Pigeon Ponds and Chetwynd country was subsequently sold to Messrs. Kerr and Swanston and is now divided into two runs occupied by Messrs Willis and Swanston and Messrs. Stawell and Ellis. Mr. Gibson who had first occupied Mr. Riley's station on the Wannon came next on the river. Very little of the country which had not frontage to the main rivers was considered available at this time. It was not till 1844 that Mr. John Airey sent a party consisting of a Mr. Mann and his overseer with about 3000 sheep to look for country in my neighbourhood.  I had an indistinct notion from various cattle hunts in that direction that there must be plenty of good country to the northwest of me across the river and advised them accordingly and they returned to my station in a week having discovered the Mount Talbot country which if they had occupied all they could at the time would have been one of the finest runs in the whole colony. [293] The want of water was for a long time considered its only deficiency though it is now covered with many immense lakes several of which are from 12 to 14 feet deep. In the summer of this year several others passed to the westward and the "new country" as it was called was occupied by Wallace Hops Bates Ballantyne McLeod &c.  The collisions with the blacks which I had heard of on almost every station after my arrival in the Western District if they took place at all were kept very quiet.  There were certain hangers-on at stations (Tulloh at the Grange for instance) who boasted of such encounters; but it was generally believed that those who talked most knew least of such scenes. Their aggressions however whether avenged or not were not infrequent. I had a horse which till his death would never go near a tree my stock-keeper having been attacked by the blacks from behind one. On another occasion the blacks were seen driving my cattle through a swamp and holding on by their tails and spearing them as they went. [...]  I recollect a cow being brought into the stockyard stuck all over with spears like a porcupine. We extracted them and she lived and fattened and was eventually sold fat in Melbourne. On my first settlement at Englefield in tracking cattle I came upon a place where the blacks had within a few days camped some stolen sheep in bough-yards and where the torn fleeces and broken legs and joints since gnawed by wild dogs told a tale of wasteful destruction. It was scarcely to be wondered at that the settlers took the law into their own hands on such occasions. Whether it was fear or a better acquaintance with us which worked upon them it is difficult to say; but about 1843-4 we heard no more of sheep-stealing in the neighbourhood and the blacks who had always fought very shy of my station - where "Cranky Jem" my hut-keeper had the reputation of being a good rifle shot which was clearly proved by the holes in all the trees round where bullets had been cut out - commenced to come about and offer to strip bark and make themselves useful. [294] They are not generally very much wanted on a cattle station and I seldom encouraged their advances. Later in 1845 I had a black boy named "Bill" from the Mount Rouse tribe who remained with me for about eighteen months when the summer amusements of his relatives and companions proved an irresistible temptation for him and he bolted. I could however place implicit confidence in him and found him most obedient and docile and a great deal more cleanly in his person than most of the white men with whom he lived. On one occasion I had taken him to Geelong to bring back some cattle. My stock-keeper was drowned at Fyans' Ford and the cattle remained in the sole charge of Bill for a couple of days until assistance was sent to him. He watched them night and day and did not lose one. I have heard that he has since returned to the present proprietors of my station and is still a useful member of society.  In the summer of 1842 I returned with a stock-keeper to the Devil's River to collect the leavings of my herd. At Lake Repose near Mount Sturgeon I came upon Major Mitchell's tracks and followed the marks left by his heavy boat-carriage across the Hopkins Plains to the Fiery Creek where I found my friends Messrs. Stevens and Thomson shearing their sheep under a tarpaulin and passing through the runs of the Campbells and Donald & Hamilton slept in a shepherd's watch-box on Mr. Irvine's run at the Amphitheatre. This was my first visit to the district for which I am now Commissioner. The Wimmera at this time was not occupied below Clarke's. Mr. Lynott had taken up what was afterwards "Decameron" for Dr. Imlay. Irvine had crept in above him on the river and between him and Messrs. Donald & Hamilton disputing right and left. In 1842 Decameron was sold to Mr. James Allan Cameron late of the 13th Light Dragoons for £1500 who lately sold it to Mr. Charles Williamson for £30000. Below Clarke's which was managed by Messrs. Pettett and Francis (the latter was killed by one of his own men) with sheep from Dowling Forest originally brought from Van Diemen's Land there was no head station though Blow who originally occupied the Allanvale country for Mr. Sinclair of Van Diemen's Land laid claim to what was subsequently sold to Dr. Blundell and Mrs. Greene. [295] The latter run was bought for £500 and sold lately to Mr. McMillan for £17000.  Briggs (from whom Briggs' Bluff at the Grampians derives its name) came next on the river having out-stations near where the Four Posts Inn or Glenorchy now is. The lower part of the river was next taken up by Darlot in 1843 and after him what he had passed through as valueless was occupied by Messrs. Taylor and McPherson who have since divided two of the finest runs in the district. Back from the river on the McKenzie Creek Messrs. Brodie and Cruikshank took up about this time the Wonwondah Station now Messrs. Splatt and Pynsent's. Below Mr. Darlot Major Firebrace took up the Vectis Station on the river disputing part of it with the Messrs. Wilson who ultimately squeezed in between him and Mr. Darlot about three miles below the present township of Horsham; and Messrs. Bailie and Hamilton took possession of Major Firebrace's leavings again lower down the river. Ellerman came in about twenty miles below Firebrace holding his present run for Darlot and Steiglitz first took up the beautiful country at Lake Hindmarsh which is now divided between the Beichers and Atkinsons &c.  The northern part of the Wimmera district including the mallee runs were not thought of till later. Grant who took up the Mount Arapiles country was the first who found out their value in 1844 and disposed of his interest in the present Mount Elgin station to Major Firebrace. The Murray Avoca Avon and Richardson runs were all of later discovery.  In 1845 I exchanged the Englefield run for one near Mount Rouse to which we gave the name of "The Green Hills." The country about me had been all along settled excepting a small patch to the south-west of me into which a Mr. Gibb managed to squeeze himself. [296] But the days of the early settlement of the colony may be said to have been over before this period.  Devil's RIVER.  This country lying to the north of the tipper Goulburn River district and extending to the head of the Broken River was first occupied in September 1839 by Messrs. Watson and Hunter who in February 1840 formed their head station upon the Devil's River at a place called by the natives "Wappang." The original discoverers of this country were Mr. John Hunter of the above firm and Mr. Campbell of Otter who entered it from the Big Hill near which at the head of the Seven Creeks (Templeton's station) Mr. Hunter had a station called "Balowra." They could see from the top of the Big Hill range the open country of Mount Battery backed by Mount Buller and the line of Australian Alps.  They eventually found the Devil's River so called from hearing a black's "corrobboree" upon its banks the night that they first camped upon it but their first station was at Mount Battery. The whole of the country occupied now by Messrs. Goodman and Locke and Malcolm and the head station at "Wappang" which is now in the occupation of a working overseer named John Bon who landed from an emigrant ship in 1841 without a rap were comprised within Messrs. Watson and Hunter's original station besides their cattle station on the Broken River which extended to and took in Mr. Moore's present station of "Barjang" afterwards the Arundells' homestead.  In 1841 I had a license for a small station upon the south side of the Devil's River below Mr. Waugh's station (the author of "Three Years' Experience in Australia" a pamphlet which gulled half England and Scotland in 1839 and 1840) called Mimamiluke but I gave it up in the month of November of that year to Mr. Alick Hunter who afterwards sold it to a Mr. Serjeantson. [297]  My first visit to this country was in January 1840 when the whole of this country was in Messrs. Watson and Hunter's hands.  ENGLEFIELD Glenelg RIVER.  This station was formed by me and Mr. James Riley in November 1841 as a heifer-station. There was at the time no settler higher up the Glenelg and we laid claim to the country which now is divided between Mr. Lewis (late Cadden) Stirling and Fairbairn - formerly Mather (a carpenter from Melbourne who was killed in 1843 by a falling tree) and Mackintosh. It had been previously temporarily occupied by a Mr. Norton but the blacks had killed so many of his sheep he was glad to desert it.  In 1842 I gave up my claim to "Englefield" and it was occupied by Dr. Barker who sold it back to me for £50 towards the end of that year. In 1843 Mr. Cadden came with sheep and Mr. Commissioner Fyans allowed him to take a large portion of my country from me which I disputed till 1844 when we settled the affair amicably. In the same year I allowed Messrs. Affleck who had been old servants of Messrs. Watson and Hunter's to occupy the lower part of Mather's Creek and in 1846 they tried to claim my whole run but eventually sold the run I had lent them to Messrs. Stirling and Fairbairn for £50 having first tried to do me all the injury they could.  The natives were very troublesome till 1844. My cattle were frequently found with spears in them and once the blacks were chased by my stock-keeper when they were hunting the cattle through a swamp. I never however heard of any collision with the natives on that station.  In February 1846 I exchanged this run with Mr. Robert Clerk for one called The Green Hills near Mount Rouse. It is now occupied by Mrs. Greene of Woodlands. [298]  The GREEN HILLS.  The original station of "Mumumberick" of which the Green Hills formed a part was taken up in 1840 by Mr. Matthew Gibb for Captain Swanston. It was afterwards about 1843 sold to Mr. Robert Clerk with whom I made an exchange for Englefield on the Glenelg River in 1846. Mr. John Coy who occupied Mount Rouse and Mr. Henry Best who occupied Burchett's run and Messrs. Kemp who occupied what was afterwards Cheyne's Station on Muston's Creek were the original neighbours to this run.  In November 1839 I arrived in Melbourne by sea from Sydney on my way to South Australia and made a tour through a considerable portion of the Province and wrote to my brother who was then collecting a large stock in Maneroo recommending the Portland Bay District for which place the stock accordingly started under the charge of Mr. J. M. Darlot. I may mention that it consisted of 13000 sheep 4000 head of cattle and 100 horses. When they arrived at Mount Alexander my brother (who had come by sea to Melbourne) met them and after exploring to the northward decided on taking up the country on the Loddon instead of proceeding to Portland Bay - heavy losses from catarrh and scab and the ewes having commenced to lamb being the cause of his doing so. In about June 1840 he took up the station now known as Cairn Curran and in the occupation of Mrs. Bryant and during the year the stations now known as Charlotte Plains Janevale Langi-Coorie and Glenmona comprising all the country from the range to the west of the Porcupine Mount to the Pyrenees. I returned to Sydney in January 1840 and did not again visit Port Philip till June 1841 when I arrived overland and shortly afterwards purchased the whole of my brother's stock and stations. [303] On my arrival on the Loddon I found my neighbours were Messrs. Campbell and McKnight on the stations now Mr. Wm. Campbell's and on which the Forest Creek and Fryer's Creek diggings are; Mr. Lachlan Mackinnon on the station now belonging to Mr. W. M. Hunter; Mr. Colin Mackinnon on the station now Messrs. Joyces'; Mr. Donald Mackinnon on the station now Mr. Bucknall's; Mr. McCallum on his present station; Mr. Jas. Hodgkinson on his present station; Mr. Catto on his present station; and Messrs. Heape and Grice and Mr. Chas. Sherratt on the stations now occupied by Messrs. Gibson and Fenton - all the rest of the country to the northward being unoccupied.  I almost immediately after my purchase sold the station now known as Cairn Curran to Messrs. Cole and Langdon and shortly afterwards the station of Glenmona to Messrs. McNeill and Hall. In about May 1842 I took up the station now occupied by Mr. Morton below Mr. Catto and sold it shortly afterwards to a Mr. Sellars on which then the lowest permanent water in the Loddon existed. In about twelve months afterwards Messrs. Bear Booth and Argyle Brain and Williams and Thorpe took up extensive stations on the Loddon and Serpentine Creek and the remainder of the Loddon down to its junction with the Murray was taken up in 1845 by Messrs. McCallum Curlewis Cowper and others.' From the time of my arrival on the Loddon the aboriginal natives were concentrated under the charge of Mr. Parker at Jim Crow Hill (Mount Franklin) and with the exception of murdering a Mr. Allan who had a small cattle station (which I afterwards purchased) between Mr. Catto and me committed no depredations of any consequence and were very useful to the settlers in cutting bark and at sheep-washing.  In the latter end of 1842 Messrs. Gibson sold a small station they had taken up below Glenmona on the Fourteen Mile or Bet Bet Creek to Messrs. Foster and Stawell who shortly afterwards occupied a large scope of country on the east side of the Pyrenees; and Mr. Colin Mackinnon having sold his station on the Loddon took up a station to the northward of them. [304] In April 1843 I started with some stock from this station with the intention of taking up some new country either on the Avoca or Wimmera. I passed the north end of the Pyrenees crossing the Avoca Avon and Richardson all of which were completely dry for from 15 to 20 miles to the north of my course; so much so that only for a timely shower I would have had to return. I made the Wimmera abreast of Mount Zero (the north point of the Grampians) and not liking the then parched and dusty Wimmera Plains I crossed over to the head of the Glenelg and in June took up the station now known as Glenisla my nearest neighbour being Mr. Fairbairn about thirty miles down the river. Mr. Chas. Sherratt who accompanied me immediately returned and in the course of a month or two brought his stock from Mount Alexander and took up the country between me and Mr. Fairbairn. Immediately afterwards Mr. P. D. Rose took up the country between me and the Grampians. At this time the whole of the country on the Avoca Avon and Richardson was vacant as also was the whole of the Wimmera below the Ledcourt Station then owned by Mr. Benjamin Boyd now by Mr. Carfrae;" but in a few months Messrs. Taylor and McPherson Darlot and McLachlan Splatt and Pynsent Wilsons and Major Firebrace occupied the Wimmera down to Mount Arapiles. In 1844 I left Glenisla in charge of my overseer and returned to the Loddon; consequently from personal knowledge I can't enumerate any further particulars as to the occupying of the country.  During my residence at the Glenelg the aboriginal natives were very troublesome constantly taking sheep in large lots by force from the shepherds or stealing them from the fold at night. I had to follow them three different times driving my sheep away but each time overtook them after several days' harassing tracking and took from them all the sheep they had not eaten or destroyed; but not without running considerable risk in doing so and having received several wounds from their spears and boomerangs. [305] The last time in particular they broke the legs of about sixty of my sheep leaving the poor animals to lie in a heap in a small yard in of course the greatest agony; and whilst I was examining them my horse and I were both severely wounded by a discharge of spears from a body of the natives in ambush.  The whole of the country about the Pyrenees that I had passed thus on my way to the Glenelg was in 1844 taken up by Messrs. Ellis Elliot and Shore Mr. James Campbell Mr. Coutts and others; and although it has been several times very nearly dry it has never been completely so as in 1843.  In 1846 having purchased a station near Albury I took up a large amount of country on the Billabong Creek about thirty miles north-west of Albury; but finding it impossible to dam the creek sufficiently full to ensure a permanent supply of water I gave it up to Mr. Charles Huon who I believe now holds it.  In October 1844 I came up to the Murray to look for unoccupied country suitable for pastoral purposes and went out exploring on the other side of the river and saw much available country. [348] The lowest stations then were Messrs. Collyer's on this side and Mr. Clark's on the other side of the river. Mr. E. B. Green had taken up a run below Mr. Clark's which he had to vacate for about twelve months on account of the hostility of the blacks.  In February 1845 I brought my stock (sheep and cattle) up to the Murray and stationed them temporarily on the Yalloak Creek about thirteen miles below the Messrs. Collyer's home-station and went out exploring on this side of the river accompanied by Mr. McDougall (acting for Mr. J. C. Curlewis) and Jack a native of Twofold Bay and after being out fourteen days returned to my camp at the Yalloak Creek. Mr. McDougall and I proceeded to Melbourne to obtain depasturing licenses and before my return poor Jack had been enticed away by other aborigines who murdered him the day after. I was much surprised that he joined them as I had frequently heard him express his belief that if they got an opportunity they would kill him and that he put no faith in anything they might say to the contrary. I was much grieved at his loss for he was a merry agreeable fellow a first-rate bullock-driver and an expert horseman. He was about twenty years of age and had lived seven years with the whites. I came here early in June. Mr. Curlewis had passed to Lake Bogs; Mr. James Cowper had located himself on the other side of the Loddon with sheep about eighteen miles from this; and Mr. James Rowan arrived at Gunbower Station shortly afterwards.  I cultivated a friendly feeling with the natives and I found them inoffensive and obedient. Upon one occasion however seven strange blacks came to the hut; there was no one at home but myself and after some conversation with them I went to the river for water. Previous to stooping down I happened to turn round and saw one of the natives (Warrigal Jemmy afterwards transported for life) following me a few yards behind with my own axe uplifted and clasped in both hands. I fixed my eye upon his walked deliberately up to him and gently took hold of the axe which he quietly relinquished. [349] I walked back to the hut conversing with him as if he had done nothing to excite my suspicion and I concealed the circumstance from my own men and the natives on the station for about two years. When I mentioned it to the natives of this place they said they had no doubt but that Warrigal Jemmy intended to kill me but that he acted from impulse and there was nothing premeditated. At another time when near the Reedy Lake about 30 natives naked and armed with spears surrounded me and I was well pleased to recognise three of the blacks from my own station among them whom I advised immediately to go home - which they did. The party when I saw them were going in the direction where two days afterwards about six miles distant two of Mr. Cowper's shepherds were murdered by aborigines who about that time showed much hostility towards Mr. Cowper and shortly afterwards towards Mr. Curlews's. The latter sustained loss from their attacks upon his cattle of about £6000. The cause was I believe the following. Some white men on one side of the Murrabit called out to some blacks on the other side to come to them; the latter inquired who they were and were told that they were Mr. Curlewis's men shooting ducks. The unsuspecting blacks were crossing in a canoe when one or two of them were shot by the whites who were Mr. Cowper's men.  In April 1846 I went about 140 miles down on this side of the Murray accompanied by two whites and a Gunbower black-fellow. When about ten miles below the country since occupied by Mr. Beveridge we saw a number of natives at a distance who seemed very frightened of us. At length they approached nearer (carrying green boughs in their hands which they kept waving towards us) and came to the opposite bank of a creek when we carried on a conversation through my blackfellow and two of them agreed to cross to us if we sent away our guns which was done. We were short of provisions at the time and they promised to meet us next day with fish. We then proceeded lower down the river resolving to return next day. [350] After parting with the natives my blackfellow informed me that when we went for the fish the natives would kill us; that they told him so and asked him to join them. I doubted his statement. After consideration and after questioning him closely at different times I discovered that he was trying to deceive me which he confessed but said that we ought to shoot them after they brought us the fish. We met the two natives next day according to appointment who gave us the promised fish. One of these men afterwards assisted to murder Mr. Beveridge. Some months after I came up here Mr. A. McCallum occupied Mount Hope and Tragowell and Mr. Green re-occupied the stations on the opposite side of the Murray. The Gunbower blacks are 35 in number; the Mially Water blacks (or my blacks) are 32 in number and are not decreasing.  The squatting system in the Port Phillip district had commenced just prior to this period. The commencement of the colony in this new locality was in fact the commencement of squatting which vocation was then and for fifteen years afterwards until the discovery of the goldfields the chief interest of the country. On the Sydney side (to use the distinctive mode of speaking that was in use prior so the separation of Victoria) this system had been commenced in rapine and disorder vulgarity and poverty from which it had been gradually and laboriously purified. At Port Phillip on the other hand the squatting class had from the first been respectable and attained in this particular both as to the means and the social status of its members a position equal or even superior to that of any other colonial vocation.  The mode of life was eminently attractive to many of the young and even to the educated members of home society who flocked out in considerable numbers to the rising settlement. The attractions were doubtless enhanced by the pleasant scenery of the country a fine and bracing climate a free and easy hospitality that became everywhere in the interior a sort of public right and the prosperity that generally resulted from pastoral enterprise under an average prudence of management. [194] Many youths of finished education the junior members of good families were met with at the various sheep stations whose homesteads thus classically garnished formed so many luminous points in the wilderness of the bush. These parties had either taken up 'stations' for their own account on the vacant Crown Lands or they were residing with friends and fellow-colonists in order to acquire some preliminary local experience. Separated as they thus found themselves from society and family ties the life was not over favourable to a continuance of early discipline and study. The smock-frock the black pipe and a general indifference to the personel. often concealed the cultivated English gentleman. But the classic reminiscences had not entirely disappeared and they still mingled their crystal stream to diversify the monotony of Australian pastoral life. The squatter negligently reclining beneath the shade of a wide-spreading gum tree recited old Horace as he gazed upwards through the scanty foliage upon a bright Australian sky; or he prescribed to himself a daily study from the fragments of a dilapidated Virgil that were successively sacrificed to the lighting of tobacco pipes or to other domestic necessities.  The independent bearing of the colonial labouring population in short of the whole of the employed classes is often commented upon. A labourer in Australia is indeed a very different personage from one in the mother country and he is not long of knowing the fact. There never was and never can be any fixed scale of relative consideration for one class as compared with another in society when this depends so much on the proportion of the numbers that offer as compared with the vocations that await them. The atmosphere we breathe is not more necessary to society than the labourer; but in order to appreciate fully either the one or the other of these necessaries society should be made to feel some stint in the supply. This in the dealings of a bounteous nature is never the case with the first and but rarely in old countries is it the case to any trying extent with the second. An English gentleman therefore might be disposed to regard the license and bearing of the mechanic and labouring classes of colonies as somewhat subversive of social landmarks and a feature altogether disagreeable in the colonial landscape.  This feeling gradually gives way with the effect of habit and of a less prejudiced view and the independent position of such classes then assumes a more advantageous light. [300] The picture is not free from exceptionable aspects. But generally speaking the consideration awarded to all classes must be regarded in the light of an extension of the sphere of society that involves with it many good and improving features. After some experience of colonial life one certainly feels on returning to the mother country that in this respect the range of society is narrowed that the social edifice is constructed more selfishly that it is certainly more defective as regards social destinies; and that we are surrounded by features and circumstances ever painfully reminding us that the lesser half of our fellow-men lives in a superabundant enjoyment at the expense of brains and sinews the nightly and daily toil the scant rewards and plenteous sufferings of by far the larger portion of humanity.  The COLONIAL SECRETARY said that on the occasion of moving the first reading of this Bill he had gone somewhat fully into the subject in giving a running commentary on the various propositions which the Bill contained; and he had taken that course unusual at so early a stage in the hope of directing public attention to the question during the recess. He regretted however that except some discussion in the press the public out of doors had not given any expression of opinion on the subject there has been only one public meeting held in Melbourne on the subject and that was directed only against the proposed endowment of public worship; but that could not be taken as an expression of opinion on the whole subject of the constitution or on the merits of the Bill. On the gold-fields there had been certainly two meetings held but they did not discuss the merits or demerits of the Bill; but rather the right of the Legislative Council to deal with the question of the constitution. On this point however he need not dwell; but he did regret there had been no expression of public opinion out of doors on the question. However as there had not been any such a demonstration of the popular voice he was entitled to assume that there were no very strong objections entertained out of doors to the main provisions and principles of the Bill. He must admit that upon the gold-fields the same apathy respecting political questions which existed elsewhere was by no means prevalent; and that the diggers felt aggrieved that they were not enfranchised and were not represented in that House. [309] He did not blame the diggers for feeling thus aggrieved; but he wished it to go forth that it was not in the power of that House to enfranchise the diggers without referring to the Imperial Parliament and the Crown; and considering the conflicting characters of the various constitutions to be sent home from the different Australian colonies and the delay that might in consequence arise before the present Bill should be brought into operation the Government had it at present in contemplation whether it might not be desirable to pass a short measure concurrently with the present Bill granting the right of franchise to the diggers which measure could obtain the royal assent more speedily and without the delays which might occur to the Constitution Bill. In the constitutional scheme now submitted to the House it would be found there was ample provision made for the development of the principles of political freedom according to the elements - regal aristocratic and democratic of the British constitution. As he had said on a former occasion it would be vain to attempt to stem the torrent of democratic or popular feeling and they should rather aim at guiding and directing it to a proper end and that was the view which the committee had proposed to itself in adopting the scheme now submitted to the House. The terms whigs tories and radicals in use in Great Britain had no application in a state of society such as existed in this colony for they had no great establishments to maintain or pull down here as in Great Britain. They had no established church no standing army no national debt and therefore those political terms were not applicable here. Their business was not to reform or uproot but to create; and he trusted that in creating local institutions for this country they should succeed in imitating all the good points of the British-constitution - a task which other nations who had attempted it had hitherto failed to do. Blackstone laid it down that the right of the political franchise originally possessed by all subjects of the realm had at a very early period been limited to those who possessed some stake in the country such as a £40 freehold because those who had no pecuniary interest in the welfare of the country were found to value a vote only for the price at which they could sell it; and it was on that principle that the committee had proposed a property qualification to prevent mere passing adventurers who had no connection with the country from exercising the franchise in it. [310] But in fixing a property qualification they had rated so low as virtually to extend the franchise to the very poorest and to exclude none of the deserving humbler classes from it; for which of them that was not a drunkard but was able to obtain sufficient property to enable him to vote when the qualification consisted of a 5£ freehold (annual value) a 10£ leasehold (annual value) or as a householder of 10£ annual value a holder of a salary of 100£ a-year or an occupant of the Crown lands for twelve months? Under this latter head the diggers would be enfranchised; and if they would not take out their license for twelve months so as to enable them to possess the franchise he could only say they must care very little indeed about that privilege. With regard to the qualification of members of the one House some were of opinion that there ought to be no property qualification at all - an opinion in which he did not agree. But they had fixed the qualification so low - a freehold estate of 100£ a-year - that if it should be proposed to reduce it he would prefer having no property qualification at all. In the constitution of the Upper House they aimed at obtaining the staid and grave opinions of men of experience and mature time of life of a large property stake in the country who would have a position of importance to act not so much as a check as a counterbalancing influence against either the machinations of a corrupt or bad minister or the hasty decisions of the Lower House in critical junctures: and he thought the propositions of the committee in this respect were calculated to attain that object. It was thought by some that a system of double election either by electoral colleges or by municipal bodies should have been adopted for the Upper House; and though he should himself have preferred a system of double election by means of municipal bodies he regretted to say that it was impossible owing to the non-existence of any such municipal bodies in the colony. They therefore proposed that the Upper House should be elected by a different constituency from that of the lower and possessing a higher property qualification viz a freehold of the annual value of £100 or a leasehold of the annual value of £300 or a licensed occupancy of Crown lands with 8000 sheep or 1000 cattle thereon; and they further proposed as a graceful homage to education that graduates of universities and members of the learned professions should be electors to the Upper House. [311] The qualification of members was to be a freehold of £1000 a year; and they further proposed a test which would prevent the abuse of a man obtaining a qualification for the purpose of becoming a member and then when he had obtained his seat parting with that qualification. to the Upper and Lower Houses so constituted they propose to give similar powers to those possessed by the House of Lords and Commons in Great. Britain with the exception of the judicial functions of the House of Lords which they did not mean to confer upon the Upper House. As to the Royal prerogative there was no material change made in its exercise under the proposed Bill. They proposed to make it imperative on the Lieutenant-Governor to give his assent or dissent to any Bill submitted to him within a limited time and that was merely transferring the exercise of the Royal prerogative of veto from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the resident Governor of the colony. He might add that care was taken to separate the legislative from the executive functions of the Government; for experience had shown that on the Continent of Europe some of the greatest disasters had arisen from the usurpation of the functions of the executive by the legislature. They had thus endeavoured to give effect as far as possible to the principles of responsible Government on which alone the future stability of the institutions of the country would depend. They had not made any provision for a confederation of the different Australian colonies because it was not their province to do so; but he trusted that during the ensuing discussion the opinion of the House would be elicited on that important point and that the opinion would be in favor of a plan of confederation. Having thus given the House an outline of the main provisions of the Bill he had only to move that it now be read a second time. [312]  Mr. GRIFFITH said all must admit the difficulty to be met in forming an Upper House in a new colony. He gave the hon. Colonial Secretary full credit in being desirous to follow. as nearly as may be the analogies of the British constitution but would have been much better pleased if he had proposed to have the Upper House nominated by the Crown. It was most desirable in a country like this to encourage a high degree of civilisation and he thought that would be best attained by adhering to the nominee system which was the only one by which the different branches of the legislature could be kept in harmony. An elective Council might obstruct the Lower House for years but a nominee one could always be popularised by the addition of new members as the House of Lords has often been. He then quoted from Bulwer's 'Caxtons' where it is recommended that the younger nobility should be encouraged to settle in the colony and ultimately scions of royalty itself. The only means of obtaining a high standard of civilisation would be by the presence of an aristocracy; and though he was opposed to an aristocracy of mere wealth he yet hoped to see the day when the state of things indicated in the extract he had just read would be in full operation and then all would be well.  SCENES IN THE POLICE OFFICE  "Satire's my Weapon" - JUVENAL  The Cracked Crown  Chancey Pedro Scudder Esq. landlord of the Three Crowns on the top of Church Hill and his lovely and amiable consort were charged by a stalwart son of Erin named Pat Hely the former with "taking him in hoults " and the latter with cracking his crown by hammering him on the head with a quart measure. Mister Hely being a gintilman who is rather fond of a drop of the crature went as usual on Friday last to do pinance at the Triple Crown by drinking a few tumblers of Irish whiskey - oh! but when the whiskey's in the wit's out says the old proverb and Paddy Hely soon arrived at fighting point. He looked around for an object upon which he could display his fightable propensities when a Mr. Cockburn made his entrance and was at once floored by the pugnacious Pat. Mr. Scudder said that his house was not the Fives Court and laid hold of Pat to restrain him but Pat pushed and pulled in so determined a manner as to alarm Mrs. Scudder who tried which was the hardest Paddy's head or a quart pot. The head got the worst of the trial as was evinced by the enormous masses of plaster with which it was studded. Another Pat whose surname is Connor was called to prove that Mister Hely had been almost murthered entirely quite and that he was a paceable illigant harmless gintilman. Mr. Nichols appeared for Mr. and Mrs. Scudder and called two witnesses to disprove the assault and also to show that Pat Hely behaved more like a bull in a China shop than like an illigant gintilman. They failed to disprove the battery with the quart pot as although inflicted by the delicate hands of Mrs. Scudder between the hollowness and emptiness of the pot and Paddy's head the sound might be heard at a considerable distance. The magistrates dismissed the case with regard to Mr. Scudder but sentenced the fair landlady to pay five shillings (the value we suppose of Pat Hely's head) and half the costs viz. two bob and a bender.  Ancient Pistol  A gentlemanly-looking elderly person named William Christie was charged by a Bardolpheian-shaped mass of humanity named Patrick M'Grath with threatening to shoot him at the same time presenting a loaded pistol. Pat. M'Grath deposed: - I'm Postmaster general of Burwood and dat ould gintilmin came to me wild murther written in his countenansh. Ricolick says he dish pisthill's loaded and by de tails of me coat I'll lodge de contints in yer big thick carcase.  Mr. Dowling: - Are you afraid of him that he will do you some bodily harm?  Paddy M'Grath: - Is it afraid ye mane; shure an I'm in a mortial fear. Look at his countenansh; it's plain to percave the murderoush intinshins. [32]   Mr. Dowling: - Do you bear him any malice?  Paddy M'Grath: - O! hone me bear malice! Not at all only the swatest of loving kindness and friendliness. I'm the paceablest crathur on the terrestial globe but it's a murthering kind of gintilmin is Misther Christie!  Mr. Cory: - Have you got a savage dog?  Pat. M'Grath: - What! my dog savage! poor Faugh-a-ballagh savage! Shure and he's never bit nobody yet; the civilest crathur of the canine genius in this counthrey or any other.  The magistrates decided upon binding Mr. Christie to restrain his valiant propensities for three months himself in £20 and two sureties in £10 each or in default to be imprisoned until the Quarter Sessions. The sureties were at hand and Mr. Christie was released.  A Jolly Marine  Sergeant Tim Oates of the Royal Horse Marines on board H.M.S. Calliope stood at "eyes right" and "attention" in the witness-box while a nymph of the pave with a pair of eyes like two burnt holes in a blanket and a waist like a hogshead of porter lounged with her chubby arms over the prisoner's dock charged with making more free than welcome with the "Jolly's" pockets. Sergeant Tim Oates stood as erect in the box as if he had taken a breakfast of ramrods and ball cartridge and told the mayor and Mr. Dowling that he came ashore to have a jolly good spree and to pay his devoirs at the shrines of Venus and Bacchus when he met the female in the dock who is known by the euphonious appellation of Lizzy MacCluskey. There was another "lady" or two with her and also a couple of "coloured gentlemen" and Lizzy who was so polite that he accepted her invitation to walk home and take tea with her in her house built in the Elizabethan style in Mr. Patrick Erwin's Alley. The bohea promised was very rum tea for Lizzy suggested a quiet pint of pure pine-apple Jamaica amongst which as she remarked five "couldn't 'urt a vorm" and she further proposed that Mr. Timotheus Oates should pay for the same. This was carried nem. con. and Lizzy received two shillings from him; procured the alcohol and poured him out a "ball." He had stood many a ball before in his alligator-like life on sea and land but the ball which Lizzy served him with soon put him hors de combat. He shifted from Bacchus into the arms of Morpheus and although it was only about seven in the evening he did not awake until three or four o'clock next morning when he heard Lizzy and the "colored gemmen" singing "how do you like your taters done." He also made a discovery that he had not a shot in his locker but had been lightened of 12 sovereigns and £1 5s. in silver. Under such circumstances he besought the advice of constable Rawson who hauled Lizzy off to the watchhouse; but the "other lady" and the coloured gentlemen had sloped. While Oates was going through the process of kissing the book Miss Lizzy indulged in a strain of random oratory more expressive than polished. Sergeant Oates winced a little at this species of attack and said he could not swear who stole his money. Miss Lizzy was once more set at liberty with a warning from the Mayor that the pitcher which comes often to the fountain gets broken at last. To this she replied quietly "It warn's a pitcher please your Vusship but a glass decanter."  Assault  Mary Ward a pretty blonde with rosy cheeks ruby lips light auburn hair sparkling fawn-like eyes pearly teeth and alabaster forehead dressed in an elegant and modest attire appeared on the floor of the Court to answer the complaint of Ann Rudgeley an old mulberry faced grizlyhaired woman with a cast in her eyes. The charge was that Mary Ward did on the 31st of last month assault the aforesaid Ann Rudgeley. Mrs. Ann Rudgeley bit the book and swore - "She threw a cap at me." [33] Police Magistrate - "Was it a dead cat or a live cat?" Mrs. Rudgeley - "It was not a cat you goose you it was a cap." Police Magistrate - "Was it a China cup or common crockery?" Mrs. Rudgeley - "Surely it was not a cup at all it was a cap; don't you know what a cap is? Don't you wear a night cap?" Police Magistrate - "Oh! it was a cap and she threw it at you? Did it hurt you?" Mrs. Rudgeley - "Och hone! Och hone! I'll never come here any more. No I won't. She didn't throw a cap at me man! She pulled a cap to pieces off my head." Mr. Nichols appeared for Mary Ward and cross examined Mrs. Rudgeley who admitted having called Miss Ward "a dictating hussey." Mrs. Rudgeley also grinned rather savagely at the learned gentleman and called him "Oh you lawyer." For the prosecution two witnesses were called namely Henry Miller and Nicodemus Dunn. Neither of them were able to impugn the fair defendant's character. For the defence Mr. Nichols called a gentleman named Devanny and a young lady named Arabella Mills. The case was dismissed and Miss Mary Ward walked out of Court with flying colours arm in arm with her charming friend Miss Arabella Mills.  The Stop-Watch and The Ticker  Mr. Thomas Lynch keeps a grocery establishment at Homebush within a few doors of the Homebush Inn kept by Mr. W. Cutts. A young man named William May lived at the inn; and the scene opens in the bedroom of Mr. Lynch. It was past the midnight hour and silence and darkness reigned conjointly when Mrs. Lynch awoke and said "Tom get over a little further there's a duck; you've nearly pushed me out of bed. You've got all the clothes off me." Mrs. Lynch got up lit a candle put the bed-clothes to rights looked at the watch suspended over their heads at the bed's head saw it was twenty minutes to one o'clock blew out the light and jumped into bed again. It is necessary to inform the reader that besides the ticker from whose face Mrs. Lynch ascertained the time o'night another patent lever which had stopped hung over the heads of the happy pair. Mr. and Mrs. Lynch were soon again in the arms of each other and of Morpheus. But Mrs. Lynch dreamt a dream. She imagined in her vision that a stout man with a chubby face and hair which curled like a pound of pork sausages emerged from beneath the bed. With stealthy step he advanced towards her pillow. He stretched forth a sinewy arm extended his fingers and clutched the watches guards and all! He raised his other arm! Mrs. Lynch awoke and screamed. Her dream was true. Mr. Lynch also awoke leaped out of bed and in his night-dress pursued the midnight marauder who seemed to know every nook and corner of the house and shop as well as the proprietor. He first dodged Mr. Lynch round and round a sugar cask; then he hopped over the counter and back again having the advantage of Mr. Lynch in being dressed and shod whereas the worthy grocer was without shoes or stockings and in his calico. The robber bolted into the passage and into the kitchen hotly pursued by the grocer who had ample opportunity of seeing him by the light of a three-log fire. Here a "follow my leader" ensued among the pots and saucepans when the robber again dashed through the passage and the shop slapping-to the door after him with such force as to entangle the grocer's calico and detain him until the pursued had opened the front door and escaped with his booty. Mrs. Lynch remained in bed in excessive trepidation during the chase which she animated by calling out "Murder! robbery! fire! rape!" Mr. Lynch mentioned the circumstance of the robbery to constable Harper 5 but desired him to say nothing about it for a day or two in the hope that the thief might endeavour to sell the watches and thus afford a clue to their recovery. [34] He afterwards took out a warrant against the object of his suspicions W. May who was arrested. Lynch swore positively malgré the cross-fire of Mr. Roberts who attended for the defence that May was the thief and that he distinctly saw him by the light in the kitchen with the watches in his hand. Mr. Cutts landlord of the Homebush Inn was called. He said he had known the prisoner during the course of eleven years. He would not believe him capable of such an offence. He had often entrusted him with large sums of money and he had never betrayed the confidence reposed in him. On the night of the robbery the prisoner was so drunk that he could not see a hole through a ladder. Witness put him to bed at eleven o'clock and saw him there at seven on the following morning. Two or three men slept in the same room and did not miss the prisoner. The Mayor said he had no alternative but to commit the prisoner for trial at the next Quarter Sessions; bail being allowed in £80 and two £40's.  Assault  Mary Hamilton of Market-lane spinster charged John Jamison of the same place shoemaker with assaulting her by slapping her face and kicking her on the 26th of last month. She complained of the system of persecution to which she was subjected by the defendant who constantly taunted her with being "an old maid." Mr. Nichols appeared for the defendant. But it so happened that the maiden lady had two witnesses; they were females and took such a length of time to arrange their bonnets their curls visites &c. that they were not in court when called whereas the bold shoemaker's witnesses were men and were all ready. The defendant was fined in the mitigated penalty of 1s. and 6s. costs.  Storming An Eating-House  A brazen-faced brawny-armed female named Mary Ann Smith was brought up by Sergeant Swainston charged with attacking and storming an eating-house in George-street kept by one John Cawley. She had destroyed glass and crockery to the value of 9s. Mr. John Cawley a dapper little fellow unfolded a handkerchief and produced what appeared to be a quarter of a grindstone which Mary Ann had sent in through his windows. He described the onslaught of Mary Ann which threw Lord Exmouth's bombardment of Algiers completely into the shade. Mr. Gawley's better and bigger half next entered the witness box with a marvellous long boa entwined around her neck whilst her nose evinced a great curiosity to look into her eyes. She also described the granitic attack of Mary Ann as more sublime than beautiful. During the recital the defendant was not idle but rattled away with her only weapon her tongue at an amazing rate. She was sentenced to pay 9s. the value of the property destroyed or to be imprisoned during fourteen days. She took the latter alternative.  An Englishman's House His Castle - The Case Reversed in Sydney  Bernard Devine a decent looking citizen residing in Clarence-street was placed at the bar charged with assaulting constable MacGeoghehan 12 A. Mr. Gory appeared for the prosecution; the prisoner was undefended. 12 A deposed that between four and five o'clock on Friday afternoon he saw the prisoner in liquor and ordered him to go home. The prisoner at once obeyed and went into his house. When inside his own house the prisoner insulted 12 A's dignity by clapping his hand in the manner the military do when drawing a fresh cartridge from their cartouche-boxes. [35] 12 A got incensed and rushed into the man's house seized hold of him and tried to drag him out. The prisoner resisted and in the struggle obtained hold of a poker with which he struck or slightly burnt 12 A in the palm of his hand. 12 A struck the prisoner also and eventually succeeded in dragging him to a watchhouse where he confined him. Mr. Gory urged that the prisoner was justly in custody before he entered his own house but 12 A who is an honest fellow although a novice in the police denied Mr. Gory's allegation and distinctly declared that he did not take the prisoner into custody but ordered him to go into his house an order with which the prisoner promptly complied. 12 A also said that when he was trying to drag the prisoner out of his house the prisoner's dog attacked him and tore his coat an event which would lead to the belief that the faithful dog knew the law better than the constable or than the magistrate as they convicted the prisoner of the assault and sentenced him to pay a fine of 5s. and 2s. 6d. costs or in default to be imprisoned during two days.  A Family Quarrel  Catherine Ryan a girl about sixteen years of age was charged with assaulting an old man named James Murray who stated "that the girl was her mother's daughter and he was her mother's husband." He added that on last Tuesday evening the girl called him all sorts of names pelted him with stones excited a mob to chase him into his house in some lane off Parramatta street and she then beat him with a coarse sweeping broom. [36] The girl expressed a wish to call her mother to prove her innocence but the old man protested against such a proceeding as he said her mother sided with the girl against him and had helped to beat him. He told the Bench that he was determined to press the charge against the girl. The mother came forward (not on oath) and made a statement that it was she and not the girl who had struck the old fellow. She said that her name had been Ryan until to her grief she had been beguiled to join "that old ragamuffin" (meaning her husband) in wedlock. He did not earn anything to maintain her but lived upon the hard earnings of herself and daughter. The old man was sometime ago a bailiff since when he has figured rather disgracefully for dishonest offences. The Bench fined the girl 1s. and 4s. 6d. costs.  A Young Jehu  Charles Madden a boy about sixteen years of age surrendered to his bail charged with a breach of the Police Act under the following circumstances: - Terence M'Mahon of Newtown labourer stated that on the night of 16th instant between nine and ten o'clock he was passing along King-street. He attempted to cross the street. The young defendant was driving a cab as hard as it could rattle. Witness tried to get out of the way but the youngster drove over him. The horses hoofs struck him on the face and head and he became insensible. He was taken to the Infirmary where he remained three days and he had been since under the medical care of Dr. Rutter. In cross-examination Terence denied that he was drunk at the time; he had taken a glass or two but was able to toddle. No man was thoroughly drunk until he tried to light his pipe with a bucket of water. He denied that the boy gave him any warning whatever or that he touched the horses.  The defendant exclaimed that Terence was quite drunk and laid hold of the horses' heads when the accident occurred. He had done all in his power to prevent any such accident and hailed Terence three times to get out of the way. He then called Inspector Singleton who deposed that he went to the spot where the accident occurred and saw the old man Terence M'Mahon lying in the street senseless and bleeding. One of the horses in the cab had also fallen down. Having put Terence into the cab he drove him to the Infirmary and afterwards drove the boy to the watch-house. He had seen the boy driving about five minutes before the accident. He was going at a moderate pace; in fact they were such a couple of miserable quadrupeds that they would hardly go at all except down hill when they could not help themselves. When he took charge of the reins he had a tough job to get the horses along and they stopped several times ascending King-street to recover breath. He was inclined to blame the people who hired such a stripling to drive as he was not sufficiently powerful to manage a pair of horses. As to Terence M'Mahon he was drunk. The defendant then called as witness Samuel Jones aged about sixteen who deposed - "I was riding with Charley that night and we were going a jig jogpace. The horses were as slender as parchment. They are regular jibs up a hill. I saw the old man Terence in the road. He was tacking about this way. (Here Samuel Jones went through the drunken gyrations of Terence.) We shouted to him to get out of the way but he caught hold of the old mare's head and she was so weak that she tumbled down. I cannot say which fell uppermost the old mare or Terence." The Police Magistrate asked to see the defendant's master. A person named Mullaly came forward and explained that the boy was as capable of driving a carriage as any man in Sydney. In fact he had been brought up among horses. The defendant was then discharged from custody. [37]  Robbery  William Dunn and William Ryan were placed at the bar by constable Rowe who had apprehended them on a charge of stealing two gold rings off the fingers of Margaret Clark in a public-house in Clarence-street on the previous evening. The prisoners were defended by Mr. Parry Long. A pugnosed rosy-checked humptydumpty looking woman with a bonnet trimmed with artificial cauliflowers staggered half drunk into the witness-box and gave vent to the following original oratory: - "I'm as honest a murned woman as ever the sky grew over and sure its in Sussex-street I was. Well Mr. Clarke that's my husband the big blackguard goes out to get a ball; I in course goes to fetch him home. As soon as I goes into the public-house Dunn axes how I did and caught hold of my hand and squeezed it so he did and then passes my hand to the other gossoon. 'It's mighty free yer making' says I and with that I looked and sure enough my rings were gone." Mr. P. Long: "How many persons were in the public-house at the time?" Mrs. C.: "I didn't count them." Mr. Long: "Were you drunk at the time?" Mrs. C.: "Is it me you mane?" Mr. Long: "Are you drunk now?" Mrs. C. - "Is it me? Sure I've only had one glass before breakfast and that wasn't a full one for they gave me bad measure." Mayor: "The prisoners are remanded until Monday. The woman is too drunk to be able to give evidence; take her over to the watch-house for contempt of Court." Mrs. C. (dragged out by the police): "Is it me you mane?"  Illegally On Premises  About four a.m. yesterday morning a Mrs. Cherry whose where-abouts did not transpire discovered a drunken fellow called Patrick Long on her premises. She screeched out the usual cries of "thieves fire murder police" &c. when Constable Samuel Long B 9 run to the spot and quickly collared Paddy Long who was almost too drunk to go along. In the due course of time Paddy Long was brought before the Bench by Samuel Long but Mrs. Cherry having stopped at home too long Paddy Long was cautioned by the Bench and ordered to go along.  Buckley And Wife  John Buckley was charged by his wife with turning her and her three children out of the house neck and crop and refusing to maintain them. She said her husband was a plasterer but he "mixed it too much;" he was constantly drunk and would not give her the price of a loaf of bread; he lived upon ale and tobacco; he could earn nine or ten shillings a day but he was too fond of drink to stick to his mortar and plaster; moreover he often ill-used her. He turned her out of doors on Valentine's day. Defendant: "I'll take the pledge." Wife: "What's the use of that; you've broken the pledge four times already!" Defendant: "You are welcome to come home to my house and I'll be good to you." Wife: "Your house! I never knew you had a house." Defendant: "I'll do anything to please her your worships if you will let me go; I'll get her a new house." The Bench postponed the case until the 2nd of April to enable the Buckley family to adjust their differences.  Robbing A Lodging-House  A plump good-looking female gaudily attired called Sarah Dennison alias M'Leod was placed at the bar charged with stealing £8 and a silver watch and jewellery worth £12 the property of Mrs. Brown keeper of a lodging-house coffee oyster shop &c. in Market-street. Mrs. Brown stated that the prisoner and her husband had lodged at her premises about two persons; they paid her £2 a week for their board and lodging. [38] A short time ago the prisoner and her husband quarrelled and the husband went to the diggings leaving his wife in very straitened circumstances. She expressed an intention of going into service but witness said she would find her plenty to do if she liked to stay with her and she would also keep her in pocket money. On Sunday before last the prisoner suddenly decamped and the money &c. was missed. Inspector Singleton apprehended the woman at a late hour on Saturday night. None of the missing property was found upon her. She denied the charge and cried during the examination. Mr. Roberts defended the prisoner who was committed for trial at the Quarter Sessions.  Extraordinary Charge Of Theft  A pretty little fashionably dressed young female apparently just arrived at sweet seventeen was charged with stealing three gold rings from the dwelling of Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson milliner of Goulburnstreet. Mr. Cory appeared for the defendant. Mrs. Wilkinson stated that the defendant's proper name was Mrs. Plomer; her husband had a station on the Clarence River; he was nephew to the Duke of Argyll and had gone to the mother country to receive a fortune which had just fallen to him. The defendant was taken by Mrs. Wilkinson as an apprentice to the millinery business. She had an allowance of £5 per week. When she left Mrs. Wilkinson she owed that lady a debt of£5 and gave her charge of the three gold rings and locket to detain them until she should pay the £5. On Thursday the defendant called upon Mrs. Wilkinson and made her a payment of £1. The locket was then restored to her but soon after her departure Mrs. Wilkinson missed the rings. She hastened to the house occupied by the fair defendant who hastened to the door opened it and welcomed her in but when taxed with dishonesty she threatened to "lag" Mrs. W. while a gentleman in the house acted the preux chevalier on the occasion and administered a kick which sent her out of doors. Smarting under the indignity she was rejoiced to see Inspector Higgins passing by and gave Mrs. Plomer into his custody. She at once produced the rings and delivered them to the Inspector. Mr. Gory urged that the defendant had only taken her own property which was not an indictable offence and Mrs. Wilkinson's proper remedy would have been an action of trover. The Bench concurred with Mr. Cory and discharged the fair defendant from custody.  The Weird Sisters  Catherine Kelly charged by Inspector Singleton with being constantly drunk and disorderly was sent to gaol for three months. Margaret Lynch another veteran female toper was brought up by Constable Rowe. The Mayor sentenced her to be confined for a month. "That's better than nothing" she replied. Eliza Norris another old woman was brought up by Constable Ellis A 7 who stated - "I found her in bed at one o'clock on Sunday morning. She has no place of restiveness and is often here under the Bagabone Act. She generally sleeps at the Market Wharf and she was snoozing there when I broke upon her slumbers and hauled her off to durings wile." The Mayor said he would find a better bed for a month and wrote out her mittimus to the Darlinghurst dormitory.  A Lover of Literature  An intelligent looking respectable young man named William Cooke was placed at the bar of the prisoner's dock by Constable Lucas who stated that the defendant was in the habit of sitting day after day in a secluded part of the Government Domain reading books and newspapers. The constable took it into his pate that the defendant intended to destroy himself and therefore put him in the watch-house. [39] The Police Magistrate said that he had seen the defendant in his favourite seat in the Domain for the last year and a-half and knew him to be perfectly harmless - indeed numbers of children seemed to take peculiar pleasure in playing about him and he never molested them although on one occasion he had been robbed by a little boy. Cooke was then discharged from custody.  Diabolical Outrage  On Monday night some execrable miscreant bent on mischief perpetrated an outrage of unprecedented horror in the annals of crime by causing a nasty dead diseased bullock horns and all to be deposited opposite the domicile of Mr. Stubbs the Inspector of Nuisances. The venerable Inspector was awakened from a dreamy morning nap by the disagreeable smell and supposed at first that he was prosecuting some hapless proprietor of a dead ox in the precincts of the Police Office but judge his surprise! - his inexpressible horror and disgust! - a big cockhorned brute lay inanimate before his door. Mr. Stubbs has offered a reward of £1 for the apprehension of the diabolical miscreant.  Babel  About half-past twelve o'clock yesterday such a tumultuous clatter was made in the Police Court as is not every day to be heard or witnessed. On the Bench sat Mr. Chambers taking the information of some man; near him stood P. Grant Esq. taking the oath of another. In front sat the deposition clerk calling to the Chief Inspector. Next to him stood Inspector Higgins shouting at the top of his voice for Mary Ann Robinson. Carrot the summoning constable at the same time vociferated "Larkins against Dundle." Mr. Cory Solicitor was reading aloud the 8th section of the Police Act while Mr. Parry Long was endeavouring to restrain the passionate exclamations of a female client. The heavy tread of divers policemen moving to and fro and the hum of the spectators added to the scene which was crowned by some itinerant fruiterer outside the door bawling "Here's your peaches! Two-pence a dozen!"  The Head of The Family  Robert Tindal of Pitt-street a hen-pecked old man was charged before Messrs. Dowling Atkins and Murnin with using threatening language to his daughter. Miss Mary Anne Tindal a good-looking girl of eighteen stated that on the 12th instant her papa threatened to knock her down if she followed him: she believed him to be of unsound mind.  Old Man: - The girl and her mother want to make out that I'm crankey but I'm as sound as a drum.  Dr. Rutter stated that he had conversed with and examined Tindal and had discovered no symptoms of insanity.  Mrs. Tindal then displayed her prominent proboscis and vari-coloured headgear in the witness-box. She said if old Bob was not actually crankey he had at least "lost a shingle." Still she had no objection to give him another trial and take him home with her on condition that he consented to quit the house then occupied by the family and go to another house which (said Mrs. Tindal) "I have in my eye." Robert was then discharged and lugged off by his affectionate wife and daughter.  A Comical Case of Desertion  Stephen Timmins appeared to answer the complaint of Ann his wife for deserting her and their two infant children about a fortnight since. It appeared from the evidence that one night the defendant came home drunk and having fallen down on the floor he sunk into a profound slumber. Ann went and got a horse and dray clapped all the furniture bedding &c. on the dray and took the road to her sister's residence at Ultimo. She actually stripped the house of every portable article and taking advantage of her husband's drunken lethargy she pulled off his coat and shirt and took them with the rest of the property. [40] When the unfortunate fellow came to himself he found that he had been deprived of wife children and all his goods and chattels at one fell swoop "There" concluded Timmins "your Worships can call that desertion if you like; but in my opinion it seems that she deserted me." The Bench adjourned the case for seven days to enable the parties to effect a reconciliation.  Assault  Mary Ann Murphy as neat a little specimen of the feminine gender as ever scratched a face or flung a quart bottle danced the drum polka on the floor of the Court to show why and wherefore she gave Mrs. Mary Wilson a black eye by throwing a tumbler at her. Both ladies reside in that most warlike part of the city called Cumberland-street. Mr. Roberts appeared for the complainant. The defendant spoke as follows: - "I've Mr. Nickells as isn't here. She drinks; she must have tumbled down and trod on her eye. I didn't do it." The defendant was sentenced to pay a fine of £1 and 4s. 6d. costs or be imprisoned during seven days. She paid the fine.  Robbing A Sailor  Edward Lappage who described himself as a man of war's man charged a female pirate named Jane Johnson with boarding him while becalmed in Rum-and-water bay on Tuesday night and plundering him of specie to the amount of two sovereigns. Jack still seemed to stagger from the effects of the action and spun but an indifferent yarn his log book having gone overboard during the engagement. Mr. G. R. Nichols appeared as "tender" to Jane who sailed out of Court with flying colours.  Husband and Wife  Thomas Saddler a tailor was charged by Dennis Doolan 15A with threatening to knock his wife's brains out with his lapboard. The wife also said that she believed him insane; he drank "three half-pints" daily; he slept with his shears under his pillow and often threatened to run them through her. She was in fear of her life. The unhappy tailor was ordered to find sureties for his good behaviour for six months himself in £20 and two sureties in £10 each or to be imprisoned until next Quarter Sessions.  One of The Swell Mob  A showily dressed young man named John Howard was brought up by Inspector Higgins charged in the first instance with having absconded from his bail and secondly with being concerned in robbing the landlord of the Pelican Inn on the South Head Road on the 3rd of last November. Mr. Nichols appeared for the prisoner. According to the evidence it appears that in the early part of October last the prisoner was apprehended for fraud; on the 4th of that month Howard and some other men entrapped a country gentleman named Harper into the Glasgow Hotel Pitt-street and defrauded him of about £60 by inducing him to join in placing large sums of money in a hat and another person supposed to be an accomplice of Howard called to a coin. Harper was victimised to the tune of £60; he obtained a warrant against Howard who was fully committed for trial at the Central Criminal Court but allowed bail; himself in £80 and two sureties in £40 each. He kept out of the way when the Session came on and his recognisances were ordered to be estreated. [41] On Wednesday 3rd November while on bail the prisoner Howard was seen by Constable Lawless with a well-dressed man named Terrett to enter Mrs. Aylward's the Pelican Inn It so happened that Mrs. Aylward served Terrett and his companion with some drink in a back parlour; she afterwards went up stairs to get some money from her bedroom when Terrett rushed from under the bed struck her a severe blow rushed down stairs and out of the house and after a severe struggle he was over-powered and captured by two men named Osborne and Baker in the Sheriff's gardens. Terrett's companion escaped. Terrett was sent for trial at the Central Criminal Court: he was convicted and sent to Cockatoo Island for five years. On Sunday last Inspector Higgins apprehended Howard at a house in his occupation on the South Head-road. With regard to the charge of absconding from his bail he was ordered to be sent to prison on the original warrant. With regard to the charge with being concerned in the robbery of Mr. Aylward's constable Lawless swore that Howard was the man who on the day of the robbery entered the Pelican Inn with Terrett. Mr. Aylward thought he resembled the person but could not swear to him neither could Baker or Osborne. Howard was committed for trial at the Quarter Sessions.  Furious Riding - George-Street Races  On Friday afternoon Mr. Stubbs Inspector of Nuisances &c. saw a blue-frocked gent top heavy with liquor galloping at a racing pace along George-street. One man who was crossing the street had a very narrow escape of being ridden down by the fellow. Mr. Stubbs was not mounted upon his ancient Rozinante but upon an animal of good blood and mettle and the venerable but chivalrous old officer set spurs to his horse and pursued the man who stopped and dismounted at the Royal Hotel. The man gave his name as George Pattenden and appeared at the Police Court yesterday to all appearance as drunk as ever. He told the magistrates he was one of the best riders in the world and if they doubted it he would break in a horse for either of them. He had only been three weeks in the colony and thought it very hard to be pounced upon in such a manner. In fact he considered it was a gross shame to impose upon people and such a thing would cause a riot in England. The Mayor told him that he must look out for the laws here. The defendant replied: "Yes and it seems I must look out for the people too. I am too good a rider to hurt anybody; and I never hurt anybody in my life." Mr. Nichols appeared for the prosecution and appealed to the Bench to inflict the highest penalty upon the defendant. The Bench inflicted the lowest penalty viz.: 40s. and 13s. costs. The defendant was evidently thought a great deal of and well respected malgre his humble attire for bank notes were extended and proffered to him in all directions to pay the fine.  The Rival Nancys  "Call Ann Cox against Ann Callaghan" bawled the Chief Inspector in a voice which would have done credit even to bluff King Harry the Eighth. Obedient to the mandate a little squinting cock-nosed female arrayed in her best answered to the name of Ann Callaghan and made her debut on the floor of the Court. A visible movement took place at the same time among the crowd of loungers who patronise the witness's seats as a female Daniel Lambert with a platter face and pug nose forced her way with her dumpling fists through the throng to the witness box and announced herself as Ann Cox. The parties are residents in Castlereagh-street and near neighbours; but unhappily one individual of the masculine gender wormed himself into the tender affections of the two Nancys. On Saturday evening Ann Cox's feelings approaching to a climax she invaded the back yard of her neighbour Ann Callaghan armed with a broomstick. [42] The defendant flew to where a number of empty bottles were deposited and she threw some of them with such excellent aim that she nearly put her neighbour's nose and face on one broad level. One Edward Dempsey was called for Ann Cox but he proved nothing. For the defendant a female friend named Eliza Johnson was called and she so admirably supported the cause of Ann Callaghan that that amiable female won the day and having thanked the Bench especially Patrick Grant Esq. she walked out of Court and once more put up her parasol in liberty sweet liberty!  An Injured Publican  A masculine-looking woman named Catherine M'Carthy was charged with marching into a public-house at the corner of King and Clarence-streets kept by J. J. Ralph and wantonly demolished four panes of glass and two bottles of lemonade of the value of four shillings. Kate's defence was of the "veni vidi vici" order - to wit "I was drunk." She promised to make amends to Mr. Ralph for the damage done and she was released upon bail to settle the matter. George Friday a tall black-looking man in a white shirt and a red neckerchief was then charged by Mr. J. J. Ralph with assaulting him. Mr. Ralph deposed that the defendant came into his public-house and accused him of assaulting Mrs. Friday; the defendant then struck him in the face. Mr. Ralph admitted that he had assaulted the defendant's rib and turned her out of the house. There was also some unintelligible affair concerning a shawl and a bonnet. He did not know at the time he turned the woman out that she was Friday's wife and he had never enjoyed the felicity of seeing Mr. Friday before. The defendant was sentenced to pay. a fine of 20s. and 4s. 6d. costs and in default to be imprisoned for seven days which made him mutter something about its being a very black Saturday.  Assault  Ann Callaghan an apoplectic looking female of middle stature but extraordinary breadth of beam appeared before Mr. Dowling to answer the complaint of Margaret O'Brien for assaulting her on the previous Monday evening. Margaret was a rather formidable looking dame with fair hair and florid complexion bearing a strong resemblance to the military gentleman who beats the big drum of the XIth's band. Mr. Cory was retained by the dumpling Callaghan and having twirled his whiskers he opened the campaign by ordering all witnesses out of Court. [43]  Mrs. O'Brien then produced from beneath her shawl a fragment of stone in use among the masons at work in Barrack-lane. "On Monday night" quoth Mrs. O'Brien "my blessed husband went to St. Pathrick's a'cos 'tis a taytotaler he is. I sends my darter arter a pound and a-half of pork sasingers jist to have reddy 'gainst he cumed home for that taytolling work allers makes him mortal hungry; when that baste of a woman as his huffing and blowing afore the Court hits my darter who screeches and out I runs. I axked her in purlitest terms the raison of her wiolence when she ups with this sthone runs arter me and just as I gets into my own door she sends it arter me. If it had only hit me I should not have been here to tell the tale"  Mr. Cory: - Was there anybody present? Mrs. O'Brien: - Was there anybody present?  Mr. Cory: - Have you got any witness? Mrs. O'Brien: - Have I got any witness? Mr. Cory: - Now Marm I ask you again have you got any witness and what's her name?  Mrs. O'Brien: - She's a famale and her name is Lizzibith.  Mr. Cory: - Is she a little girl?  Mrs. O'Brien: - No shure but a middling aged girl.  Elizabeth M'Gregor a pretty girl about seventeen with her bonnet trimmed with an astounding quantity of pink ribbons was called on behalf of Mrs. O'Brien and stated that the podgy female opposite threw a stone which took effect on Mrs. O'Brien's leg.  Mr. Cory: - What did Mrs. O'Brien throw?  Elizabeth: - Oh! nothink; Mrs. O'Brien was very good considering: she only made one row that evening by calling Mrs. Callaghan anythink cept an honest woman.  Mr. Cory having announced that he had three ladies on his side to prove his client's innocence called Miss Mary Anne Walsh a middling aged spinster whose brown complexion was admirably relieved by the white linings of her bonnet. She also was adorned with a large quantity of pink ribbons pink appearing to be the chosen colour among the fighting females of Sydney. "I seed" quoth Mary Anne "all the row on Monday evening. Mrs. O'Brien came to Mrs. Callaghan's who told her as how she wasn't wanted and she chucked a big stone at Mrs. Callaghan houldin the blessed babbie in her arms at the time and Mrs. Callaghan never flung anythink at all but only says she 'murther! I'm kilt!'"  Mrs. O'Brien: - Hevings forgive you Mary Han for telling sich a whopper; yer an hinnercent gal Mary Han and expects to be married; Hevings forgive you!  Mary Anne: - Hevings forgive you!  Hereupon Mary Anne and Mrs. O'Brien leaned over to one another speaking both at once in that hostile manner which usually precedes a resort to fisticuffs; and the Police Magistrate unwilling to have the Police office arena the ring for the adjustment of the grievance dismissed the case and Mrs. O'Brien was by the aid of Sergeant Mat Carroll ushered out of Court.  Stealing A Watch  William Mansfield alias Connor alias M'Govern was charged with stealing a watch of the value of eight guineas the property of Mrs. Frederica Niecker a German lady. Mr. Brenan conducted the prosecution Mr. Roberts the defence. It appeared from the evidence that the prisoner was a waiter in Mr. Govers's lodging-house in Bligh-street. The prosecutrix another German lady named Biere and a gentleman named Hirsch lodged there. Mrs. Niecker kept her watch suspended against the wall in her room which was on the ground floor under the verandah. On Wednesday evening the prisoner went into the lady's room and looked at the watch inquiring if it was gold. [44]  On the following evening about dusk he noticed the ladies lighting a candle and invited them to go and sit in the general dining-room saying that it was lighted up. The ladies did so and in the course of an hour Mrs. Niecker returned to her room and missed her watch. The prisoner was sitting under the verandah and as the gate was fastened he was suspected because it was said that no stranger could have got in. There were some other suspicious circumstances against the prisoner who protested his innocence and was very ably defended by his advocate. Mr. Govers said he had been acquainted with the prisoner during the last 20 years and believed him to be an honest man. He had known him as Connor but had lately discovered that he was called Mansfield and the prisoner had shewn him a discharge in the name of M'Govern. Mr. Hirsch gave evidence against the prisoner and among other facts said that when he was going to fetch the police the prisoner desired to accompany him. He wished to find Inspector Singleton and the prisoner proposed to go in one direction while Mr. Hirsch went in another. Although Mr. Hirsch was a long time before he found Inspector Singleton and returned to Mr Govers's yet the prisoner did not come back until some time after. The prisoner was committed for trial at the Quarter Sessions. In the afternoon a man came into the court and delivered to the Police Magistrate the gold watch which had been left in his wife's care by the prisoner Mansfield. The Police Magistrate at once sent it to Mrs. Niecker.  A Comical Decision  Robert Hanslow a smart looking boy between eleven and twelve years of age was charged by F. W. Meymott Esq. barrister-at-law with absconding from his service. Mr. Meymott said that he had engaged the boy as a general servant for the period of three years with consent of his father. He sent the boy to school half of each day excepting during the holidays allowed him to get anything he liked to eat and gave him a shilling or two whenever his conduct was good. The boy made a statement that Mr. Meymott sometimes beat him. Mr. Meymott admitted that when the boy was naughty he did chastise him in the same way as a father would chastise a refractory child. The boy's father stepped into the witness box and denied in toto that the boy was hired to the complainant he had lent him to that gentleman but for no stipulated time and he was unwilling for him to remain with Mr. Meymott any longer. Mr. Chambers seemed sorely puzzled but recovering from his perplexity he interrogated Mr. Hanslow as to the manner in which he obtained his living. The gentlemen of the Press instantly nibbed their pens or sharpened up their pencils expecting that Hanslow senior had fallen under the ban of the Vagrant Act but Mr. Hanslow plunged Mr. Chambers into a fresh labyrinth by declaring that he was a retired butcher who lived upon his rents. Mr. Chambers having received a hint from one of the senior Police Officers then asked Hanslow the elder if he had not been in gaol. He replied in the affirmative. Mr. Chambers then told the boy to go back to Mr. Meymott who he said would probably prove a better father and friend than his natural one. If he did not comply with the order he would be sent to gaol. Mr. Chambers next addressed himself to Hanslow senior and threatened him that if the boy returned to the paternal domicile instead of to the house and service of Mr. Meymott he would deal with him Hanslow senior for enticing his son away.  Assault  Henry Charles Rignell was charged by Mary Dick with assaulting her on the 18th instant. Mr. Cory conducted the prosecution. Mrs. Dick stated that she let some premises to the defendant and while he was in gaol suffered his wife to remain in the premises at the rental of four shillings per week. [45] The defendant owed her £2 16s. and as she experienced some difficulty in obtaining a liquidation of her claim she paid him a visit accompanied by Israel Chapman bailiff whom she politely introduced to him. Chapman was so struck with the elegance of the furniture that he pulled out his pencil and paper and began writing it down. H. C. Rignell was so unmindful of the honour conferred upon him that he upset Chapman and tore the kiver off his Sunday hat. He next commenced hostilities against Mrs. Dick and "he hit her here and there and everywhere." He also tore her gown. The defendant denied the charge and the debt. He declared that while he was "out of town" his wife pulled the rings off her fingers and gave them to Mrs. Dick as payment for the rent. Mrs. Dick did not deny having the rings; in fact she had them on at the moment in the witness box but said they had been given her as presents by the defendant's wife. The defendant was fined 5s. and 4s. 6d. costs.  The Laws of The Medes and Persians  Ann Keast appeared against Mr. Alfred Toogood: this was the third and last time of asking. A few weeks ago Mr. Alfred Toogood returned to Sydney of which famous city he had formerly been a resident. Among the other items of property which he brought to Sydney was a female servant yclept Ann Keast. Mr. Toogood hired the spinster at £8 per annum for two years and he also paid £25 for her passage money. When Ann arrived in Sydney she soon found out that she had a wealthy aunt one Mrs. Bluck of Clarence-street and at the same time she made another important discovery to wit - that female servants in Australia are mississes and that £8 per annum would not keep a Sydney female servant in visites and parasols. Ann was consequently very eager to bid Mr. Toogood "good morning" but Toogood did not relish the idea of losing £25 by paying the passage of an utter stranger. The parties have therefore on two occasions been before the Police Magistrate. In the first instance Mr. Toogood charged Ann with absenting from service and her aunt with harbouring her but the charge or charges fell to the ground. In the second instance Ann charged Mr. Toogood with assaulting her "by trying to shove her down stairs only she clung to the bannisters." Mr. Toogood expressed his willingness to release her from her engagement if she would pledge herself to refund part of the amount of her passage money. To effect such an arrangement the Police Magistrate postponed giving any decision in the case until Monday (yesterday). The case was however called on when Mr. Chambers was upon the bench as the moment of that gentleman's advent was the moment of the Police Magistrate's exit. Mr. Roberts was engaged for Ann Keast; Messrs. Nichols and Cory for Mr. Toogood. The learned gentlemen explained to Mr. Chambers that the case had been initiated before the Police Magistrate - ergo it had been commenced. Mr. Chambers was of a contrary opinion observing that initiation did not mean beginning and dismissed the case.  Master and Servant  Cha Sin a Chinaman was charged by his master Mr. Raper of George-street butcher with neglect of work. Mr. Raper said that Cha Sin had been fighting with some other of his servants and had since taken to bed. He seemed to like that sort of remedy so well that it was next to impossible to get him from among the blankets. Cha Sin was sent to take a week's nap in Darlinghurst. John Smith was charged by Mr. Borton of the Cricketer's Hotel with being absent from service without leave since the 12th instant. He was sent to cultivate the acquaintance of Cha Sin in Darlinghurst. [46]  A Destitute Child  A little flaxen haired boy called Edward Gray was brought up by Inspector M'Cook who found him lying asleep between two and three o'clock yesterday morning in George-street. The child said his father was in London and his mother had lately died in the Benevolent Asylum. The Mayor told the officer to take the child to Mr. Dowling and he would probably obtain his admittance into the Asylum for Destitute Children. Mr. Dowling sent him to the Benevolent Asylum.  Fire and Water  Two elderly females of remarkably warlike aspects confronted each other. Mary Dent was the accuser and Margaret Waller the accused. It appeared that Margaret's hair was similar in colour and coarseness to the hair of a shaggy French dog from whose coat Mary Dent cut a lock and then held it up pointing out the resemblance between the canine hair and Margaret's. The latter got into a passion especially as it was on a Sunday evening and she opened fire at Mary's windows sending brickbats and other missiles into her house. Mary endeavoured to repel the assailant by pouring on her a copious shower of water. Margaret Waller was fined 5s. and 4s. 6d. costs.  A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE LAMENTABLE AND BLOODY AFFRAY AT BALLAARAT  by which the Queen's Forces have successfully terminated the State of Insurrection existing in that District.  Wednesday 6th December 1854  We hasten to give the people of Melbourne an accurate account of last Sunday's proceedings at Ballaarat together with the actual narratives of eye-witnesses who were present at the tragic scene at the time of the affray.  Before daylight last Sunday 3rd December the Government force mustered quietly and left the camp with the purpose of attacking the Stockade. The attacking party under the command of Captain Thomas assisted by Captain Pasley R.E. and Mr. Commissioner Amos consisted of 276 men including 100 mounted as follows: - 30 mounted men of H.M. 40th Regt. Lieuts. Hall & Gardyne.  70 mounted police Sub-Inspectors Furnell Langley & Chomley.  65 men of H.M. 12th Regt. Capt. Queade Lieut. Paul.  87 men of H.M. 40th Regt. Capt. Wise Lieuts. Bowdier & Richards.  24 foot police Sub-Inspector Carter.  At early dawn they reached the neighbourhood of the positions sought and the advanced files were fired at by a sentinel posted within the Stockade.  One of the digger captains within the Stockade has obliged us with this eye-witness account of the beginning of the affray.  "I was on guard" he said "and saw the military at the same time that the alarm was given by a digger working on a brace hard by. They were then at the point where the gully running down from the Stockade joins the head of Specimen Gully. I called out to Vern and Vern called Lalor. We got under arms immediately some 200 about."  The order of attack was now given by Captain Thomas who led the detachment of the 40th Regiment which made a quick advance upon the double breast-work - a barrier of ropes slabs and overturned carts - which formed the stronghold of the insurgents and diggers.  "The first shot was fired by our party" our eye-witness continued. "The military answered with a volley at 100 paces the bullets whistled through the tents and then there was a volley from the Stockade. The military sent out scouts on foot and the troopers surrounded the Stockade the party on foot being covered by the fire from a force posted on the high ground in the rear of the Free Trade hotel."  Captain Wise led the scouts on foot and after a couple of vollies on both sides the barrier was broken into on the side fronting to Specimen Gully where the insurgent's leader Peter Lalor held a strong party.  The foot police were first over the barricade and one climbing the flagstaff under heavy fire secured the "Southern Cross" standard which the diggers had hoisted with pride but a few days before.  "They got in" said our eye-witness "but the firing and piking and bayonetting went on."  The defenders of the Stockade would not stand and were either driven out to the waiting troopers or into the shallow holes with which the place was spotted and in which many were barbarously put to death in the first heat of the conflict either by bullet or by bayonet thrusts. [252]  The sun had now risen and about twenty minutes had passed since the first shot was fired.  "The disordered diggers" continued our eyewitness "rushed into some tents and a blacksmith's shop on one side of the Stockade The troopers fired the tents and the rest of the military now came up. Soon the tents slabs Stockade and all were on fire."  "'I'm off!' said I and wheeled round to go out of the Stockade but met some troopers and retreated and ran into a butcher's shop close by. I climbed up into the chimney and so escaped as the red-coats did not search."  The loss to the Queen's force was considerable some dead and many wounded including Captain Wise who in leading his men in the attack was severely wounded and is in great danger of dying. Lieutenant Paul was also wounded.  The loss amongst the diggers is variously estimated but there could not have been fewer than thirty killed on the spot and a great many wounded. There were 125 prisoners taken in the Stockade.  Another eye-witness has given us an account of the tragic picture presented to him as he reached the Stockade towards the conclusion of the affray.  "The first thing I saw" he said "was a number of diggers enclosed in a sort of hollow square many of them were wounded the blood dripping from them as they walked; some were walking lame pricked on by the bayonets of the soldiers bringing up the rear."  "The soldiers were much excited and the troopers madly so flourishing their swords and shouting out - 'We have waked up Joe!' and others replied 'And sent Joe to sleep again!'"  "The diggers' Standard was carried in triumph to the Military Camp waved about in the air then pitched from one to another thrown down and trampled upon."  "The Scene was awful when the soldiers came with carts to take away the bodies. I counted fifteen dead one Green a fine well-educated man and a great favourite. I recognised two others but the spectacle was so ghastly that I feel a loathing at the remembrance. They all lay in a small space with their faces upwards looking like lead; several of them were still heaving and at every rise of their breasts blood spurted out of their wounds or just bubbled out and trickled away."  "One man a stout-chested fine fellow apparently about forty years old lay with a pike beside him; he had three contusions in the head three strokes across the brow a bayonet wound in the throat under the ear and other wounds in the body - I counted fifteen wounds in that single carcase."  "O God! sir it was a sight for a Sabbath morn that I humbly implore Heaven may never be seen again."  "A little terrier sat on the breast of the man I just spoke of and kept up a continuous howl; it was removed but always returned to the same spot; and when his master's body was huddled with the other corpses into the cart the little dog jumped in after him and lying again on his master's breast began howling again."  "What a horrible sight! Old acquaintances crippled with shots the gore protruding from the bayonet wounds their clothes and flesh burning all the while. Poor Thonen the lemonade man had his mouth literally choked with bullets; my neighbour and mate Teddy More stretched on the ground both his thighs shot asked me for a drop of water."  The insurgents' leaders Black Vern and Lalor have escaped. Peter Lalor it is known has been severely wounded and in the agony of death. Most of the insurgents were Irishmen.  It is with much satisfaction to know that this terrible affray has ended in a complete rout of the insurgents who had not contemplated any active measures by the Queen's forces on that Sabbath morn but expected instead that the gallant Captain Thomas would wait until the main body of troops then on their way from Melbourne had arrived. In consequence many of the diggers were away from the Stockade and of those that remained some had dined late and no doubt drank deep.  They were thus completely surprised by the active commander of the Queen's troops who resolved to seize the favourable opportunity of delivering the most effective blow to restore law and order again.  In spite of its strong position the Stockade was much too large for successful defense a military officer in Ballaarat has informed us and it was not protected by proper bastions or outworks to aid the defenders in a general assault. Very fortunately so indeed or else the tragic affray in Ballaarat may have assumed far far bloodier consequences. Even so the high casualties amongst the insurgents as well as the troops are most lamentable and the indignation of the Victorian citizens must condemn the whole policy of the Government and declare that while disapproving of the physical resistance offered by the diggers the strong coercive measures adopted by the military and the police are against all standards of liberty to which British subjects are entitled.  In the month of November 1831 became master of the schooner Elizabeth of Launceston owned by Mr. John Griffiths' and bound on a sealing voyage to the N.-W. Islands.  Early in December we landed on the Lawrence rocks Portland Bay where we were joined by a boat's crew left there the year before they having procured nearly 400 skins. [52] Proceeding towards Kangaroo Island anchored on the 16th in Guichen Bay; landing on Baudin's rocks killed 30 seals leaving one man with a supply of water and provisions until our return. Anchored in Nepean Bay on the 20th and procured from the Salt Lagoon five tons of salt; bought 150 skins (seal) and 12000 wallaby skins from the islanders.  These islanders were principally men who had left various sealing vessels when on their homeward voyage the masters readily agreeing to an arrangement by which they secured for the next season all the skins obtained during their absence.  This island-life had a peculiar charm for the sailors being supplied from the ship with flour tea sugar tobacco and a few slops and living generally in pairs on the shore of one of the little bays. They cultivated a small garden to supply them with potatoes onions and a small patch of barley for their poultry. They thus led an easy independent life as compared with that on board ship. They obtained wives from the mainland; these attended to the wallaby snares caught fish and made up the boat's crew when on a sealing excursion to the neighbouring rocks. At Kangaroo Island there were some sixteen or eighteen of these men. On a certain day once a year they assembled from all parts of the island to meet the vessel in Nepean Bay and dispose of their skins getting a supply in return for the following year the only money required being a sovereign or two for making earrings.  There was another class of men also who probably had escaped from Van Diemen's Land; these lived generally on islands apart from the others some on Thistle Island near Port Lincoln and other islands in Spencer's Gulf and there was one man who had been unvisited for three years when I saw him on this trip. This man lay under the suspicion of having murdered his original companions. He had two wives whose woolly heads clearly showed their Van Diemen's Land origin. [53]  Although so long without supplies he had every comfort about him. A convenient stone house good garden small wheat and barley paddocks with pigs goats and poultry made him quite independent of the vessel except for tea and tobacco. He had collected 7000 wallaby skins of a kind peculiar to this island - very small fine-furred and beautifully mottled in colour. I sold these in Sydney for the China market. Returning to Launceston in February 1832 I was first employed to take Mr. Sinclair's whaling party to Twofold Bay and afterwards in the Sydney trade.  November 3rd proceeded on a second sealing trip landing on almost every rock between Bass's Straits and Doubtful Island Bay; returned to Launceston after a very successful trip in March 1833. My mate Mr. Dutton appointed the chief headsman of the first fishing in Portland Bay; employed attending on these whalers. Whales so plentiful that on my visiting the Bay in June I found all the casks full and the men putting oil into pits they had made in the clay. Out of 100 tons thus dealt with a very small quantity was saved. I took the first cargo of oil from Portland on this occasion. Port Fairy was visited about three years before by the cutter of that name commanded by Mr. Wishart.  Mr. E. Henty made his first visit to Portland with me returning to Launceston the same voyage.  November. - Fitted for my third sealing voyage which was extended to Cape Leeuwin; on this voyage we anchored in the Harbour of Middle Island; discovered close to the beach a lagoon containing fine salt in such quantities that we took on board 20 tons in three days. On this voyage also I was on the plain where Adelaide now stands; and also discovered the dangerous reef off Cape Jaffa. Returned to Launceston in March 1834. Two fisheries in Portland Bay this year. Voyage to Hokianga New Zealand.  October. - Brought Griffiths's party of whalers from Portland. Employment having to be found for these men during the summer to prevent them being employed by the opposition fishing party took a number of them on an expedition to strip bark. [54]  Left Launceston the latter end of November having on board a team of bullocks a dray and some twenty men besides the crew. Entered the Heads of Western Port the beginning of December; anchored under Phillip's Island; saw the place where a settlement had been; ruins of houses and workshops with broken crockery &c.; the land here was bad and there were no wattle trees. Stood up the harbour; surprised to find the deep-water channel marked with beacons on each side. Anchored abreast of the ruins of another settlement; landed the men and team. Here were the remains of houses and gardens - grass very abundant and the wattle trees the largest I had ever seen. Employed for a fortnight collecting bark; saw the traces of numerous cattle; shot a large white bull.  Finding the bark so abundant I loaded the schooner and proceeded to Sydney leaving the shore party behind; sold my cargo to a ship bound to London and chartered the ship Andromeda to load bark in Western Port for London. Put on board Mr. Thom (my mate) as pilot and supercargo. She arrived there in April 1835. In the meantime I proceeded to Launceston and gave an account of my trip first to my owner and Mr. Conolly; afterwards to a number of persons assembled in the billiard-room of the Cornwall Hotel among whom were Mr. Fawkner Messrs. Geo. and John Evans and I think Mr. Batman. I spoke in high terms of the land and the grass; instanced the sign of the mimosa trees as a proof of the one and the condition of the wild cattle as the result of the other.  When however the Andromeda arrived to get her clearance at the Custom-house of Launceston the fame of the place was spread far and wide by the returned bark cutters. Many of these were farming men born in Van Diemen's Land and they at once saw the advantages of this beyond that of their own country. [55]  The cargo of the Andromeda was consigned to John Gore and Co. of London through Mr. Conolly and sold for about £13 per ton.  I brought vast numbers of black swans which we had pulled down while moulting; the waters of Western Port were covered with these birds.  In December 1835 I sailed as a passenger to London and while there gave evidence to some of the South Australian Commissioners on the subject of the coast and lands of that province. I furnished sailing directions for Colonel Light then about to leave in the Rapid. I related to Colonel Torrens the fact that the Port Lincoln natives circumcised their males in a very extraordinary manner although the tribes round had no such custom.  In September I sailed from London for Launceston taking with me as passengers several of the now old South Australian settlers who on my suggestion went to Van Diemen's Land in the first instance to select their stock &c. to take with them.  In November 1837 I undertook to drive a herd of cattle from Portland to Adelaide; these cattle I had originally bought from Mr. Dutton in Sydney to be delivered in Portland. I had shipped a large number during the previous six months. The remainder about 500 head I started with from Darlot's Creek. My party consisted of Mr. Pullen who had been my chief officer (now I believe Captain Pullen R.N. of the North Star) and nine men.  I arrived at Mr. S. Winter's station on the Wannon on the 3rd and for a week was employed exploring to the westward of the Glenelg with a view of making a direct course to Adelaide. Finding however no water I determined to make the Murray by Major Mitchell's road. I had however greater difficulties to overcome than I expected. It was a season of extraordinary drought. Many waterholes were dry in the bottoms of which we found the large monster mussels lying putrid. I was obliged therefore to leave the Major's road for the purpose of procuring water; his object at the season in which he passed being to avoid it. [56]   I arrived on the Murray near Mount Hope early in January 1838 and travelling down the stream crossed the river about fifteen miles below the Darling. At this place the depth of water did not exceed eighteen inches on a sandy bottom. As a nautical man I felt great interest in this river and saw at once that it would be navigable for a great portion of the year possibly for the whole year in ordinary seasons. I observed that the cause of the shallows was the river having to cross in its course to the westward the pine sand ridges that run north and south and therefore when the river is full in these places it increases its width and brings a fresh supply of sand into its bed; no deepening therefore will avail here and it appears to me the only improvement that could be made would be to narrow the channel artificially with clay or wood the expense of which would make it impossible to be done for ages to come.  Nothing struck me so much on this river as the splendid timber that grows on its banks; I never saw anything equal to it for shipbuilding purposes.  I arrived in Adelaide March 1st without the loss of a beast and on the 3rd sailed to Launceston to ship the whalers for Encounter Bay.  I have allowed your circular of the 27th July last to remain much longer unanswered than I intended but concluding that the information you required at my hands would be in sufficient time if it reached you at any time previous to your departure I have put it off from time to time I am afraid at the expense of taxing your good opinion of me. I fear you will not consider the very short narrative herewith forwarded so full as you expected at my hands. I am however such a very indifferent hand at description that I trust you will find what I have written answer your purpose. Accompanying my narrative I beg to hand to you a copy of a statement prepared by my brother William when laying our claims for compensation before the Home Government. I do not see that it will interest you but it bears out my account of the early settlement of this part of the colony. The difficulties and trials of early settling are perhaps better known to myself and two other members of our family than to any other individual in the colony. I have not touched upon any description of the country either at Mount Gambier or Wannon and Glenelg simply because from your knowledge of these parts you are so much more able to do so than myself. I cannot however ever forget the pleasant rides that I have had the honour of accompanying you on on several occasions over a great deal of the above-named country and I trust I may live to have an opportunity of doing so again in some other part of the world as it is my intention (if spared) to visit the old country next year and I am now making my arrangements accordingly. As another magistrate will be required here and a friend of my own Mr. Learmonth of Ettrick near Portland is about to join me in carrying on my business here I hope you will not consider that I am taking too great a liberty in asking you to put him in the Commission of the Peace as having been some years a magistrate in Van Diemen's Land he is in every way qualified for such an appointment; and again in begging your kind re-consideration of Dr. Hallett's case for I really consider him very harshly used by the two individuals who sat with me at the hearing of his case both of whom had prejudged the case before it came on for hearing. [122] But for my illness my report would have been decidedly in his favour for the only point on which any evidence was given directly rebutted the charge made by Mr. Malpas that Dr. Hallett returned his own servant as Government office-keeper. There was no evidence whatever to bear out any other charge but there is evidence now to prove that Mr. Blair wished the man to bear out Mrs. Malpas's statement. But for the death of the unfortunate lady the case would have been brought forward again. I am sorry to trouble you upon such a subject at a time when I am sure you must be very much worried but I feel it my duty to state to you my opinion in this case.  Mrs. Henty unites with me in very kind remembrances to you and may I beg you will convey the same to Mrs. La Trobe whom I trust you will soon meet in perfect health. With every good wish for such a speedy consummation and your future welfare and happiness here and hereafter believe me to remain  Your sincere friend and admirer  S. G. HENTY.  1833. - The Henty family residing in Launceston Van Diemen's Land being interested in a whaling company whose operations were carried on along the coast from Portland Bay to Port Fairy Edward Henty accompanied by my father visited Portland Bay during this year and finding the country well-grassed and apparently very well adapted for grazing purposes it was determined by the family upon their return to Launceston to send over stock and other necessaries for an establishment at Portland Bay forthwith; and accordingly Edward Henty accompanied it as manager and after a most boisterous passage of four weeks during which several of the stock died he reached Portland Bay (1834) and fixed his habitation on what is now block No. 4 in the township of Portland and now occupied by me. [123]  My father at this time applied to the Home Government for permission to exchange some portion of our large grant of land at Swan River for a smaller portion here which however was refused; but what we considered a tacit permission was given for us to occupy and to claim such lands as we might improve by fencing or cultivation. Our subsequent operations bear out that we depended upon this concession; the sequel however shows that we were mistaken.  1834. - In December of this year my brother Frank joined the party at Portland bringing over more stock and servants.  1835. - Early in the following year it was necessary for F. Henty to return to Van Diemen's Land. On his return to Portland in October of this year the small sloop in which he was a passenger called on her way at Indented Head where they found Batman's party waiting an opportunity to get further up the Bay of Port Phillip. He took advantage of this opportunity and proceeded with the party up the Yarra Yarra when the party camped for the first time on the present town-site of Melbourne. After remaining there for a fortnight he proceeded on his voyage and reached Portland again in November 1835.  At this time the writer was residing at Swan River to which colony he had emigrated from England as one of the pioneers of that colony at its earliest settlement in October 1829. Learning from my brothers at Portland that they had taken up their location there and being urged by them to join them I at once determined on doing so and in order to effect this I purchased a vessel of sixty tons called the Sally Ann and embarked with my wife and servants and reached Portland in June 1836. The vessel was afterwards employed as a tender upon the party running regularly between Portland and Launceston. At this time we were entirely dependent upon ourselves both for supplies from Van Diemen's Land and for protection against the natives and the many runaway prisoners who were at large at and around the whaling establishment. [124]  1836. - It was in August of this year that a portion of Major Mitchell's party headed by himself visited our establishment when to his astonishment he found our party comfortably settled (having as he expressed himself the only glass windows to our house that he had seen since he left the boundary of New South Wales). Not being aware of any settlement at this place he supposed that we were a party of bushrangers or runaways from Van Diemen's Land and in approaching us he took the precaution to have his men ranged in order with their arms ready for action. This led us to suppose that his party was what he supposed ours to be and we were consequently as cautious before holding any intercourse with him.  From Major Mitchell we learnt that the country about 50 miles north was much more suitable for grazing purposes than where our stock was located and as our sheep had accumulated to several thousands it was considered advisable to push into the interior. To enable us to do this we cut a trackway through the forest to Mount Eckersley and there took up stations until we could get further inland.  1837. - It was not until the 3rd of August in this year that we succeeded in driving our first flock on to the Merino Downs Station - a day that will be memorable in the recollection of the family of the writer as the natal day of his first-born son Richmond. The remainder of our stock was sent up as fast as possible with which we occupied the stations known as Muntham Connell's run and Sandford. At this time we had very great difficulty in retaining the services of any men owing to the hostile disposition of the natives to which many of our men's lives were sacrificed.  1838. - In this year Mr. Samuel Winter came over from Van Diemen's Land and shortly afterwards took up a station called Tahara adjoining our Merino Downs run. [125] Shortly afterwards Mr. John Bryan came over; and when it became known in Van Diemen's Land that we had opened up a road into the interior many other gentlemen followed our example.  1840. - Among others in 1840 were Messrs. Pilleau and Jones McCulloch Purbrick Savage J. G. Robertson Coldham McPherson and many others until all the country immediately around us was taken possession of. It was in October of this year that the first land sale took place and which deprived us of some of that land upon which we had made improvements at so much expense to ourselves - some of it realizing at the rate of £1600 an acre.  The South Australian Government held out very great inducements for the selection of special surveys. This induced me to take a journey across the boundary of this colony in search of some suitable spot on the coast within the colony of South Australia; and for this purpose I prepared a party of two men and myself and took my deparutre from Merino Downs in June 1839 steering a direct course by compass for Mount Gambier which I reached on the second day. To those who have not seen Mount Gambier it may seem strange when I say that I ascended it by a very gentle slope on the north-east side and was scarcely aware of my exact position until I reached the brink of the enormous eastern lake a sight which I never can forget - quite beyond my power of description. At this time I was not certain whether this beautiful country belonged to the South Australian colony or I should at once have applied for a special survey in that locality for at this time I believe no European had ever seen the country but my own party. Under this doubt I determined to push further on and examine the coast line as far as Cape Jaffa and therefore extended my search for 28 days without success and returned along the coast to Portland. We afterwards formed cattle stations at Mount Gambier of which we were subsequently deprived by the chicanery of some unprincipled individuals in search of sheep stations. [126] This part of the country is now thickly settled. The export in wool alone from the port of Portland this season will reach to about 12000 bales or in money value nearly £300000 and traffic consequent upon this is now very great.'  Port Fairy was (like Portland but subsequently) settled first by the formation of a whaling party and afterwards stock was introduced from Van Diemen's Land by Messrs. Conolly and Griffiths but owing to the very great expense attending it both these gentlemen were ruined.  The trade to Portland from Great Britain is very considerable no less than eight large vessels having arrive direct within the last twelve months fully laden with cargo - one of them the Aberdeen clipper Frances Henty belonging to the writer - besides some emigrant ships ranging from 1350 tons down to 650 tons.  I would have replied long before this to your circular of date 27th July last but waited expecting to find my journal which was lent to Miss Drysdale and cannot be found which will account for the meagre reply I now make.  1. In September 1835 I shipped per Norval Capt. Coltish the first cattle for Port Phillip.  2. In March 1836 I landed at Melbourne with my family. There being no constituted authority I was requested to act as a general arbitrator. I did so by common consent my tent being the police office. Many felt a pride in showing an example in upholding order which was done without much trouble. The people were very quiet and attended every Sunday morning at my tent for public worship where I read the Church of England service.  3. In April 1836 I built by subscription a house for a church and school - the old weatherboard lately removed from St. James's. [131]  4. The first clergyman who visited us was the Rev. Jos. Orton Wesleyan and afterwards the Revs. Messrs. Clow Forbes Grylls and Waterfield.  5. In May 1836 Mr. Batman arrived with his family.  6. From that time we had weekly arrivals with stock from Van Diernen's Land and many stations were taken up near Melbourne.  7. In July 1836 we took the first census numbering 149.  8. In December 1836 the first herd of cattle was brought from Sydney by Mr. Jno. Gardiner and Capt. Hepburn.  GEELONG.  9. In May 1836 I landed my sheep at Point Henry and occupied the present township of Geelong as a sheep station and Indented Head as a cattle station for Capt. Swanston. Messrs. Cowie and Stead and myself had the whole Western district to ourselves for eighteen months parties being all afraid of the blacks. We were afterwards joined by Roadknight Darke Derwent Company Russell Anderson Brown Read McLeod Steiglitz Sutherland Murray Morris Lloyd Ware Learmonth Armytage Raven Pettett Francis Bates and others.  10. In 1837 I built the present house of Kardinia which I called after the aboriginal word for "sunrise." I built also a house for the Derwent Company occupied afterwards by Mr. Fisher.  11. In 1838 Mr. Strachan built the first store in Geelong; he was followed by Messrs. Rucker and Champion.  ABORIGINES.  12. On my first journeys into the country I was very much surprised to find so few natives and thought they were keeping out of the way. During our first visit to Buninyong we did not see one and on our first journey to the west when we discovered Colac and Korangamite we saw about twenty at Pirron Yalloak who fled on seeing us. [132] On better acquaintance I found their number really very small. All within 100 miles had visited us.  13. In December 1836 I was at great pains to muster all that were in the Geelong district and gave each a blanket; they were Buckley's tribe and he assured me I had mustered the whole of them amounting to only 279. They were always friendly; I was well known amongst them and wherever I went they received me kindly. But alas! the decrease has been fearful chiefly from drinking and exposure to all weathers bringing on pulmonary complaints. Since their connexion with the whites there has been little increase. When I first numbered them they had several children amongst them but they decreased every year and now in this tribe we have only 34 adults and only two children under five years. The men now living were all children when I arrived and are beginning to look old so that in ten years more there will not be one alive.  Every attempt to civilize them has signally failed. I have had several in my family for years and taught them to read and go to church with the family; but after a time the other youths would threaten them and carry them off when they again got fond of a savage life. I am convinced that no plan except one based on entire isolation will succeed with these poor degraded people.  Addenda. - The Marrack (scrubby) Hills near Cape Otway form fifty miles by ten of dense scrub exactly like the country you saw at Wilson's Promontory with immense trees towering to the height of 80 and 120 feet and fern trees of 20 feet in the gullies a rich black soil and streams of water running into the sea every six or seven miles.  I undertake to do what an honest man should do let it thunder or rain. He who buys this book to lull himself to sleep had better spend his money in grog. He who reads this book to smoke a pipe over it let him provide himself with Plenty of tobacco - he will have to blow hard. A lover of truth - that's the man I want - and he will have in this book the truth and nothing but the truth.   Facts from the "stubborn-things" store are here retailed and related - contradiction is challenged from friend or foe. The observation on and induction from the facts are here stamped with sincerity: I ask for no other credit. I may be mistaken: I will not acknowledge the mistake unless the contrary be proved.   [2] When two boys are see-sawing on a plank balanced on its centre whilst the world around them is "up" with the one it is "down" with the other. The centre however is stationary. I was in the centre. I was an actor and therefore an eye-witness. The events I relate I did see them pass before me. The persons I speak of I know them face to face. The words I quote I did hear them with my own ears. Others may know more or less than I; I mean to tell all that I know and nothing more.   Two reasons counsel me to undertake the task of publishing this work; but a third reason is at the bottom of it as the potent lever; and they are -   1st. An honourable ambition urging me to have my name remembered among the illustrious of Rome. I have on reaching the fortieth year of my age to publish a work at which I have been plodding the past eighteen years. An ocean of grief would overwhelm me if then I had to vindicate my character: how under the hospitality of the British flag I was put in the felon's dock of a British Supreme Court to be tried for high treason.   2nd. I have the moral courage to show the truth of my text above because I believe in the resurrection of life.   3rd. Brave comrades in arms who fell on that disgraced Sabbath morning December 3rd worthy of a better fate and most certainly of a longer remembrance it is in my power to drag your names from an ignoble oblivion and vindicate the unrewarded bravery of one of yourselves! He was once my mate the bearer of our standard the "Southern Cross." Shot down by a murderous hand he fell and died struggling like a man in the cause of the diggers. But he was soon forgotten. That he was buried is known by the tears of a few true friends! the place of his burial is little known and less cared for.   Sunt tempora nostra; non mutabimur nec mutamur in illis; jam perdidi spem.   The work will be published on the 1st of December next and given to each subscriber by the Author's own hand on the site of the Eureka Stockade from the rising to the setting of the sun on the memorable third.   II. A Jove Principum.  "WANTED A GOVERNOR. Apply to the People of Victoria:" that was the extraordinary advertisement a new chum in want of employment did meet in the usual column of The Argus December 1852. Many could afford to laugh at it the intelligent however who had immigrated here permanently to better his condition was forced to rip up in his memory a certain fable of Æsop. Who would have dared then to warn the fatted Melbourne frogs weltering in grog their colonial glory against their contempt for King Log? Behold King Stork is your reward. Tout comme chez nous. [3]  One remark before I start for the gold-fields. As an old European traveller I had set apart a few coppers for the poor at my landing. I had no opportunity for them. "We shall do well in this land;" was my motto. Who is going to be the first beggar? Not I! My care for the poor would have less disappointed me if I had prepared myself against falling in the unsparing clutches of a shoal of land-sharks who swarmed at that time the Yarra Yarra wharfs. Five pounds for landing my luggage was the A followed by the old colonial C preceded by the double D. Rapacity in Australia is the alpha and omega. Yet there were no poor! a grand reflection for the serious. Adam Smith settled the question of "the wealth of nations." The source of pauperism will be settled in Victoria by any quill-driver who has the pluck to write the history of public-houses in the towns and sly-grog sellers on the gold-fields.   Let us start for Ballaarat Christmas December 1852. - Vide - tempore suo - Julii Caesaris junioris. De Campis Aureis Australia Felix Commentaria.   For the purpose it is now sufficient to say that I had joined a party; fixed our tent on the Canadian Flat; went up to the Camp to get our gold licence; for one pound ten shilling sterling a head we were duly licensed for one month to dig search for and remove gold etc. - We wanted to drink a glass of porter to our future success but there was no Bath Hotel at the time. - Proceeded to inspect the famous Golden Point (a sketch of which I had seen in London in the Illustrated News). The holes all around three feet in diameter and five to eight feet in depth had been abandoned! we jumped into one and one of my mates gave me the first lesson in "fossiking" - In less than five minutes I pounced on a little pouch - the yellow boy was all there - my eyes were sparkling - I felt a sensation identical to a first declaration of love in by-gone times. - "Great works" at last was my bursting exclamation. In old Europe I had to take off my hat half a dozen times and walk from east to west before I could earn one pound in the capacity of sworn interpreter and translator of languages in the city of London. Here I had earned double the amount in a few minutes without crouching or crawling to Jew or Christian. Had my good angel prevailed on me to stick to that blessed Golden Point I should have now to relate a very different story: the gold fever however got the best of my usual judgment and I dreamt of and pretended nothing else than a hole choked with gold sunk with my darling pick and on virgin ground. - I started the hill right-hand side ascending Canadian Gully and safe as the Bank of England I pounced on gold - seventeen and a half ounces depth ten feet.   [4] III. Jupiter Tonans.  One fine morning (Epiphany week) I was hard at work (excuse old chum if I said hard: though my hand had been scores of times compelled in London to drop the quill through sheer fatigue yet I never before handled a pick and shovel) I hear a rattling noise among the brush. My faithful dog Bonaparte would not keep under my control. "What's up?" "Your licence mate." was the peremptory question from a six-foot fellow in blue shirt thick boots the face of a ruffian armed with a carabine and fixed bayonet. The old "all right" being exchanged I lost sight of that specimen of colonial brutedom and his similars called as I then learned "traps" and "troopers." I left off work and was unable to do a stroke more that day.   "I came then 16000 miles in vain to get away from the law of the sword!" was my sad reflection. My sorrow was not mitigated by my mates and neighbours informing me that Australia was a penal settlement. Inveterate murderers audacious burglars bloodthirsty bushrangers were the ruling triumvirate the scour of old Europe called Vandemonians in this bullock-drivers' land. Of course I felt tamed and felt less angry at the following search for licence. At the latter end of the month one hundred and seventy seven pounds troy in two superb masses of gold were discovered at the depth of sixty feet on the hill opposite where I was working. The talk was soon Vulcanish through the land. Canadian Gully was as rich in lumps as other gold-fields are in dust. Diggers whom the gold fever had rendered stark blind so as to desert Ballaarat for Mount Alexander and Bendigo now returned as ravens to the old spot; and towards the end of February '53 Canadian Gully was in its full glory.   IV. Incipit Lamentatio.  The search for licences or "the traps are out to-day" - their name at the time - happened once a month. The strong population now on this gold-field had perhaps rendered it necessary twice a month. Only in October I recollect they had come out three times. Yet "the traps are out" was annoying but not exasperating. Not exasperating because John Bull ab initio et ante secula was born for law order and safe money-making on land and sea. They were annoying because said John not that he likes his money more than his belly but he hates the bayonet: I mean of course he does not want to be bullied with the bayonet. To this honest grumbling of John the drunkard that is the lazy which make the incapables joined their cant and the Vandemonians pulled up with wonted audacity. In a word the thirty shillings a month for the gold licence became a nuisance. [5]  A public meeting was announced on Bakery-hill. It was in November 1853. Four hundred diggers were present. I recollect I heard a "Doctor Carr" poking about among the heaps of empty bottles all round the Camp and asked who paid for the good stuff that was in them and whither was it gone. Of course Doctor Carr did not mention that one of those bottles corked and sealed with the "Crown" was forced open with Mr. Hetherington's corkscrew; and that said Dr. Carr had then to confess that the bottle aforesaid contained a nobbler some £250 worth for himself. Great works already at Toorak. Tout cela soit dit en passant. Mr. Hetherington then a storekeeper on the Ballaarat Flat and now of the Cladendon Hotel Ballaarat Township is a living witness. For the fun of the thing I spoke a few words which merited me a compliment from the practitioner who also honoured me with a private precious piece of information - "Nous allons bientot avoir la Republique Australienne! Signore." "Quelle farce! repondis je." The specimen of man before me impressed me with such a decided opinion of his ability for destroying sugarsticks that at once I gave him credit as the founder of a republic for babies to suck their thumbs.   In short here dates the Victorian system of "memorialising." The diggers of Ballaarat sympathised with those of Bendigo in their common grievances and prayed the governor that the gold licence be reduced to thirty shillings a month. There was further a great waste of yabber-yabber about the diggers not being represented in the Legislative Council and a deal of fustian was spun against the squatters. I understood very little of those matters at the time: the shoe had not pinched my toe yet.   Every one returned to his work; some perhaps not very peacefully on account of a nobbler or two over the usual allowance.   [6] V. Risum Teneatis Amici.  I recollect towards this time - I followed the mob to Magpie Gully. It was a digger's life. Hard work by day blazing fire in the evening and sound sleep by night at the music of drunken quarrels all around far and near. I had marked my claim in accordance with the run of the ranges and safe as the Bank of England I bottomed on gold. No search for licence ever took place. What's the matter? Oh the diggers of Bendigo by sheer moral force in the shape of some ten thousand in a mob had inspired with better sense the red-tape there and somewhere else so I took out my licence at the reasonable rate of two pounds for three months my contribution for the support of gold-lace. So far so good. I had no fault to find with our governor Joseph La Trobe Esquire; nor do I believe that the diggers cared about anything else from him. Was it then his being an esquire that brought his administration into contempt? The fact is a clap of "The Thunder" from Printing House-square boomed on the tympanum of my car. We diggers got the gracious title of "vagabonds" and our massa "Joe" for his pains to keep friends with us was put down "an incapable;" all for the honour of British rule of course.   "Wanted a Governor" was now no longer a dummy in The Argus; but unhappily no application was made to the people of Victoria.   Give a dog a bad name - and the old proverb holds good even at the antipodes. My trampings are now transcribed from my diary.   With the hot winds whirled in the Vandemonian rush to the Ballaarat Flat. My hole was next to the one which was jumped by the Eureka mob and where one man was murdered in the row. At sixty-five feet we got on a blasted log of a gum-tree that had been mouldering there under a curse since the times of Noah! The whole flat turned out an imperial shicer. (You do not sink deep enough Signore Editor.) Slabs that had cost us some eight pounds a hundred would not fetch afterwards one pound. We left them to sweat freely in the hole; and all the mob got on the fuddle. My mate and myself thought we had been long enough together and got asunder for a change. I was soon on the tramp again. Bryant's Ranges was the go of the day and I started thither accordingly. December 1853. Oh Lord! what a pack of ragamuffins over that way! I got acquainted with the German party who found out the Tarrangower den; shaped my hole like a bathing tub and dropped "on it" right smart. Paid two pounds to cart one load down the Loddon and left two more loads of washing stuff snug and wet with the sweat of my brow over the hole. Got twenty-eight pennyweights out of the load. Went back the third day brisk and healthy to cart down the other two loads. Washing stuff! gone: hole! gone: the gully itself! gone: the whole face of it had been clean shaved. Never mind go ahead again. Got another claim on the surface-hill. No search for licence: thank God had none. Nasty sneaky cheeky little things of flies got into my eyes: could see no more no ways. Mud water one shilling a bucket! Got the dysentery; very bad. Thought one night to reef the yards and drop the anchor. Got on a better tack though. Promenaded up to the famous Bendigo. Had no particular objection to Celestials there but had no particular taste for their tartaric water. Made up my mind to remember my days of innocence and turned shepherd. Fine landscape this run on the Loddon: almost a match for Bella Italia but there are too many mosquitoes. Dreamt one day I was drinking a tumbler of Loddon wine; and asserted that Providence was the same also in the south. It was a dream. The lands lay waste and desolate: not by nature; oh no; by hand of man. Bathing in these Loddon water-holes superb. Tea out of this Loddon water magnificent. In spite of these horrible hot winds this water is always fresh and delicious: how kind is Providence! One night lost the whole blessed lot of my flock. Myself the shepherd did not know in the name of heavens which way to turn. Got among the blacks the whole Tarrang tribe in corrobory. Lord what a rum sight for an old European traveller. Found natives very humane though. My sheep right again only the wild dogs had given them a good shake. Was satisfied that the Messiah the Jews are looking for will not be born in this bullock-drivers' land; any how the angels won't announce the happy event of his birth to the shepherds. No more truck with sheep and went to live with the blacks for a variation. Picked up pretty soon bits of their yabber-yabber. For a couple of years had tasted no fish; now I pounced on a couple of frogs every couple of minutes. Thought their "lubras" ugly enough; not so however the slender arms and small hands of their young girls though the fingers be rather too long. [7]  That will do now in as much as the end of the story is this: That portion in my brains called "acquisitiveness" got the gold-fever again and I started for old Ballaarat.   [8] VI. Sua Cuique Voluntas.  I was really delighted to see the old spot once more; Easter 1854. I do not mean any offence to my fellow-diggers elsewhere; it struck me very forcibly however that our Ballaarat men look by far more decent and our storekeepers or grog-sellers if you like undoubtedly more respectable.   Of a constitution not necessarily savage I did not fail to observe that the fair ones had ventured now on a large scale to trust their virtue among us vagabonds and on a hot-wind day I patronized of course some refreshment room.   I met my old mate and we determined to try the old game; but this time on the old principle of labor omnia vincit - I pitched my tent right in the bush and prophesied that from my door I would see the golden hole in the gully below.   I spoke the truth and such is the case this very day. Feast of the Assumption 1855:- What sad events however were destined to pass exactly before the very door of my tent! Who could have told me on that Easter Sunday that the unknown hill which I had chosen for my rest would soon be called the Massacre Hill! That next Christmas my mate would lie in the grave somewhere forgotten: and I in the gaol! the rope round my neck!!   Let us keep in good spirits good reader we shall soon have to weep together enough.   Gravel Pits famous for its strong muster of golden holes and blasting shicers was too deep for me. The old Eureka was itself again. The jewellers shops which threatened to exhaust themselves in Canadian Gully were again the talk of the day: and the Eureka gold dust was finer purer brighter immensely darling. The unfaithful truants who had rushed to Bryant's Ranges to knock their heads against blocks of granite now hastened for the third time to the old spot Ballaarat determined to stick to it for life or death. English German and Scotch diggers worked generally on the Gravel Pits the Irish had their stronghold on the Eureka. The Americans fraternised with all the wide-awake ubi caro ibi vultures.   Here begins as a profession the precious game of "shepherding" or keeping claims in reserve; that is the digger turning squatter. And as this happened under the reign of a gracious gold commissioner so I am brought to speak of the gold licence again. First I will place the man before my reader though.   [9] Get a tolerable young pig make it stand on his hind legs put on its head a cap trimmed with gold-lace whitewash its snout and there you have the ass in the form of a pig; I mean to say a "man" with this privilege that he possesses in his head the brains of both the above-mentioned brutes.   VII. Ludi Ballaaratenses.  Eureka was advancing fast to glory. Each day and not seldom twice a day the gutter gammoned and humbugged all us "vagabonds" so deucedly that the rush to secure a claim "dead on it" rose to the standard of "Eureka style" that is "Ring ring" was the yell from some hundred human dogs and soon hill and flat poured out all spare hands to thicken the "ring."   By this time two covies - one of them generally an Irishman had stripped to their middle and were "shaping" for a round or two. A broken nose with the desired accomplishment of a pair of black eyes and in all cases when manageable a good smash in the regions either of the teeth or of the ribs - both if possible preferred - was supposed to improve the transaction so much that what with the tooth dropping or the rib cracking or both as aforesaid it was considered "settled." Thus originated the special title of "rowdy mob" or Tipperary in reference to the Irish. Let us have the title clear.   The "shepherding" that is the squatting by one man women and children had not got hold of this Dolce far niente yet - the ground allotted by law to four men; and the astuteness of our primitive shepherds having found it cheap and profitable to have each claim visibly separated from the other by some twenty-feet wall which was mutually agreed upon by themselves alone to call it "spare ground" was now a grown-up institution. Hence whenever the gutter 120 feet below took it into its head to bestir and hook it the faithful shepherds would not rest until they were sure to snore in peace a foot and a half under ground from the surface and six score feet from "bang on the gutter."   This Ballaarat dodge would have been innocent enough were it not for "Young Ireland" who having fixed headquarters on the Eureka was therefore accused of monopolising the concern. Now suppose Paddy wanted to relish a "tip" that is a drop of gin on the sly then Scotty who had just gulped down his "toddy" which was a drop of auld whisky would take upon himself the selfish trouble to sink six inches more in Paddy's hole which feat was called "jumping;" and thus broken noses and other accomplishments as aforesaid grew in proportion to tips and "toddy" drunk on the sly. [10]  I frequently saw horrid scenes of blood; but I was now an old chum and therefore knew what was what in colonial life.   I had a Cameleon for a neighbour who in the garb of an Irishman flung his three half-shovels out of a hole on the hill punctually every morning and that was his work before breakfast. Then a red shirt on his back and a red cap on his head he would in the subsequent hour give evidence of his scorning to be lazy by putting down some three inches deeper another hole below in the gully. "Full stop;" he must have a "blow" but the d----d things - his matches - had got damp and so in a rage he must hasten to his tent to light the pipe; that is to put on the Yankee garb and complete his forenoon work in a third hole of his whose depth and shape recommended him as a first rate grave-digger.   And what has all this bosh to do with the Eureka Stockade?   VIII. Flat Fustitia Ruat Coelum.  As an old Ballaarat hand I hereby assert that much of the odium of the mining community against red-tape arose from the accursed practice of jumping.   One fact from the "stubborn-things" store. The Eureka gutter was fast progressing down hill towards the Eureka gully. A party of Britishers had two claims; the one on the slope of the bill was bottomed on heavy gold; the other some four claims from it and parallel with the range was some ninety feet deep and was worked by day only by three men: a fourth man would now and then bring a set of trimmed slabs from the first hole aforesaid where he was the principal "chips." There was a Judas Iscariot among the party. One fine morning a hole was bottomed down the gully and proved a scheisser. A rush Eureka style was the conseqence; and it was pretended now that the gutter would keep with the ranges towards the Catholic church.   A party of Yankees with revolvers and Mexican knives - the garb of "bouncers" in those days - jumped the second hole of the Britishers dismantled the windlass and Godamn'd as fast as the Britishers cursed in the colonial style. The excitement was awful. [11] Commissioner Rede was fetched to settle the dispute. An absurd and unjust regulation was then the law; no party was allowed to have an interest in two claims at one and the same time which was called "owning two claims." The Yankees carried the day. I a living witness do assert that from that day there was a "down" on the name of Rede.   For the commissioners this jumping business was by no means an agreeable job. They were fetched to the spot: a mob would soon collect round the disputed claim; and for "fair play" it required the wisdom of Solomon because the parties concerned set the same price on their dispute as the two harlots on the living child.   I. The conflicting evidence in consequence of hard swearing prompted by gold-thirst the most horrible demon that depraves the human heart even a naturally honest heart. - II. The incomprehensible unsettled impracticable ordinances for the abominable management of the gold-fields; which ordinances left to the discretion - that is the caprice; and to the good sense - that is the motto "odi profanum vulgus et arceo;" and to the best judgment - that is the proverbial incapability of all aristocractical red-tape HOW TO RULE US VAGABONDS. Both those reasons I say must make even the most hardened bibber of Toorak small-beer acknowledge and confess that the perfidious mistake at head-quarters was their persisting to make the following Belgravian billet-doux the "sine qua non" recommendation for gold-lace on Ballaarat (at the time):   (ADDRESS)   "To the Victorian Board of Small Beer   "Toorak (somewhere in Australasia i.e. Australia Felix - inquire from the natives reported to be of blackskin at the southern end of the globe.)   "Belgravia   "First year of the royal projecting the   "Great Exhibition Hyde Park.   "LADY STARVESEMPSTRESS great-grand-niece of His Grace the Duke Of CURRY-POWDER begs to introduce to FORTYSHILLING TAKEHIMAWAY Esquire of Toorak see address her brother-in-law POLLIPUSS WATERLOOBOLTER tenth son of the venerable Prebendary of North and South Palaver Canon of St. Sebastopol in the east and Rector of Allblessedfools West End - URGENT."   In justice however to Master Waterloobolter candidate for gold-lace it must not be omitted that he is a Piccadilly young sprat and so at Julien's giant bal-masque was ever gracious to the lady of his love.   [12] "Miss Smartdeuce may I beg the honour of your hand for the next waltz? surely after a round or two you will relish your champagne."   "Yes" with a smothered "dear" was the sigh-drawn reply.   Who has the power to roar the command "Thus far shalt thou go and no further" to the flood of tears from forlorn Smartdeuce when her soft Waterloobolter bolted for the gold-fields of Australia Felix.   To be serious. How could any candid mind otherwise explain the honest boldness of eight out of nine members of the first Local Court Ballaarat who one and all I do not say dared but I say called upon their fellow miners to come forward to a public meeting on the old spot Bakery-hill. September Saturday 30th 1855. Said members had already settled at that time 201 disputes and given their judgement involving some half a million sterling altogether for all what they knew and yet not one miner rose one finger against them when they imperatively desired to know whether they had done their duty and still possessed the confidence of their fellow diggers! They (said members) are practical men of our own adopted class elected by ourselves from among ourselves to sit as arbitrators of our disputes and our representatives at the Local Court. That's the key for any future Brougham for the history of the Local Courts on the gold-fields.   It has fallen to my lot however to put the Eureka Stockade on record; and from the following "Joe"-chapter must begin any proper history of that disgracefully memorable event.   IX. Abyssus Abyssum Invocat.  "JOE Joe!" No one in the world can properly understand and describe this shouting of "Joe" unless he were on this El Dorado of Ballaarat at the time.   It was a horrible day plagued by the hot winds. A blast of the hurricane winding through gravel pits whirled towards the Eureka this shouting of "Joe." It was the howl of a wolf for the shepherds who bolted at once towards the bush: it was the yell of bull-dogs for the fossikers who floundered among the deep holes and thus dodged the hounds: it was a scarecrow for the miners who now scrambled down to the deep and left a licensed mate or two at the windlass. [13] By this time a regiment of troopers in full gallop had besieged the whole Eureka and the traps under their protection ventured among the holes. An attempt to give an idea of such disgusting and contemptible campaigns for the search of licences is really odious to an honest man. Some of the traps were civil enough; aye they felt the shame of their duty; but there were among them devils at heart who enjoyed the fun because their cupidity could not bear the sight of the zig-zag uninterrupted muster of piles of rich-looking washing stuff and the envy which blinded their eyes prevented them from taking into account the overwhelming number of shicers close by round about all along. Hence they looked upon the ragged muddy blue shirt as an object of their contempt.   I William Diaper (alias J. Jones J. Osborne J. Jackson Feejee (Fiji) Jack Caladonien Jack) this day sit down to write something not knowing what else to do with myself and knowing still less what to write about; but let that be as it may I intend to write to use a vulgar saying just as the maggot bites and hit or miss slash gutter strike out right and left in my own style and risque [risk] all consequences; and perhaps by so doing I may take the fancy of the harem-scarem dare-devil portion of the community (for whom I in particular write) and thereby secure to myself some little praise if less profit. I dare say the whole narrative will be tinged according to the different moods I may be in - sometimes bearing the impress of the most desponding melancholy and at other times elevated to the highest degree: for be it understood that I am one of those unfortunate characters who are elevated at the most trifling success or depressed at times by the most trivial mishap. Perhaps the contents of the bottle may also exercise its influence according as it looks up - pretty full or rather low. At surmounting difficulties however which I conceive to be of moment I have always found my heart to be even too large for my body.  This narrative I intend being a continuation of the adventures of my life which I wrote for Captain Erskine of H.M.S. Havannah in 1850 (who I believe is now Aide-de-Camp to H.B.M.). That part commencing at my birth (1820) and reaching till about 1844 (or perhaps 1846) is now in print and called 'Jackson's narrative'. I wrote it on board the Havannah during the time I was interpreter for the South Seas; I having been transferred from H.M.S. Fly into the Havannah as an interpreter-general. [2]   I have now before me 15 years unwritten (i.e.) from 1844 till 1859; almost every month of which time have been fraught more or less with adventure hair-breadth 'scapes among shipping different colonies gold diggings islands and their savage inhabitants besides many other things too numerous to particularise here and perhaps it may be 20 years as I don't know what I am bound to yet go through.  In my first narrative I gave an account of my birth (1820) and parentage who were of the middling class of people; education which ought to have been good had I been the kind of youth to have received it all my school adventures which weren't a few I can assure you when I was at every School I went to pronounced to be the worst boy of the hundreds of my schoolmates.  Then came a series of voyages or trips in coasters travels in the Australian Colonies different situations for short periods - very short periods - a description of whaling trips or cruises; piracy; and if I omitted the men-of-war it was in consequence of my being then on board one of the Queen's ships and not being willing to expose myself or paint myself as black as I really was; or perhaps I was afraid of being claimed as a deserter as I did not thoroughly understand the nature of 'general service' or whether I had in that way or not I scarcely knew as very little troubled me excepting getting out of a hobble as fast and as well as I could which I am bound to confess as I mean telling the whole truth happened almost every day.  When I wrote before I did it with a kind of restraint on account of the situation I held for a short time in government; but now it will be entirely different as I am a complete outcast here on this island and I don't know whether I ever shall be blunted well enough to face civilization again; therefore I shall tell a straightforward unvarnished truthful tale; just as every thing happened not attempting to make myself noble generous brave on the one hand or mean and despicable on the other; although I dare say I shall appear to have possessed all of those qualities in a degree at times; and so if my character can be defined from so many contradictory qualities it's more than I have myself ever been able to do: and I am quite indifferent to the result! [3] [4] [5]  I write for amusement. If I gain anything by it it will be a lucky job for me: if not I don't know as I have lost anything. I shall get as much as I got for the first part which was nothing at all although I hear that it is now fetching 20 shillings the volume; (or perhaps my 'narrative' is merely an insertion in a work that Captain Erskine had published from various sources which he collected when he commanded the Havannah whilst in commission on the South Sea Station). I wish it to be understood that I merely mention this as a passing fact not blaming Captain Erskine at all for any neglect: in fact I am in duty bound to acknowledge that he interested himself more in my cause than I did myself. I don't suppose that he even knows that I am still alive. He offered me very kindly to go to England in the ship and continue writing till I had finished; and then he promised to have it published in numbers by some eminent London bookseller with whom he said he was acquainted for me; but I left him in Sydney being desirous of proceeding on to the Californian gold-mines at that time all the rage.  If ever this book or books (as I intend to write plenty) should merit any readers I hope they will be as sparing with their criticisms as possible and just consider whether anything in a literary point of view can be expected from a man of my description; who has been alternatively for these last twenty years and upwards (the best and ripest part of a man's life) sailor gold-digger beachcomber outlaw etc. and all those kind of (I was going to say) pursuits - God forgive me! [6]  The only wonder is even to myself that I know how to form a single letter. And I hope they will consider also that I labour under every disadvantage. At this present moment here I am jammed up with a parcel of Kanaka children perpetually prattling around me. I have no white face to look upon! I have not a book of any description; much less such books as are requisite for references such at least as a geography or a grammar. I have not even a small edition of Johnson and so the mistakes in the geographical grammatical and orthnographical departments may all be easily accounted for. The very paper I am writing upon I happened to drop across quite unexpectedly and the ink I am obliged to invent myself.  I never should have thought of such a thing as writing if it had not been put into my head by Captain Erskine in the first place - but on second thoughts I don't see why as beggars' biographies are written now-a-days I should allow my adventures and exploits to sink into oblivion; and more especially as they happened in such outlandish and till lately so little known parts of the world - for instance - New Caladonia it being one of my principal fields of adventure. And besides very lately between three and four years ago Captain Cannot [Conneau] author of Twenty years a slaver when he was Captain of the port at the Port-de-France New Caladonia sent word several times to me whilst I was further down the west coast (Kone) to come up and write and he would pay me well for it.  In respect to other mistakes - such as dates and localities - I shall not be able to tell to months or miles because I write entirely from memory I having been many times in such straits as not to be able to return even the shirt I had upon my back to say nothing of note books - in fact I was very thankful scores of times to keep possession of my head; but still I shall not be out years and not many miles I feel confident. [7] My last narrative was entirely from memory.  The reason I wrote under a fictitious name before was merely a matter of precaution; it having been my misfortune through life as I endeavoured to extricate myself from one difficulty the morel became entangled in the meshes of another. I became notorious; and when I found it utterly impossible to redeem my good name I became not only quite indifferent but even at last to exult in being a character anything but insignificant although diametrically opposed to good.  I never was thought a very bad man by those who had ability to appreciate me; it was only the low-live riff-raff scum; who come about some of these islands and have the audacity not only to class themselves with me but even to hold up their doings as examples for me because they have not the spirit to imitate mine. This description includes some of the masters of ships who vauntingly call themselves and always expect to be called Captains - not by courtesy but they try to exact it as their right. I mean the masters of these traders.  Some people may perhaps think I have a deal of presumption to turn author. I am fully aware of the fifty different kinds of difficulties attending book writing and also of the hundreds of deficiencies existing within myself. One thing I wish to impress is that whenever it is completed that I know well beforehand that I have not only neglected to do the justice which the work would have met with if written by a person acquainted with the art of book writing; but I have also neglected to do justice to myself which I ought to deserve if it was not that I am by nature so infernally careless - and so those who wish to read it must take it as they find it.  This may appear a strange way of introducing a book to the public but I hope the public will make all allowance when I tell them that I have been always counted a strange fellow - a very strange fellow indeed - wherever I have been; and I have been to a few places - having been on the perpetual move for nearly 40 years now. [8]  After getting paid in the Havannah I was ordered to wait a while and they would make out my certificate but lime-juice time coming on directly after and finding that mine was stopped (according to the rules of the service I suppose) I immediately hurried down into Old Shelly's bumboat - which was then alongside - and purchased for myself a good quantity of ginger-beer soft-tack and some good Wollongong butter and sat myself down inviting old Jack Smith - a regular old sea dog and messmate as well as my washerman - and took a feed independent of the Service and a great deal better than she generally allows and then repaired on shore with my things without waiting for certificates discharges recommendations or any thing else.  It is well known that when I left the Feejees - some five or six years before - or at least it will be when I have told you all - that I left one of those many names which I have - from first to last - gone by behind me - that one was 'Feejee Jack'. Now in leaving Caledonia it is quite natural that I should leave 'Caledonia Jack' behind too. I wish to dispose satisfactorily of all these surplus purser's names of mine and honestly prove that in me there is no screw loose as many have often supposed. I changed my proper name - 'Wm. Diaper' - whilst a mere youngster - a whimsical freak of boyish fancy one day coming over me and wishing to ape the sailor and knowing the sobriquet or nickname of 'John' was 'Jack' and thinking that 'Bill' didn't sound to me as crack a sailor as 'Jack' - I called myself 'J. Jones'.   Their government is patriarchal the head of each family having control over his household; nor is he accountable to the community for his conduct touching them even after his children come to years of discretion if they be unmarried. They however are by no means arbitrary nor cruel; and with the children are foolishly indulgent. It is only in passion that their conduct is revolting and then they are generally checked by one or more powerful friends arresting the angered while others try to appease him by reason. Although the head of the family is not accountable to the community a mother will not tamely see her child ill-used and when a son is grown up if his mother is ill-treated he will show fight. I have witnessed some dreadful frays between father and son on the mother's account. Should one kill his wife the friends or relatives of the woman will have satisfaction; when the tribes meet the slayer must show himself naked among them and unflinchingly await their anger.  Each tribe has a chief who directs all its movements and who wherever he may be knows well where all the members of the community are. About once in three months the whole tribe unite generally at new or full moon when they have a few dances and again separate into three or more bodies as they cannot get food if they move en masse; the chief with the aged makes arrangements for the route each party is to take. In their movements they seldom encamp more than three nights in one place and oftener but one. Thus they move from one place to another regardless of sickness deaths births &c. [399] They will not wait for anything when they have an object in view. I have known instances of females having an infant at night and compelled to tramp in the morning and the men to carry their sick from one encampment to another. In each body are a few old men who take charge of the small community and give instructions in the morning where they will encamp at night. They seldom travel more than six miles a day. In their migratory moves all are employed; children in getting gum knocking down birds &c.; women in digging up roots killing bandicoots getting grubs &c.; the men in hunting kangaroos &c. scaling trees for opossums &c. &c. They mostly are at the encampment about an hour before sundown - the women first who get fire and water &c. by the time their spouses arrive.  They hold that the bush and all it contains are man's general property; that private property is only what utensils are carried in the bag; and this general claim to nature's bounty extends even to the success of the day; hence at the close those who have been successful divide with those who have not been so. There is "no complaining in the streets" of a native encampment; none lacketh while others have it; nor is the gift considered as a favour but a right brought to the needy and thrown down at his feet. In warm weather while on the tramp they seldom make a miam - they use merely a few boughs to keep off the wind; in wet weather a few sheets of bark make a comfortable house. In one half-hour I have seen a neat village begun and finished. The harmony that exists among them when none of another tribe is in the party is surprising. I have been out with them for months without a single altercation. Wherever one is born that is considered his or her country. They have no regular burial places; their bones lie scattered through the bush. [400] Over the men according to their importance an oration is delivered the purport of which is that they his survivors will avenge his death and begging the defunct to lie still till they do so. Over the women and children no ceremony is performed. After the body is interred the encampment breaks up leaving a fire at the east of the grave. Orphans are taken great care of. It is considered a great honour to have an orphan added to the family.  They have many ceremonies on particular occasions such as when a youth or maiden comes of age instalment of the bush marriage ceremony &c. &c. To give them in this brief account is impossible; one must suffice.  Marriage. - The men engross the right of giving the women away; the women have neither choice nor will in the matter; they are the property of the father; if he is dead of the brother; if there is no brother of the uncle. There is seldom a marriage without much fighting as there is a great preponderance of males over females and the old chiefs' not being satisfied with less than two and sometimes four increases the value of the women. Most females are purchased. The general price is two large koogrs (or opossum rugs) two or three dozen opossums and other trifles. The woman is handed over to her spouse who has scarce got her when some others - those who were desirous to obtain her - may be seen naked discharging wonguims &c. at the bridegroom. A general family fight takes place and the bridegroom seldom gets off without a broken head. At night the dame is sulky and when her spouse is asleep generally creeps to her mother; and when he awakes and finds her gone he claims her; her father in a rage knocks the poor girl about with his bludgeon or tomahawk drags her by the hair of her head' to her koolin where she gets another drubbing. This is often continued for two or more days till the poor creature is regularly broken down. [401] She resigns to her fate and generally proves a constant and affectionate wife.  Laws. - Of laws they have three principal viz. to punish murder theft and adultery. Murder is punished by the whole of the tribe throwing a spear and a wonguim at the murderer; if he escapes without any material injury the male who is the nearest of kin to the murdered may with his bludgeon or leonile strike at the murderer's head (no other part) till he is tired. During the punishment the murderer is not allowed to throw a single weapon but may ward off the spears &c. with his shield. I knew an instance of a man having 100 spears thrown at him who warded them every one off.  Theft is of rare occurrence and is punished by blows on the head of the thief by the party wronged. I never knew but one case of this kind.  Adultery is a crime that keeps the encampment (when two or more tribes are present) in continued broils; the adulterer and adulteress are both punished - the latter awfully severe; but the former having (what the poor females have not) a way of warding off the weapons comes better off.  There is one particularly amiable trait in the aboriginal character which is that no animosity remains in their breasts nor does any shrink from punishment. At the close of a fight or punishment those who have inflicted the wounds may be seen sucking them and doing any other kind office required.  Most tribes have intercourse or hold a kind of alliance with three or four neighbouring ones with whom they barter for lubras &c. They generally once a year at least unitedly assemble. There are many disputes imaginary or real to settle which cannot be done without some fighting. When all is settled they will corrobboree night after night till they separate. All the tribes beyond the district of their friends are termed wild blackfellows and when found within the district are immediately killed. [402]  The blacks were formerly very superstitious. The most awful superstition is that they believe that man would never die unless he were killed; that the sick man has been opened and that his kidneys and fat have been taken out which has caused death; and that nothing short of the kidneys and fat of another will appease the dead. They also believe that as the kidneys and fat are the life of man the eating of the same gives double strength and vigour to those who partake of them; hence they never kill a "wild black" as they term him but they rob the body of that part. They also have another cruel custom of sacrificing the fruit of the womb till a male is born; so that should a female have three or four girls all are killed until a male is born. The poor innocents are put out of the way by strangling or smothering and generally on the ninth or twenty-first day.  To go into the various traditions they have of the creation of the world man woman and animals stars &c. is impossible here. Suffice it to state that they are a people that have names for particular stars as the Southern Cross Magellanic clouds &c.; and their traditions are not more ridiculous than those of other savage nations. They have also an idea of several imaginary beings almost all of the dreaded class; also superstitious notions of certain birds native bears and extraordinary appearances in the heavens.  Dances. - They have various kinds day and night. Although a stranger after seeing one may think the whole alike and merely a monotony of sounds and motion such is not the case; the song and words are to the motion of the body like our country dances and reels. One ignorant of dancing would look upon the movements as monotonous; there is as much sense in the one as in the other. If the blacks' orchestra is inferior their time and motion are better.  Games. - They have many all admirably adapted to strengthen and expand the corporeal powers as running jumping throwing &c.; but the most manual is wrestling; and certainly every one who has ever seen them at this exercise has acknowledged that it is equal to any description given of the ancients and destitute of the brutality often resorted to by the ancients to gain the mastery. [403] The aborigines' is sheer fair wrestling. They challenge each other by throwing dust in the air towards those they desire to strive with which is answered by a return; they run towards each other; on approaching each puts his hands on his antagonist's shoulder and it is not till both are nearly exhausted that one is down.  I should have stated that besides chiefs they have other eminent men as warriors counsellors doctors; dreamers who are also interpreters; charmers who are supposed to be able to bring and drive rain away; also to bring or send plagues among other nations and to drive away the same as occasion requires. Although they have chiefs doctors counsellors warriors dreamers &c. who form a kind of aristocracy yet these are in no way a burthen to the community. The chiefs govern doctors cure counsellors advise and warriors fight without pay. All alike seek their food and He who is mindful of the ravens is not unmindful of these sable Sons of Australia.  Their war implements are: - (1.) The Wonguim thrown in battle and useful in the bush to knock down birds. (2.) Kurruk or throwing-stick with which a reed spear is hurled out with great force. (3.) Worra Worra a common club used in single combat. (4.) Leonile the most dreadful hand weapon used in single combat only. (5.) Kudgerin a thick club - very weighty at the end used in close combat only. (6.) Mulga a shield used in single combat only to defend the head from the hand-clubs 3 4 and 5. (7.) Geam a large shield used to ward off long spears. (8.) Tirrer a reed spear used for distant objects. (9.) Tare a long spear pointed at the end used for distant combat. (10.) Nandum a jagged spear - a dreadful weapon. (11.) Mongie a double glass-jagged spear the most fatal of their weapons. (12.) Wa-voit mostly used in play; it is thrown by the hand; the knob end bounds on the hard ground a considerable distance as a stone would do when thrown on ice. [404] He whose wa-voit is the greatest distance is considered victor.  The administration of the gold fields under this Act has unfortunately not resulted in realizing the favourable anticipations of its promoters. To account for this circumstance besides the general unsuitableness of the whole system now rendered more visible by further experience the Commission may allude to two facts of important bearing namely that the yield of gold has very considerably fallen off and that the Government have not responded to the recommendation of the committee that the Crown lands should be liberally sold to the miners. The spirit of dissatisfaction appears to have become gradually more general and snore deeply rooted. Public meetings numerously attended have been repeatedly assembled at each principal gold field to protest alike against the laws and regulations and the mode of their administration. A feeling of estrangement and distrust between the authorities and the people has been widely diffusing itself. This feeling has originated in the harsh operation of the laws in the want of a political and general status to the miner that might have aided him in procuring redress and it has been subsequently aggravated by the suspicion of corruption in the authorities. The Eureka riot of October last at Ballarat was a natural extreme of this feeling which as the subsequent inquiry demonstrated with regard to one member of the stipendiary magistracy was not without foundation. The more serious outbreak of the two following months at the same place exhibited the sad spectacle of civil strife and bloodshed happily now a rare feature among the British people and upon the soil of a prosperous colony.  The Commission have gathered from the various evidence on the subject submitted to them that this discontent so far as it bears a general character and is distinguishable from individual grievances may be attributed to the following causes:   (1) The license fee or more properly the unseemly violence often necessary for its due collection - a result entirely unavoidable in thus taxing for this considerable rate every individual of a great mass of labouring population; involving as it did repeated conflicts with the police an ill-will to the authorities from their almost continuous "hunt" to detect unlicensed persons and the constant infraction of the law on the part of the miners resulting Sometimes from accident in losing the license document or from absolute inability to pay for it as well as from any attempt to evade the charge. [53]  (2) The land grievance - the inadequacy of the supplies of land as compared with the wants of the population - the want of sufficiently frequent opportunities and upon reasonable terms for the acquisition of a piece of land - the difficulty amounting with thousands to an impossibility of investing their small capital 'Or their earnings of gold upon a section of ground; from want of which facilities many thousands it is to be feared have left and are still leaving this colony to enrich other countries with their industry and capital.  (3) The want of political rights and recognized status the mining population of this colony having been hitherto; in fact an entirely non-privileged body invidiously distinct from the remainder of the colonists consisting of large numbers without gradations of public rank political representation or any system for self-elected local authority; in short contributing largely to the wealth and greatness of the colony without enjoying any voice whatever in its public administration.   The Commission will venture on a few remarks upon each of these several heads.  The Anglo-Saxon habitually over-works himself and we are quite inclined to think that he might lead a more happy and enjoyable life than he does the laws of "supply and demand" notwithstanding.  It is argued that any diminution of the hours of labor will have the effect of increasing the cost of production and thereby have a tendency to arrest the investment of capital in some of the various ways in which it is now being laid out. We doubt indeed whether as much work is not frequently done in eight hours as in ten. Compare the style of work of a fresh with that of an exhausted man! Would any one presume to say that the labor of the one is not preferable to that of the other in the proportion often to eight? Is it not a saying as old as the hills that one hour in the morning is worth two at night? And why so? Simply because in the morning a man is fresh and works with a will and with all his faculties about him; in the evening he is too often jaded and languid and finds that every stroke he has to strike is a real effort and a bore [...] We think eight hours in a climate like this is sufficient for any ordinary man and we conceive it to be quite possible for a man to turn out as good a day's work in that time as he would in a much longer one.  But passing by the question of the possibility of increased cost of production by reduced hours of labor the lowered rate of interest the consequent diversion of capital scarcity of employment and lowered wages let us take a glance at the case of the individual workman. He is told by his "supply and demand" friends that if he reduces his hours of work he inevitably sooner or later reduces his rate of remuneration. Let us take this for granted and still see if he be not a better and happier man? The proposition is to divide the four-and-twenty hours into equal parts - eight hours for work eight for repose and eight for food and recreation. But what is this "recreation" which is so much sought for? Not skittles at the Black Bull we will be bound; not dancing at Cremorne fishing on the banks of the Yarra or lounging in the promenade concerts of the enterprising Jacobs ! The working man may consistently enough indulge in such modes of relaxation now and then; but it would little jump either with his tastes or his interest to consider this the sort of recreation to which he should accustom himself. No; to the really industrious and active-minded artizan the truth is well known that "a change of work is half a holiday" and it is to the peaceful pleasures of home that he looks with a longing eye as he struggles for relief from the exactions of a severe system. And how will the money account stand of a man like this? He earns we will say three pounds a week and finds that the "supply and demand" gentleman mulct him of a fifth part of his wages in consequence of releasing him from a fifth part of his labor - or rather hours of labor. [737] Is he a poorer man by the deduction of these twelve shillings a week? By no means. He fills up his spare time by digging in his garden feeding his poultry milking his cow teaching his children; and he finds that his daily two hours thus employed save him far more than twelve shillings a week by decreased bills at the butcher's baker's grocer's - not to say the public-house and the doctor's. The quantity and variety of food which an industrious man can place upon his table by the intelligent bestowal of an hour or two a day will astonish even himself; and lie will find that there s little comparison to be made in the pleasantness of such pursuits with his children round him and the ceaseless toiling and moiling during long hours in a dusty Street in Melbourne.  We have no means of knowing how far the present movement is likely to be successful. The great obstacle exists in the very frequent adoption of piecework; in the impossibility of getting all men to think alike; and in the certainty that however sturdily A. B. and C. may stick to the Eight Hour's system D. E. and F. will find some reason for declining it. Successful or not however we must say that we have observed with considerable pleasure the tone of moderation and the indications of very considerable intelligence by which the meetings have been characterised whose proceedings have been reported in the newspapers. At the same time rather delicate ground has been entered upon; and under such circumstances the interests of the whole body of working-men are only too liable to be compromised by the injudicious acts of a mere fraction of their number. We understand that alarm has already been taken by the course adopted by some of the workmen employed at the new Legislative Council Chambers; contractors are withdrawing their tenders upon all sides and the Government is hesitating upon entering into any new work. It behoves the intelligent artizan always to remember that while he has a perfect right to say how many hours of the twenty-four he will devote to labor capital is a sensitive thing - that capital upon the employment of which he necessarily subsists; and that if the sources from which it flows become once congealed by distrust it is not a very easy matter to set them flowing again.  The Fiction Fields Of Australia  Man can no more do without works of fiction than he can do without clothing and indeed not so well; for where climate is propitious and manners simple people often manage to loiter down the road of life without any of the "lendings" that Lear cast away from him; yet nevertheless with nothing between the blue heaven and their polished skins they will gather in a circle round some dusky orator or vocalist as his imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown to the entertainment and elevation of his hearers. To amend our first proposition then works of fiction being more necessary and universally disseminated than clothing they still resemble clothing in this that they take different shapes and fashions in different ages. In the days of Chaucer -   "First warbler whose sweet breath   Preluded those melodious bursts that fill   The spacious times of great Elizabeth   With sounds that echo still" -   didactic and descriptive poetry was almost the only recognized vehicle of fiction. Then came the bursts that Chaucer preluded; and in Shakspere's days the dramatic form prevailed over all others. For some time afterwards every kind of feeling and thought found its expression in miscellaneous verse; and (though he was of course not the first novelist) Fielding probably set the fashion of that literary garment of the imagination which has since been almost exclusively worn - the novel. In the shape of novels then civilised man at the present day receives the greater part of the fictitious clothing necessary to cover the nakedness of his mind; and our present inquiry is into the feasibility of obtaining the material for this sort of manufacture from Australian soil. We are not of course questioning the practicability of writing novels in Australia. Thackeray might have begun "The Newcomes" in Kensington and finished the book in Melbourne as well as on the Continent. Our inquiry is into the feasibility of writing Australian novels; or to use other words into the suitability of Australian life and scenery for the novel writers' purpose and secondly into the right manner of their treatment.   [98] A reference to the second topic almost forestalls the necessity of our stating the distinct conviction by which we are possessed that genuine Australian novels are possible; and as a corollary from their being possible it follows with apparent obviousness that they are desirable inasmuch as it is desirable that the production of things necessary or comfortable to humanity should be multiplied and increased.   First however we must deal with the possibility; for it has been our lot to fall in with men by no means altogether given over to stupidity who deem what Signor Raffaello calls "this bullock-drivers' country" to present a field not by any process whatsoever to be tilled and cultivated so as to produce novels for some ages to come. The real reason we take it why our incredulous acquaintances arrived at the opinion they expressed is that such cultivation has not yet prospered to any remarkable extent; and that it is always difficult to believe in the possibility of anything of which there is no existing example and type. But as this particular reason for disbelief is one which while it has much actual weight over men's minds is not often openly advanced some more specific and respectable arguments were required and accordingly were soon forthcoming.   In the first place then it is alleged against Australia that it is a new country and as Pitt said when charged with juvenility "this is an accusation which I can neither palliate nor deny." Unless we go into the Aboriginal market for "associations" there is not a single local one of a century old to be obtained in Australia; and setting apart Mr. Fawkner's pre-Adamite recollections of Colonel Collins there is not an association in Victoria mellowed by so much as a poor score of years. It must be granted then that we are quite debarred from all the interest to be extracted from any kind of archeological accessories. No storied windows richly dight cast a dim religious light over any Australian premises. There are no ruins for that rare old plant the ivy green to creep over and make his dainty meal of. No Australian author can hope to extricate his hero or heroine however pressing the emergency may be by means of a spring panel and a subterranean passage or such like relics of feudal barons and refuges of modern novelists and the offspring of their imagination. There may be plenty of dilapidated buildings but not one the dilapidation of which is sufficiently venerable by age to tempt the wandering footsteps of the most arrant parvenu of a ghost that ever walked by night. It must be admitted that Mrs. Radcliffe's genius would be quite thrown away here; and we must reconcile ourselves to the conviction that the foundations of a second "Castle of Otranto" can hardly be laid in Australia during our time. Though the corporation may leave Collins-street quite dark enough for the purpose it is much too dirty to permit any novelist (having a due regard to her sex) to ask the White Lady of Avenel or a single one of her female connections to pass that way.   Even if we survive these losses the sins of youth continue to beset us. No one old enough for a hero can say   "I remember I remember the house where I was born"  apropos of a Victorian dwelling. The antiquity of the United States quite [99] puts us to shame; and it is darkly hinted that there is not so much as a "house with seven gables" between Portland and Cape Howe.   Mr. Horne in his papers on dramatic art observed very truly that one does not go to the theatre (or the novel) for a fac simile of nature. If you want that you can see nature itself in the street or next door. You go to get larger and more comprehensive views of nature than your own genius enables you to take for yourself through the medium of art.   The Cowper Ministry has expressed an opinion against the use of Boards in Government.  The cry for "popular Government" in this colony is a deceptive cry. It is pernicious as a diversion of the public mind from the real danger. It is impossible for anything to prevent the Government being made dependent on the votes of those electors who choose to vote. When the so-called reformers pretend there is some despotic power - some class domineering over the rest in virtue of rank or wealth - they are merely gulling the populace. No such power does exist and until some ages have passed none such will be found in the colonies.  It is not in that direction that we have to fear any obstruction to popular Government. But an evil is at our doors of a far more serious nature than any supposed by political theories. This is the sale of Government patronage; the bribery of public officers and generally the use of popular institutions to get a vote and to make it a matter of barter and sale.  The peculiar circumstances of this colony offer every facility to this bribery. We have a vast estate and by the proposed law its distribution will be in the hands of Ministers.  Beside the land management there is the patronage of an ever extending web of offices multiplying daily and comprehending appointments of great value. It is fearful to reflect that judicial offices as well as others of great trust are at the disposal of parliamentary majorities such as the present House gives; still more alarming when we look at the ever downward tendency in the popular choice.  But we have another grand field of jobbery and corruption full of intricacies and obscurities - the Contract department.  That there might be every guarantee of fairness the late Governments established Boards to deal with tenders. We are told that Boards are screens. They may be so; but it is far more likely that a bargain struck by a head of a department would be corrupt if acting alone - and it is equally likely under the same circumstances a bargain would be struck by a corrupt Minister. It is the impossibility of trusting several parties with a secret that makes it not only safer but indispensable that no transaction involving money be left to one or two men. It is not at all impossible that a Minister will receive direct bribes; history does not lack examples. But it is positively certain that they will tacitly assent to a system of bribes if necessary to the duration of their power.  The object of a Board is to have a chance that a bona fide opinion of what is best for the public may be obtained; that discussion may take place; that reasons may be given and recorded; and finally that a Minister who goes in the teeth of a competent authority may be under some practical responsibility. [148]  The general responsibility of Ministers we repeat as a protection against bargains is a delusion. What does it amount to?  They may be turned out of office by the Assembly but who is to make the Assembly turn them out. The late Ministers were threatened with the loss of supporters purely on selfish grounds - that is for not giving what was equivalent to public money. The responsibility of Ministers is a great cheat - the reverse of the popular idea; a responsibility to men who may if they choose sell their votes for whatever the Minister can bestow. Boards are a check on one large department of bribery - for wherever money is to be expended a honest Minister will desire a check; and a roguish Minister ought not to escape one.  In the district known as the "Murrumbidgee" (Mr. Cowper once designated our able representative Mr. Hay the "representative of gum trees") there are hundreds (we might with truth say thousands) of miles of fencing to be done - not mental "fencing" as practised by town orators but purely physical labour. Those who are unacquainted with the nature of the work can satisfy themselves by a short trip upon the railway from Sydney. It consists of two or three horizontal rails and vertical posts and they are intended to maintain horned and other cattle in enclosed places; they in fact answer the purpose of the "hedges" or "fences" well understood. by every Englishman who has been without "the sound of Bow bells." Now this fencing is very simple work but it is hard yet not harder than any male colonist of ordinary energy and love of independence can accomplish; it does not require the strength of a giant it is not difficult but quiet steady bush work - and work that must be done by somebody. Talking will not do it. "Vote by ballot" would fail; "universal suffrage" would be in no better position - it is peculiarly adapted to the willing heart and ready hand. Upon its accomplishment materially depends the townsman's beefsteak and veal cutlet: for we may except the mutton chop. We do not lose sight of the millions of hides annually sent to England.  Well the man "who wants work" will be glad to hear that for this labour he can be remunerated handsomely. Unlike digging for gold the work is steady and the returns are sure. The steady workman can earn his £3 per week and his rations. There are men who can earn a great deal more; but as we do not rely upon the bare assertion of this fact we shall go into proof.  We have said that this fencing answers the purpose of the English hedge or fence in order to preserve the cattle in their proper boundary. The stations in the interior of Australia require the same protection as it has for some years past been found next to ruinous to allow the cattle fat or lean to stray all over the country as they will do. Those who are geographically acquainted with the little islands from which the British nation are dictating laws to a large proportion of mankind - those who know nothing of the great interior of Australia would doubtless be surprised at the extent of some of those fattening stations. One small run in the district from which I write has a continued line of two-railed fence measuring upwards of 40 miles - we mean Parracoota on the Murray! We mention this as one simple proof in order to show those who differ from us politically that we are not taxing their credulity when we say that we are equal to the times and that we can absorb all the surplus labour of which the people of the capitals in these colonies say they have such an abundance. [182] We have briefly alluded to the nature of the labour which we require; it is work that no honest man need be afraid or ashamed of; it is work that the very best of our colonists or at least a large proportion of them have time after time had to master and follow. We are bold enough to say that there are men in either honorable House oh Parliament  who have done this work and we are assured that they would rather do it again than follow the course of action which the own agitators are adopting in their attempts to undermine the best interests of the country.  Considering the large amount of money which the fencing in of the settlers' "runs" will consume this very fact should well weigh with any Government in passing a measure of reform or what we call revolution affecting the interests of this class. The cost per mile of this work varies from £60 to £100 - perhaps 5s. per rod of 16.5 feet is about the medium price for a strong two-rail fence and a couple of "mates" handy men need not overwork themselves to get through a mile in six or seven weeks. The settlers regard it as indispensable that the work should be done speedily as in some seasons they lose 20 or 30 per cent. of stock which they have brought from a distant part of Australia. We know of cases in which the loss has amounted to 50 per cent. In order to keep pace with the times the settlers in this great district are enclosing at their own expense the ground which they rent from the Crown never asking the "Government aid" or looking for support from any quarter relying on the prosperity of the colony and anticipating the public wants; despising political scheming they are seeking safety in that rare combination of mental energy and physical toil not found excelled in any class of their Anglo-Saxon countrymen in any part of the world. The settler lays out those thousands of pounds upon the strength of British honour and justice. He relies upon his due share of power in the legislature of the country. This is his sheet anchor; deprive him of it and you cut the ground from under him: destroy his political faith and how long can we expect him to devote his life to the development of the resources of the wilderness hidden as are those resources until the early elements of civilisation are called into action? The district from which I now write was fast emerging from its primeval state and but fifteen years have elapsed since the white men first settled there: there is not in this broad colony a more promising locality because the settlers are men of industry and prudence - men who have never looked for help to any State Jupiter but have relied upon themselves. Yet Mr. Cowper and his party are attempting to sap the foundation of this prosperity by destroying our political power and thus pinioning our arms. When he has once succeeded in passing his Electoral Bill - when he has given the "loafer" "the showbanker" the billiard sharper the gambler (who lives on the ruin of his victims) the petty larcenist et id genus omne the same political power (with greater facility for using it) as the most energetic settler in the interior who works hard and lives hard where is the justice? [183]  And now we are about to supplement (to use a Parliamentary phrase) our schedule of work to be done by asking a question which will go far towards explaining away a great anomaly. What is the reason that steam power is called in to do the work in the Australian bush while there are hundreds out of employ in the city of Sydney? Yet so it is! Large contracts are being undertaken for performing the fencing-work by Captain Francis Cadell by means of the steam-engine. Steam is to saw the posts and rails dig the holes for the posts and it is likely to ram them down. Another steam-engine is hard at work at Deniliquin sawing timber which might be done by manual strength now idle in Sydney. Let us remember this sawing splitting and fencing is not skilled labour. It may be acquired in a week or two by any person desirous of learning. There must be something wrong while matters are in this anomalous state. The city of Sydney is the seat of our Government de jure de facto we belong (and have long belonged) to Melbourne; pressed into the change we soon intend to belong to ourselves for we cannot submit to our political power being annihilated for the benefit of a few disaffected persons less enterprising than ourselves - ever craving for change in the hope that the ruin of others may bring about for the clamorous some change for the better.  If we resisted all change if we exercised a monopoly of the whole of the interior; if we refused to pay our fair quota of the taxes of the country; if we enjoyed any special protection in our calling; if meat were dear or inferior in quality; if we could not grow sufficient animal food for the whole of the population town and country; if the whole of the work were done as far as the interior is taken up and we could not absorb the labour as it came into the country; were these charges brought home to us then there would be some reason for the change proposed by the new Electoral Bill but when we are compelled to call steam to our aid because we cannot get manual labour to do the work (and here be it observed that the price for the steam work is higher than if done by hand) then we call upon the party in power to shew cause why our rights are to be subverted ; - why we are to be put hors de combat in the political struggle? - why the interests of the interior are to be trodden under foot to suit the convenience of the noisy brawlers in the metropolitan meetings? - why these men are to possess greater political power than the hard-working colonists who hitherto have been the very strength of the country and who would stand by it in the hour of peril.  We have unaffected sympathy for many in Sydney unemployed and perhaps unfed. We regard with profound sorrow such an anomalous state of things while there is so much to be done in the interior but the fault rests not with us. The line in the Irish Emigrant song is correct. [184]  "They say there's work and bread for all."  .And there is; who says to the contrary affirms that which is untrue. The anomaly therefore must be explained by other parties. Political dogmas enforced by strength of numbers will not do it. The key to the colonists' success is honest industry. Some may have a shorter cut to fortune but this path has serious obstructions in pursuing it; many will get crippled. At all events it is the first time in the history of our colonial affairs that it is proposed to fill the Englishman's stomach with "Manhood Suffrage." We fear that the diet will require to be changed often; fed upon such dainties the stomach will soon "rebel." We here should be sorry to try it; we find a plenty to do and a plenty to eat and we therefore are anxious to know "who wants work?"  The weather during the past seven winter months has on the whole not been unsuitable to the wants of this part of the country although on several occasions great dryness continued until the last moment when such state of the atmosphere could be endured without risking the safety of the live stock and then it has always providentially changed to damp mild weather. In the period from the commencement of April to the end of October rain fell on fifty-eight days but violent showers visited us only fifteen times; on all the other occasions the amount of water deposited on the earth was very trifling. During May June and July frequent frosts occurred generally attended by heavy fogs; the coldest day of the season was the 5th July when there was much ice seen and the thermometer at daylight stood at 33.  I believe it is universally admitted that there has been a decrease in the number of cattle in this district since the end of last summer and that it is owing to the large number of fat cattle taken to market and to the fact of few of the overlanders delivering as much as 50 per cent. of the store cattle with which they originally started from the north. Breeding has now quite passed out of fashion and all deficiencies have consequently to be made up with cattle brought from a distance. Calves have been suffering from some sort of disease in the lungs which not only appears to give them great pain but also prevents them from fattening. Sheep are getting fewer and fewer; and although many persons are talking of putting sheep on their runs as yet I do not hear of the arrival of any flocks. Of the late clip part went to Melbourne by drays and the remainder goes to the same place by the steam-boats via Lake Alexandrina. [186] But few horses have been disposed of but it is expected that if the new method of breaking-in these animals is found successful with buck-jumpers a considerable number of horses hitherto almost useless will be rendered manageable and sent to market.  It is noticeable that this part of the colony is now more valuable than when first taken up as the constant presence of cattle and sheep and more particularly of the latter has had the effect of causing many places - formerly quite barren to become well grassed.  The navigation of the river by five steamboats has given much pleasure to all the settlers along its banks and hopes are entertained that better days are in store for this part of the colony than it has ever yet witnessed.  The fine fresh of water down the channel of the Lachlan and the late rains have had the effect of recovering the Lachlan district from the distress which it suffered in the commencement of the season from the want of water and great deficiency of feed. Grass just now is tolerably plentiful and the stock are fast recovering from the extreme state of leanness to which the barrenness of the plains have reduced them.  This part of the Darling district is daily coming more into notice and it is hardly going too far to say that within a short time the Lower Darling will be quite as valuable as the Lower Murrumbidgee is at the present day. During the winter many runs have been stocked for the first time and it has been found that certain parts are particularly favourable for the grazing of sheep. Some cattle fattened on the Darling and lately sent to Melbourne were especially commended for the fineness of their condition and the firmness of their flesh. The river is constantly patrolled by native police so that the aborigines no longer have the opportunity of molesting the settlers; in fact the majority of the shepherds now employed are black men who are found to be a much more useful set of men than the aborigines ever were in the Murrumbidgee district.  Why promise and not perform is a questions that the inhabitants of this locality wish to put to Bishop Barker because for more than three years past he has promised to send us a minister and as late as 17th May last stated at a public meeting in Sydney that clergymen were shortly to be appointed to the Lachlan the Lower Murrumbidgee and Moulamein and yet up to the present moment we have seen nothing of the coming men. It may here be stated that there is urgent need for two or three clergymen and plenty of work for them to do funds forthcoming for their support and in this district very probably money for building a chapel at Lang's Crossing Place as soon as ever there may be any want of such an erection. The way in which Sunday is usually spent in these parts is far from being conducive to the promotion of morality and nothing but the presence amongst us of faithful ministers will ever have any effect in counteracting such proceedings. [187] All true friends of the Church of England must greatly regret the apathy that has been shown in the important work of obtaining additional clergymen for the large amount of work long waiting to be done in the unsettled districts.  Although no special diseases have prevailed there have been great complaints during the winter of a considerable amount of general illness for which the weather and the unusual deficiency of electricity in the air have justly or unjustly been accused of being the cause. Diarrhoea has been a somewhat frequent visitor and ophthalmic diseases have continued to be very prevalent.  New and improved huts with glass windows wooden floors lined walls and many necessary comforts formerly but rarely seen in the bush appear to be now the order of the day as well as large size stock-yards with draughting gates and other conveniences for the easy working of cattle. Very large paddocks enclosing considerable tracts of country have also been erected in many localities. The work of fencing in runs is also still being carried on on a large scale and much attention is directed to damming creeks so as to keep if not a permanent at least a partial supply of water during the commencement of the summer.  Much more attention is also now being paid here to the cultivation of garden ground and it is now found that by putting in the seed at the commencement of the autumn fine crops of early vegetables may be raised. The want of cabbage since the ravages of the aphis brassica destroyed the crops has been partially supplied by the use of milk thistles which when boiled are very good and nearly similar in flavour to spinach. The young leaves of the salt bush have also been used and when eaten with the addition of a little vinegar are not found to be altogether unpalatable. It has been proved by trial that the pink coloured pulpy fruit of the pig-face (mesembryanthemum) may be converted into very good jelly or jam.  The amount of labour lately present in this district has been far from equal to the demand - in fact during the whole time of shearing there was a deficiency of men. There has been a demand for hutkeepers cooks and milkmen which has not been supplied. Many families have been brought out and are still arriving from England under special engagements for employment in the bush. Such persons seem generally to be found more serviceable than others who have had long colonial experience. Really good servants still command high wages but the remuneration paid to middling and inexperienced persons is somewhat lower than formerly. The present average rates are: Stockmen £60 to £80; shepherds £40 to £45; man and wife on station £75 to £85; milkmen £60 all by the year; hutkeepers 15s. to 25s.; tailors 15s.; labourers 15s. to 20s. all by the week. [188]  THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES  Pastoral Admonition of the Most Illustrious and Most Rev. Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan and the Most Rev. Robert William Bishop of Hobart Town and the Most Rev. James Allipius Bishop of Melbourne to the Very Rev and Rev. Clergy subject to their jurisdiction.  MOST BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST. - The salvation of the Australian Province whose guardianship we have received from the Holy Apostolic See compels us to be watchful that insolent and most foul liberty which does not hesitate to commit to public print what each one may think concerning faith discipline authority and ecclesiastical individuals may not become more pernicious in proportion to its daily extension. For men of little wisdom invade the citadel of Zion and corrupt the fountains of wholesome knowledge for the destruction of the Christian community. They have become execrable in their undertakings; and sitting in ambush secretly draw forth their weapons from their quiver with which in the dark they strike the upright and just. What is there however holy who is there however unspotted his life from whom they have refrained from using their insolent thoughts and in opposing whom they have not sharpened their tongues like a sword. Following in the footsteps of Luther and other authors of heresy they profess the greatest veneration towards the Church and still raise their voices and write in various ways concerning abuses and shortcomings; they hold Bishops in honour and condemn Episcopal rule. [719] Moreover what exceeds their comprehension they dare after their own fashions to criticise in the public papers. The faith of the simple is scoffed at; they are desirous to penetrate every mystery concerning the government of the church and bandy questions upon most important affairs rashly and to the great scandal of the faithful. The errors of the Synod of Pistoja already condemned by the Holy See are renewed; they strike again in the face of our Lord Jesus in the persons of his ministers. These roaring lions in their audaciousness usurp every thing to themselves; every thing must be examined; every thing must be weighed by minds perhaps but lightly imbued with Catholic truth and discipline; and nothing at all reserved for episcopal authority and loving obedience of the faithful and confiding soul.  Wherefore most beloved brethren we whom the Holy Ghost has appointed to rule the church of God cannot in so great a corruption and blindness do otherwise than arouse as far as in us lies the spirit of your devotion (inasmuch as you are co-operators in our pastoral solicitude) to unite with us as far as you can for the same end. You having been made dispensers of the mysteries of God be careful that the sheep entrusted to your care and redeemed with the blood of Christ be kept at a distance from such poisoned pasturage as just alluded to. If it is necessary to depart from the company of wicked men because their speech spreads like a cancer what devastation may not this public journal effect which insolently (though without any lawful title to do so) recommends itself as the defender of Catholic faith and discipline; which circulates amongst us is found at our homes and penetrates even those private dwellings where under another name it would not obtain admittance.  Wherefore it is your duty to use every care that the souls that perish be not required at the hands of their pastors. To you it belongs to stand as a barrier that no other foundation be laid than that which now exists. Let the foxes who destroy the vineyard of the Lord be exposed in public with all prudence. Let each one be advised not to allow himself to be cajoled by the names of certain individuals - not to be imposed upon by the arrogance and cunning of men for the circulation of error; in one word let him condemn everything whether it be books or public journals in which there may be anything that may offend the pious reader or that may be contrary to faith religion discipline or brotherly love amongst the clergy as a body or between them and their flocks - in fine whatever is opposed to good morals and savours not of Christian probity.  But if anything should be necessary on our part to avert this calamity we should ever be ready to lend our assistance even to making use of the Apostolic keys (which may God avert). [720]  In the meanwhile we will not fail in all humility of heart to implore for you assistance from on high to destroy the cunning of the insidious and enable you to fully complete the duties of your ministry.  JOHN BEDE A.B. Sydney.  ROBERT WILLIAM B. Hobart Town.  JAMES ALLIPIUS B. Melbourne. Melbourne Feast of St. Barnabus  A.D. 1858.  I feel like a bird in a cage left without groundsel seed and water when masonry forms my horizon on a Sunday afternoon.  In wet weather the damp streets with their closed shops and towering walls look like huge graving-docks; in fine they are monotonous canals of stagnant sunshine. Their Pompeian stillness - unbroken save by the rattle of an occasional omnibus and the hoarse croaking of its driver and shrill treble of its cad ejaculating in amoebean contest "Glebe! Glebe! Newtown! New-town! Barwan Park!" "Wool'm'loo! 'm'loo!" "Paddingtun !" - oppresses me congests my brain. The weariness of all the busy week gathered into one overwhelming feeling of ennui seems to be brooding in the atmosphere of dust; and when the bells begin to ring for church you miss their morning's silvery sound of joy their evening's softer sound of peace. Ding-dong ding-dong in dull metallic tones without a single touch of poetry is all they say.  Disregarding their drowsy call to drowsy prayer - afternoon-service to me is always suggestive of undigested pudding on the part of both priest and people - I make a point of joining one of the many throngs that pour out from all sides of Sydney like swarming bees on Sunday afternoon. Let me sketch a few of my companions.  Look at those servant-girls with their year's wages on their backs - chaotic heaps of discordant colours - masses of jumbled rainbow; so that a tulip-bed in all its glory is not arrayed like one of these. Like red harvest-moons shining through cloud-wreaths their round ruddy faces literally blaze with robust rude health out of their feathers flowers and gauze. Their podgy hands seem bursting from their coverings like overripe gooseberries. Delicate French gloves and glittering bracelets hardly harmonise with raw-beef wrists. [38]  Contrast the little milliner - her pale face flushing into sea-shell pink in the fresh breeze. Her dress probably  has not cost a tithe of the value of Bridget's; but which looks the more like a lady? Of course I don't blame poor Bridget for her costly and yet clumsy splendour - she knows no better; but I read in the pretty little milliner a pretty little lesson on the benefit of taste.  There goes a shop-boy smoking and gorgeously attired and mounted on a hired or borrowed hack. He fondly imagines that he is the focus of hundreds of admiring eyes and that all who gaze on him consider him a squatter. Alas! his seat betrayeth him; squatters don't ride like that. The few who do look at him take him for a tailor.  A pair of lovers: "She" as the old music-books say  with a face a perfect flower-garden of smiles; "He" all awkward and confused. Why on earth should the man always be ashamed of being in love? It is the poor woman that commits the folly.  A family group: Paterfamilias a German baker of bland but spooney aspect; he smiles incessantly upon his little English wife and punctuates her rapid flow of words with the assenting Ja! or the emphatic Nein! He nurses two of the children moreover; and very curious it is to behold the bland and spooney aspect of the father's face repeated in the countenances of those young Teutons.  Suppose we embark in one of the crowded craft that wave their smoke-burgees and scarcely less sooty flags over holiday-makers bound for Parramatta Cremorne Watson's Bay or Manly Beach. What comical collections of humanity the good folks are - intensely conscious for the most part of their "Sunday clothes" glossy and wrinkled silk and broadcloth winking as it were in the unwonted blaze to which they are exposed - reminiscences of press and drawers suffusing with a bashful blush the immaculate purity of their hebdomodal resurrection. How solemnly the good people take their pleasure - in the orthodox ponderous manner of Britons on whatever shore their fate may cast them. Grave they look as if going to a funeral. The very actors yonder in abnormal hats - escaped for a brief respite from the week-long atmosphere of orange-peel and gas - succumb to the prevailing sentiment take their key-note from the dominant tone of the circumambient lugubrious glee; and cigar in mouth - With shorn cheeks pale against its ruddy glow - they cluster around the funnel as though they would keep themselves in countenance by its example whilst doing anything so dissipated as smoking. A serious silence reigns from stem to stern unbroken save when the steersman turns his quid emitting its mahogany-hued juice upon the sun-scorched deck with a splash that sounds like that of "the first of a thunder-shower" in the awful hush.  Such mournful merrymakers become tiresome after a bit; so leaving them as Elia says of the Egyptian hermits to "enjoy one another's want of conversation" let us look around. [39]  The flags of all nations flash like splendid meteors athwart the sapphire sky and boats with snowy sails fly like sea-birds over the blue waters. Now we pass a huge emigrant-ship alive with passengers gazing anxiously over the bulwarks at their "promised land;" and anon a tiny anchored yacht that seems to be fretting for freedom as it pulls at its tether like little Barbara Lewthwaite's lamb and then finding the effort vain swims round and round its buoy in a pretty little pet of impatient impotent anger.  We may well be proud of our harbour. Lovely are its deep indenting waters; covered with dancing dimples swathed in sheets of gold; rolling in emerald green heaving in violet blue; blushing beneath the parting gaze of the setting sun or looking up to him pale and trembling in the morn when all night long the thunder has pealed and echoed through the dark. Still although a gem of the first water Port Jackson would certainly be all the better for a brighter setting.  Like a mighty army of Huns in never-ending march the gloomy trees sweep down from the far distance to the melancholy shore. Here and there it is true the sombre mass is enlivened by a break that beams in cultivated beauty and tells of the sweet charities of Home; but even on its enlivener the black bush casts a shadow from its superfluity of shade. The islands too that clad in verdure - waving with the foliage of more favoured lands - might be so beautiful remind one now as they gaze drearily upon their doubles in the reflecting waters of widows in old mourning embrowned by the dust and heat of many a weary day hanging over their mirrors in half-hopeless longing for the time when they may cast aside their rusty weeds. Pinchgut is free from the "sad-coloured" raiment; but Pinchgut decorated with a tower like a gigantic hat - a monstrously magnified drab Mountcastle - doth not add greatly to the harbour's picturesque.  Now let us land on the North Shore and wander through the fragrant forest - not so ugly when one is in it and can discriminate the hues that blend into a pall of gloom when seen from a distance; let us roam through its silent solitudes sprinkled with many a holy happy nunnery of flowers until we come to St Leonard's churchyard. "Rejoice Oh young man in thy youth!" has hitherto been the summer-breeze's song; the rest of the text it murmurs like a solemn refrain as it rustles in the waving grass above the graves.  In the "Deaths" - calmly chronicled in that little tablet above the programme of the day's bustle and merry-making - there is an appeal that catches every eye and dims for a moment its kindling fires of revelry or greed. Another of Time's waves has dashed its spray upon the shore. We all of us take perforce an interest in Death because it is our common doom. The loneliness of deaths out here adds a peculiar melancholy to these records. Far from the old familiar places the old familiar faces we drop unheeded as the yellow leaves silently falling in the quiet autumn air and rot like them unnoticed in the ground. [40] How many a one for whom Love across the sea has looked and longed in vain lies in our graveyards! Those despairing mothers' and sisters' appeals for tidings of So-and-so who sailed from such a place in this ship or the other "and has not since been heard of" make the third column of the Herald a very pathetic one to me. I am afraid the tidings are but seldom gained or if gained are very seldom glad. Disappointment Dissipation Desperation Death keep a firm grip upon their victims. Not once in a hundred times is the missing son or brother found: when found perhaps it would have been better for the peace of those who sought him that he should have remained lost to them in knowledge as in life. A foul festered heart contrasted with the pure bright spirit that those who seek the lost one loved is but a dreary resurrection after long weary years of brow-wrinkling eye-dimming heart-breaking anxiety.  I ought perhaps to apologise for preaching: my excuse for my sermon must be that I have been writing on - SUNDAY AFTERNOON.  How I Started for Muswellbrook and Only Got to Maitland  "Not there not there my child." - Mrs Hemans.   Up and down the steep dimly-lighted streets that lie between Wynyard Square and the water my cab goes blundering like a huge humble - or as I would rather write it Bumble-bee - that beadle amongst insects. Cabmen are generally supposed to be well acquainted with the ins and outs of Sydney - some of them unfortunately are too well acquainted with the inns and my driver is one of this description. In a glorious state of topographical uncertainty hither and thither he jerks and lashes his horses; not infrequently bumping his pole against dead walls in vain attempts to find previously undiscovered passages to the wharf through culs-de-sac. I begin to fancy that I shall have to pass the night in wandering along rows of houses that seem as fast asleep as their owners (their closed shutters reminding one of eyelids sealed) - in watching dissipated cats out upon the loose and wearing the half stealthy and ashamed half swaggering and independent air that marks their human congeners young gentlemen with latch-keys; homeless dogs hungry and fierce foraging for garbage; hulking fellows as fierce and ravenous without the dogs' excuse of homelessness and hunger; and the slow-footed Erinnyes in shiny hats great coats and oilskin capes who have not their eyes upon these scoundrels - when suddenly inspired my jarvie pulls up at a dark archway.  A lazzaroni-horde of ragged porterkins issue from the gloom and squabble for my carpet-bag like a swarm of demons for the soul of a Don Juan who has craftily made a separate bargain with each individual imp. [159] Guided by their howls I follow the young devils through the darkness reach the boat and recover my baggage.  I like to leave Sydney at night having a taste for the Dantesque. All cities when viewed en masse have then so hellish an aspect.  Rattle along the Greenwich Railway when the red-hot cinders light up the murky air and strew the road with smouldering scoriae as they whiz from the funnel or fall from the ash-box; and when the gas-lit rails seem glowing ploughshares on which in horrible ordeal the locomotives with glaring eyes and shrieks of anguish are doomed to rush along for ever. Look down upon the myriads of chimneys right and left belching forth their hateful smoke into the already overburdened atmosphere - upon that wide-spread gloom-canopied plain of brick-and-mortar: of what text does the whole scene remind you?  Sydney tonight looks scarcely less infernal. Its smoke goes up to heaven the sprinkled lamps serve but to intensify the circumambient blackness the Gas Works jet forth their sultry column of lurid light dark figures flit blaspheming before the cresset-fires upon the wharf.  And yonder gloomy silent bush seems a dreary Hades peopled with ghosts condemned awaiting within sight of hell Dies irae dies illa when in Mephistopheles's fiendishly graphic phrase they shall come shuddering up to judgment!  Judex ergo cum sedebit  Quidquid latet adparebit  Nil inultum remanebit.  Quid sum miser tunc dicturus?  Quem patronum rogaturus?  Cum vix justus sit securus.  The squalls of Sussex-street pigs in torment dispel these moody thoughts. It is on no Inferno but merely a porcine purgatory that I look.  Let me paint more minutely my surroundings.  The bull's eyes in the deck twinkle knowingly when I tread upon them as if they saw that my boots so swellish in their upper leathers stand sadly in need of soleing and chuckled over the discovery. The wheel - its brazen centre just revealed by the glow of these impertinently inquisitive little lights - gazes at the binnacle with its queer bell-crowned hat like Polypheme ogling Mother Hubbard by mistake for Galatea and - marvelling that Galatea should have all at once become so passee - contenting himself with gazing. The quarter boats creak lazily upon the davits. The funnels with their cauliflower-heads of rising steam look like gigantic pots of foaming beer. [160]  Figureheads of neighbouring vessels peer in upon me: bowsprits point at me as if festered fingers extended from the noses of the said figureheads in contemptuous "sight". Like the very spectres of ships - craft such as that which crossed the Ancient Mariner's track on his wild lonely voyage - lie the more distant vessels with shadowy hulls and dimly towering spars. Warehouses commonplace enough by day mere prosaic receptacles for "produce" loom through the murk awful as haunted castles. The crane looks fearsome as the tennanted gibbet upon a "barren moor" beneath which a benighted wayfarer suddenly finds himself -   "drearily withering" around him.  the undescribed sounds  That come a-swooning over hollow grounds.  Here and there a glimmering lamp pries into the secrets of the black waters with light all trembling as if it fell upon a corpse's face - the putrefying features and stony-staring eyeballs of a murdered man.  A cable rattles like a cart-load of cannon-balls through the hawseholes of yonder anchoring brig; and a voice cooeys but cooeys long in vain for a shore-boat. The watermen - choice spirits that they are - are in the public-house and will not come until they have finished their grog however loudly my pea-jacketed Glendower you may be pleased to call for them. At length a boat shoves off and at each stroke of the oars the silent water gives forth a phosphorescent gleam like the glance of anger from a dumb man's eye. A wake of golden-white foam marks the swift wherry's course. Far away sounds the "melancholy-merry song" of mariners pumping at the patent-windlass: click-click-click sobs the "camel of the sea" as she pulls at her tether-pin. Ship-bells in every key from deepest bass to shrillest treble remind each other of the passing hours.  Presently a bell rings with impatient clamour and all in a fret and fuss with hissing steam panting machinery and splashing paddles - angry as it were at having been detained and fearing that she will find no one up to welcome her - a belated Wollongong packet works her way up the harbour. Her red light turns its waters into wine her flapping floats churn them into cream: thus mixing a beautiful syllabub - beautiful but fit only for Barmecide banquets. With as much ado as the biggest mail-boat would make the little vixen bustles into her berth disembarks her draggletailed cheese-complexioned passengers and then snores herself off to dreamless slumber - i.e. blows off her steam.  The moon - long waited for by her patient handmaidens the silvery stars - arises in full-faced beauty paving the waters with a road of trembling gold. A less romantic arrival is contemporaneous with hers. Going below I find that the mail-bags have just been brought on board - the official who brings them looking very sulky when he beholds upon the cabin-table the luggage of a fellow-clerk who - he for the first time learns - has obtained a few days' leave of absence which I presume will double grim official's duties. [161] Grim official however solaces himself by demanding a cigar of the civil black sub-steward for which in his perturbation of spirit grim official forgets to pay; but lighting it at the wrong end stalks stiffly up the companion-staircase crushing his hat with an appalling smash - as men wrapped up in their own wrongs are apt to do when passing through low archways - ere he emerges in indignant majesty upon the deck. Civil black sub-steward loses his civility; an inebriate consigner of cargo persisting in looking for it in the steward's pantry.  The Ethiop provoked beyond endurance calls him a "half-gentleman" and bids him hold his jaw. "Lucky for you that you're not in the States my fine fellow" I think within myself. At the same time I feel proud that here all men are "free and equal" one can put up with a little free-and-easiness to be able to boast that blessing. The dapper obliging little steward - what a peculiar pale-faced people zealous (for a consideration) of good works are the whole tribe of stewards - and the dainty obliging little stewardess flit about like Cock Robin and Jenny Wren amongst a lot of rooks; for gruff croaking is the dominant tone amongst the passengers who now are pouring in - lost parcels and pre-occupied berths being the grounds of their complaints.  Attendant friends having imbibed valedictory nobblers rush on deck at the cry of "Who's for the shore?' and I follow them. The boat is cleared of all but crew and passengers the moorings are cast off the gangway is drawn back with a jerking pull upon the wharf and away we go: - past huge anchored ships with lights blinking drowsily alow and brighter lights aloft making their gaffs seem Aaron's rods bursting forth in golden blossom - past bobbing buoys that look with their long streaming locks of dripping tangle heads of sea-monsters (submerged during day) come up to dry their manes and breathe the cool night-air - past Dawes's Battery stronghold of infantry and pretty nursemaids - past Fort Macquarie shimmering ghostly-white in the moonlight - past Woolloomooloo's avalanche of hovels - past villa-gardens where the moonbeams glint from lustrous banana-leaves like love-glances from Spanish eyes and make the pale-blue aloes doubly pale - the very ghosts of Agavae and shadow morning-hours upon the solitary lichen-spotted sundials as old men are visited in dreams by memories of youth - past Rose Bay's reach of milkwhite sand - past the Lighthouse winking to itself as if it knew a thing or two that the Ocean wanted to do in the wrecking line but didn't mean to let him - past the dazzling Lightship - past the Heads looking over at each other sadly stern recalling Coleridge's sweet lines on sundered friends - out into the black white-crested surging hissing waves coming on on on for ever and ever and swept over by that lonely homeless sea-breeze - half mournful and half fierce - that always makes me think of the wasted girls with hopeless eyes one sees in London streets at night hurrying along wind-like - none knows whence none cares whither. [162]  Swaying from side to side like a sea-bird the Illalong skims along the billows. From each funnel flutters a smoke-streamer spangled with glowing sparks. Far behind stretches a line of seething creamy foam. Contrasted with the wild welter of the waters how peaceful seems the pearly sky! And yet in that calm heaven a radiant rushing is really going on that makes man's fastest machinery-aided speed far far less in comparison than beside that appears the slowest snail's pace. Where we see only the fin-poised repose of sleeping goldfish mighty masses are thundering through Space with more than a hurricane's impetus. So much for the "silent stars".  The moonbeams fall upon a passing vessel's swelling sail. White as Alpine snow it glistens in their tranquil light and carries my thoughts back to that far-off night upon a distant sea when we were boarded by the ruthless pirate Death - who cometh without nail selects his victim and then unmarked goes over the side again in quest of other prey on the wide ocean.  We were becalmed in the tropics. The reef-points pattered on the idle sails like rain as the ship frosted with silver by the gorgeous moonlight - deck canvas cordage spars one blaze of lovely light - lazily rose and fell upon the heaving billows. But in that beauteous sea round and round the ship like a sullen sentinel a grim shark kept his watch. I went below to the "hospital berth". A flickering lamp cast its sickly gleam on the sick man's pale and clammy brow as he tossed in his narrow bunk; talking deliriously of scenes and faces far away and petulantly asking why they should chain him there - when would the ship move on? A breeze sprang up a little after midnight; on went the ship and the shark followed her. At sunrise gasping forth some message to his mother - fated never to reach her for none on board knew aught of her or him - the sick man died. Wrapt in the Union Jack we laid him on the long-boat; and at evening when the setting sun was tipping the foaming waves with crests of fire the solemn words were read; the sails shivered as the ship was luffed up into the wind; there was a leaden plunge: a snowy sea-bird flew off to the horizon like a liberated soul; the sails filled again; the ship went swiftly on and far astern the moonbeams played above the stranger's lonely grave.  But it is time to turn in. A boisterous gentleman opposes my purpose when I descend to carry it into execution; inviting me to partake of brandy and water with him instead and asserting with swaggering emphasis that he is "Ocean's child" and considers "the delightful motion of the boat to be the rocking of his natural cradle". I observe however that "Ocean's child" cannot eat the ham sandwiches he orders. [163] He soon grows very white about the gills and disinclined to talk; and at length makes a precipitate retreat to his berth beside which the black sub-steward (whom he has been chaffing) exulting at his discomfiture hangs one of those queer little buckets like birdseed holders and grinning leaves him to be lulled to sleep by the "rocking of his natural cradle".  Unfortunates in various stages of the mal de men startle the night with moans and hideous uproar. Being pretty well sea-seasoned myself of course I am disgusted at their conduct. By-the-bye is not this the way in which most of us treat a certain moral infirmity also? Happening from difference of temperament to be proof against the particular temptation - perchance preserved by strength of constitution from exhibiting the ordinary symptoms of having yielded to it - how we cry out against our peccant brother who has both eaten of the forbidden fruit and manifestly has the stomach-ache in consequence! It costs many men nothing to be teetotallers and yet they plume themselves upon their abstinence as though it were a sun-bright virtue. Others again who have each drunk as much in a night as the object of their scorn would drink in a fortnight turn up their noses at a poor weak-headed fellow who succumbs to a glass or two in most ethical disdain. It is edifying to listen to their lectures upon sottishness.  When I wake the next day - a cool and showery Sunday - we have passed Newcastle and are steaming up the river. This then is the far-famed Hunter - muddy as the Thames with banks as flat as Essex marshes! True there are some pretty hills in the distance just before you come to Hexham but as a whole the lower part of the Lower Hunter appears to me about as lovely as a plate of soup. [...]  I land at Morpeth and proceed to Maitland intending to go on at once by the mail to Singleton. At the inn from which the machine starts I fall in with a friend. The sinner enticeth me and I consent.  I wake next morning to find that my friend is gone my money too: an inconvenient state of things since I remember enough of my pridian experiences to be aware that latterly I imbibed on tick that my friend was impecunious and that consequently an hotel-bill remains unsettled.  There at Last  Forsitan haec olim meminisse juvabit.  To slope from the inn in which you have very unceremoniously taken your ease without settling your account - even when you leave your luggage as security for ultimate payment - is not the most gentlemanly mode of procedure in the world. [164] It is however the course that I am compelled to adopt; for my wealth consists but of a shilling or two. I know no one in Maitland and fear that if I disclose the state of my circumstances to my landlord he may have me apprehended as a swindler who has obtained good liquor under false pretences.  Not belonging by any means to the Pachydermata of moralists in matters of this sort I look so conscious of fugitive intentions when I descend the staircase of the "Northumberland" (an hotel by-the-bye that I can safely recommend to more immediately remunerating customers than myself) that I wonder the barmaid does not lay violent hands on me and demand on behalf of her master the liquidation of my little bill. But she is flirting with an early nobbleriser and suffers me to pass her yawning window unchallenged and depart unheeded on my road to Singleton.  Travelling in Australia is sadly monotonous. The highways are all fashioned in one model. Everywhere you see the same grey or red rail-fences; the same ragged gum-trees reminding you of men with dirty tattered shirts; the same tall bare white boles extending their arms like skeletons about to break forth in sepulchral oratory or "set" in a "Dance of Death" the same charred prostrate trunks like blackfellows knocked down in a drunken squabble (felled trees in other countries look like heroes o'ermastered in Homeric strife); the same black jagged stumps like foul decaying teeth; the same distant verdure - verdure a non vinendo - like piles of dry mud and soot the same scrub close at hand with dingy foliage that looks like Royal Mint-street clothing half hopelessly hung out for sale (even leaves in Australia possess "colonial experience" and are anything but green); the same not grass but graminaceous scurf as if the earth had got the ringworm; the same bark-roofed slab-huts not so respectable as English pigsties; the same ramshackle rambling roadside inns with canoe-like water-troughs; the same execrable road in dry weather a field abominably ploughed over whose furrows the mail-cart goes bump-bump lurch-lurch churning all milk of human kindness in the new chum polishing his pants on cushionless seats or subjacent post-bags into anything but butter for the constructors of the accursed tracks on which the stay-at-home writers of Australian Guide-books have bestowed such lying eulogies: in wet weather a Slough of Despond no modern Christian ought to be called upon to pass a channel of mire dotted with bogged drays with drivers seated on their loads like sailors in the tops of wrecks and foundering ships smoking with the grim resignation of despair. "'The roads of Australia proverbial!" Verily they are proverbial - but in no fundatory sense!  To resume my catalogue of identities: - Everywhere you are oppressed by the same long miles of loneliness relieved only by the same bullock-drays with barking dogs jingling bells kegs slung beneath and pots and pannekins swinging behind; by the same flocks of sheep herds of cattle mobs of horses (their drivers - straight and thin as ramrods lank-haired as Indians sallow as mummies - sitting stately in their saddles now cracking their stockwhips like so many rifles anon resting the handles sceptre-fashion on their thighs with the lashes looped in loose coil like tame serpents round their arms); by the same female equestrians remarkable for short habits and substantial ankles carrying all sorts of things from a feather bed to a pumpkin-pie dangling at their saddle-bows; and by the same Chinamen with silken nets hanging veil-wise from their cabbage-trees and balancing poles like milk-yokes on their shoulders from the ends of which depend their blanket-bundles and umbrellas - whoever saw a vagrant Celestial without an umbrella? [165]  Natives when in the company of immigrants are in the habit of trumpeting the beauty of their country about thirty times an hour. Now for my own part I always suspect everything except a king or queen that requires to be proclaimed; and remembering that most Australians like the mouse in the fable have had but scanty opportunities of comparison and call their own land a fine one just simply because they have not seen any other I make a point of never saying "Amen" to these fulsomely reiterated praises. I don't say it because I can't say it. Of all the lands that ever I saw Australia appears to me to be the ugliest shrivelled and sulky-looking as the most ancient and hopeless of old maids. [...]  The Dutch measure their distances by pipes: Charles Lamb used to measure his by pints. In emulation of that great public benefactor I make my milestones nobblers. The consequence is that in the bush my miles are often somewhat lengthy. Scotch miles with very big bittocks. It is evening and I recall with melancholy appreciation a derivation of the word Spes on which I stumbled once upon a time whilst turning over the leaves of a German Latin dictionary: - "SPES; Sanscrit bhas akin to the Greek aos light - a light in the distance towards which you look and long." The light in the distance for which I look and long is a public-house lamp for I am footsore fatigued famished and very thirsty; but none such can I discover. So first drinking or rather lapping up and then bathing face hands and feet in some water of the colour and consistency of coffee-grounds (using the gritty sand that circles it as soap - very Brown Windsor) I pick the grassiest spot I can find to camp out in and lay me down to take my rest with my paletot wrapped around me. The stars come out one by one and look down on me like loving sisters' watchful eyes. Presently the moon rises over the dark trees. I don't relish her full light so much. [166] I fancy that she is comparing me - not to my advantage - with Endymion.  She is "dropping down the sky all silently" when after a wretched mosquito-haunted night I wake for good. A rich aroma - there is some good even in gum-trees - fills the fresh morning air as I push on to the next inn for breakfast; and cheerfully curls the blue wood-smoke from the encampments of the bullock-drivers preparing for their day's journey. After a dejeuner sans la fourchette of bread and cheese and my pet beer at a wayside "public" I descend upon Patrick's Plains and hobble into Singleton - a town composed apparently of inns mills and tabernacles. In a small place the divisions of sect look almost ludicrous; it seems so strange that half-a-dozen people should want half-a-dozen different roads to heaven. Going to one of the mills to get a boat to cross the river I overhear a Methodist expounding the peculiarities of his creed to his floury fellow-workmen. Instead of sneering I somehow respect him for it. We southerners are such a set of Sadducees or if we have any religion make it so exclusively a "thing of synagogues and Sundays" - locking it up as it were with what Sam Slick calls our "go-to meetin' clothes" that this weaving of it into the warp of common workday life seems to me - to say the least - an interesting phenomenon. It makes me think of the old Apostolic times when those who pulled the oar and hauled the net were also fishers of men; of the old Puritan times when in Carlyle's phrase the English squire wore his belief in God about him like his shot-belt.  Failing to obtain a boat I return to the crossing-place; passing on the road a candidate for senatorial honours who is on a canvassing-tour. He folds his arms and knits his brow striving as he paces the veranda of his hotel - planting his little feet with all the ponderosity of which they are capable (and that isn't much - the lead lies in the opposite extremity) - to look the very Zeus of booksellers and statesmen I need not say that he fails most deplorably in his attempt. It's no use trying little Nid! Thou wast not meant to be majestic. - For want of a more dignified conveyance I am constrained to mount a water-cart and cross the river sitting like a sign-painter's Bacchus astride upon a tun.  A hot dusty tiring thirst-provoking day - I meet an old pupil. He seems somewhat surprised to see his former "guide philosopher and friend" plodding through the bush in shirt-sleeves and with upturned trousers like a tinker on the tramp; but nevertheless - young scoundrel that he is - he offereth me not a horse. I wander through a wilderness of trees springing from soil so sun-scorched that one marvels that even an Australian forest can grow there. As the road winds I catch glimpses of gloomy hills with solemn Dead Seas of sombre foliage in the intervening gullies. Towards evening I reach Glennie's Creek and see for a wonder a little rural "bit" worthy of the pencil of a Gainsborough. [167] The sun is low in the cooling sky. The grass gleams like burnished bronze. The leaves of the eucalypti are tipped with gold. A flock of bleating lambs are descending to the stream followed by a bevy of barefooted children - just let out of school - as noisy and as gamesome. In front of an English-looking inn stands an English-looking landlord lazily watching a wool-dray which has just been upset on the other side of the creek within shadow of the pretty little white stone church. To right the overturned dray a team has been borrowed from the dray behind. One of the bullocks shams faint and is liberated from the yoke; whereupon Strawberry knowingly whisks his tail and rushes into the water with a broad grin upon his bovine nose. After sundry remarkable displays of engineering - mechanical science in these parts appears decidedly to be in its infancy - the wain is set upon its wheels once more crosses the creek together with its companion and the drivers and their local allies celebrate their triumph with copious libations.  Another night of camping out. No sleep. The bull-frogs croak like their human analogues with a detestable tone of enjoyment. The parrots chatter like schoolgirls in their bedroom when the governess on duty has gone down to supper. High up in the trees my little namesakes send forth their indescribable cry. Countless crickets hiss in chorus. Lukewarm rain falls ever and anon. Flies cluster on my face making it look - if there were any one here to see it - a very liberally fruited currant-dumpling. Above all those d-d mosquitoes - I can't help it I must swear - jostle with the flies for the possession of my nose and turn my hands into a pair of pink perforated cards. I am a Pythagorean and firmly believe that the souls of unpaid creditors migrate on their decease into mosquitoes and in that form continue to torment their unfortunate debtors. That last dig came from a departed snip. This under which I at present wince is the spiteful bite of a dead landlady. Would that I had bled honestly in metaphor and thus avoided this vile literal phlebotomy!  Morning comes at last. A miserable breakfast and a miserable day - spent in crawling along like a wounded snake lying down in the Brummagem shade that Australian trees afford and seeking for and drinking muddy water. Everyone they say must eat a peck of dirt in his lifetime. I am sure that I have taken my quantum diluted a dozen times over in this trip of mine. Now however I can find no water however muddy. Every moment I am tantalised by the fancied sound the fancied sight of running streams. I might as well hope for them in Sahara. Dead beat with a hundred pulses throbbing in my head I drop upon the ground muttering Hibernice: "It's all up with me!" When lo! suddenly the sunlight fades the wind rushes moistly past and in a few minutes the lightning writes its blinding zigzags on the blackened heavens and the awful thunder crashes and rumbles through the gloom. [168] Down comes the rain in sheets not drops; I drink at every pore and freshen like a plant.  The sun is shining again in a blue evening sky when splashed to the eyes at last I enter Muswellbrook. The wet shingles flash back his dazzling rays and every leaf is decked with quivering brilliants.  The Hippodrome is the name given to the last transformation of that extremely ugly and nondescript building which was in the first epoch of its existence known by the name of Tattersall's and which has but lately served as a market for the sale of stale vegetables and meat of doubtful freshness. There was never anything attractive about the place: the concerts of its early days had a gaudy kind of squalor as their characteristic and the balls had only more dust and confusion than the concerts. When it was devoted to its legitimate purposes it had an earthy sephulchral smell and its equine inhabitants seemed the most dismal of quadrupeds. As a produce market it offered an interesting study to such natural philosophers as delight in investigating the decomposition of vegetable and animal tissues; and now that it has become a "Hippodrome" it is equally remarkable for moral foetor as it was erewhile for material malexhalations. Its contiguity to that cloaca of putrescent vice Little Bourke Street renders it most convenient as a reservoir wherein may flow that ever-moving stream of human loathsomeness which fills the localities hereabout; and hence Yankee 'cuteness has judged rightly for itself in believing that a certain kind of coarse boisterous attraction would turn this current therein.  If there are any enthusiastic students of physiognomy who are not Over-fastidious where they pursue their investigations of the human Countenance I recommend them to go to this Hippodrome and they will see an assemblage of characters such as in few other places could be brought together. [256] The place is approached with difficulty. I do not mean that the unsightly structure itself is not readily enough found but there is requisite no little address to arrive inside. If any simpleminded individual should go thither with recollections of the entrance to the English Astley's and expecting some kind of resemblance at least to the very brilliantly lighted and gaily decorated corridor which separates the doorway from the dress-circle at that temple of equestrianism I should be glad to enjoy his discomfiture at the Hippodrome as he stumbles over the muddy uneven floor of its entrance and gazes at the high wall of rough deal boards through which some eyes are glowering at him from a hole and upon which light is thrown from two or three flaring jets of gas. "Where do you want to go?' says a rough-looking man at his elbow and in a tone extremely like that with which he was once accosted on a dark night on the Richmond Road when he was requested to accommodate the speaker with all the loose cash he had about him. "Where do you want to go?' "Dress-circle" says the verdant visitor with a start. "Pay there and go along there" says the prize-fighting man pointing with one hand to the eyes in the board and with the other to a kind of passage at the end of which is a light. So he pays "there" and goes along "there" and having got to the end of "there" he is startled again by another man roughly accosting him with "Now then where's your check?' Having given up that instrument he is allowed to pass this Cerberus who half fills up the narrow doorway as if he were expecting a violent rush and were prepared to resist it. Cerberus past he finds himself upon an open platform which seems to him to be intended for a stage and he is convinced he has made some mistake; but looking round he sees benches filled by individuals who are apparently spectators like himself for they are shouting at him to get out of the way so he worms a passage through the crowd gets into a corner and then looks round him. He sees a strange array of forbidding faces but they are all turned in one direction: a coarse blowsy woman in most scant petticoats is jumping about upon a carpet spread upon the sawdust in the circle and her gyrations excite the most tumultuous applause; she is led off by the master of the ring and the shouts of her admirers convince her she has distanced Fraulein Fannie completely. Band of wheezy wind instruments strikes up and one of the "gorgeously-caparisoned steeds" enters. Following is one of the "world-renowned riders". The "world-renowned rider" mounts the "gorgeously-caparisoned steed" stands upon his back and does some posturing. Presently comes in a clown with a loud voice and stale jokes; having delivered some of his stale jokes he assists several "tight"-habited individuals to hold coloured dusters after the manner of bridges over which the "world-renowned" man jumps to the frantic delight of the spectators. Encouraged by this approval he attempts a somersault over one of the bridges but instead of coming down upon the back of the horse he lands himself on his own back across the wall of the ring. [257] He has more pluck than cleverness however for he tries again and again and again and falls each time manifestly to the delight of the audience which seems composed of exactly the kind of people to enjoy a broken neck. But "world-renowned" cannot do the somersault nor does he break his neck and I am afraid he becomes in consequence unpopular.  To this failure of attempt at fracture and dislocation succeeds another in a different way by other performers. It consists in leaping from a spring-board over the backs of several horses. Neither horses nor men are damaged in this experiment and the dexterity (which might be accidental) is accepted in lieu of the catastrophe. Then comes a fellow with a pole which he plants on his abdomen and another fellow climbs up it (not the abdomen - the pole) and apparently tries to singe his hair at one of the lights in the roof. Not succeeding in this attempt he is seemingly seized with violent cramps which occasion him to wriggle and twist in a manner which seriously embarrasses the lower man who holds the pole; having recovered from this spasmodic attack he slides down that piece of timber with a rapidity that suggests the possibility of his going down the throat of his companion. This feat of deglutition is not performed however.  Comes in next a lanky man who has by diligent practice succeeded in producing semi-luxation of the hip-joint and who is thereby enabled to put his heels behind his neck and his head out of sight; thus contorted he presents the appearance of a deformed frog on horseback. This hideous outrage upon ligamentous tissues is highly acceptable to the assemblage. He gives place to a man who jumps through papered hoops and lastly through a kind of drum in which have been placed some flags; after which he dresses himself as a Red Indian and whoops and screeches like fifty devils in one. He shows how the Indian wields his club (the club being very much like a magnified carrot) and how he shoots his arrows. I was much interested to learn that the arrows used by the Indians are curved - for the purpose I presume of shooting round corners like the fowling-piece of that historical Hibernian.  There is another clown besides the one first mentioned. He has a very Yankee accent and his jokes are even more venerable than those of his companion. It was he who did the longest jump over the horses and who did not as he was manifestly expected to do break any of his bones. There is more to be recorded but it is all of the same kind - to wit that of attempts to suffer breakage or laceration in some part of the body. For instance the man who walks in stilts appears narrowly to escape dislocation of the ankle-joint; the man who hangs from the slack-rope also does his best to effect articular displacement of that joint as well as that of the wrists and the maniac who allows himself to be dragged several times round the circle through the sawdust is apparently some Indian Fakir who has failed in being crushed by Juggernaut. [258] So it will be seen there is very much at this Hippodrome to allay the craving for man-killing; and probably if the lovers of this kind of excitement go several times they may most likely witness a genuine fatal accident not to speak of the possibility of a fight in the pit or elsewhere with a like termination.  The conductors of this establishment are evidently disposed to afford the freeest possible liberty to their patrons. Smoking is not disallowed and the interchange of compliments in the shape of oranges and other delicacies between the occupants of the boxes and the pit is permitted without any gainsay whatever. If any lady should by accident visit the place she will do well not to put on her very newest bonnet or cloak as to say nothing of the crushing and pushing to which she may be subjected she will probably be undesirous of having those articles of apparel spoiled by an intermitting shower of tobacco-juice playfully spurted in the form of a salivary spray from the boxes into what is facetiously denominated the "dress-circle". Such persons too as are in the habit of carrying articles of value in their pockets will do well to button those receptacles carefully up for judging from the facial expression of a great number of the audience the quality of digital appropriativeness must be one somewhat extensively possessed.  Sir - The straightforward article upon "Tariff Reform" in your Saturday's issue places the question before the country upon its true merits and has likewise swept away those fine-spun cobwebs our colonial political economists have so industriously enveloped it withal and which they dignify by the high-sounding but empty title of "Free Trade."  You Sir have lifted the curtain somewhat when you state that free trade has never existed in these colonies but I am prepared (to use a colonial phrase) to up with the rag entirely and broadly assert that it exists in no other country upon the face of the earth.  Then away with the useless discussion of an abstract principle and let us as reasonable men discuss what fiscal policy will best suit this colony of Victoria. Not what will best suit its bankers its merchants or its gentry but what will best advance the material prosperity of all not forgetting the hard working sons of toil whose interests are ofttimes forgotten or else totally ignored by those political economists who think and state that a high rate of wages is incompatible with the prosperity of the colony. [261]  Why should the opponents of this movement endeavour to smother it under the odium and prejudice attached to the word "protection" if they are able to meet its supporters in fair argument? Why endeavour to overthrow it by a side wind instead of discussing it upon its merits?  Having cleared the way for the discussion of the question upon its merits let me ask my fellow-colonists if they think it desirable to establish as opportunity arises other branches of industry than those that exist at the present time? If they answer as I anticipate they will in the affirmative let me ask them again what probability there is of such a result under the present system? What has been done this last six years? Positively nothing. In fact what little manufacturing enterprise existed among us has been effectually nipped in the bud and correspondents in your own pages have frequently shown how.  I do not think it necessary to single out any one branch of industry as especially suited to illustrate my argument. Nor on the other hand would I be understood to advocate indiscriminate protection. Each case should be met and discussed upon its own merits and the principle that should guide us in affording it protection should be:   1. The probability of its equalling the imported article in quality.  2. The amount of duty necessary to enable it to compete with the imported article.  3. The probability or otherwise of its being able to take root so that at no distant date the protection now afforded might be withdrawn or greatly reduced.  If the answer to the first should be in the affirmative to the second ten or fifteen per cent. and to the third ten years as the time when protection as such might be dispensed with I should say a case had been made out. If in addition it was of a character likely to employ a number of hands .or if from climate or geographical position it was probable it might become a staple still further reason would be shown why it should receive the fostering care of the legislature during its infancy. So plain are these arguments to the common sense of mankind that we find them universally acted upon. [...]  But we are here met by another fallacy viz. the increased cost to the consumer. Why says a well-to-do merchant should I pay 2s. 6d. a pair more for my boots than I can obtain them for from England? Why exclaims a sleek lawyer should I give 10s. more for a chest of drawers than I can obtain them from England for? Again a banker exclaims he should buy his paper in the cheapest markets. [262]  My answer to Messrs. Merchant Lawyer and Banker is this - because the bootmaker the cabinet maker and the paper manufacturer are your customers out of their pockets come your profits fees and dividends and lumping ones too. Because they contribute largely to the State by the taxes they pay and you contribute comparatively little thereto. Because your principle should be the golden one of "Live and let live." Because patriotism should teach you to wish well to your adopted country. But why multiply reasons when it is evident that nothing but the selfishness of the non-producing portion of the community stands in the way of the alteration of our fiscal laws.  But Mr. Editor extreme selfishness need not fear overmuch the advance in price consequent upon protection for we should have colonial competition to equalize prices; and we should get rid of speculation which has tended to advance prices. In a word colonial capital which is now employed by speculators to increase the price of the imported article to the consumer would be more legitimately employed in producing the colonial substitute and! the ordinary principles of trade would by fair competition prevent monopoly.  To sum up: protection to native industry by a wise and careful alteration of our present fiscal laws would have the following beneficial effects  1. A legitimate opening for capital.  2. Employment of labour.  3. Development of the resources of Victoria.  4. A more perfect settlement of the country.  5. General contentment consequent on general prosperity.  Firmly believing this question is second to none I would beseech my fellow-colonists to take it into their serious consideration previous to the general election and to test all candidates for their suffrages on this point.  Apologising for the length of this communication  I remain  Yours &c.  GRAHAM BERRY.  Intimation has been made we are glad to see that a sum will be placed on the Estimates for the ensuing year for the establishment of a Public Library in Sydney. The institution will we trust be founded in such a spirit of wise munificence as to make it really a national undertaking and one that will reflect credit on the Colony. We earnestly hope to see at no distant period grants made to enable the municipalities of the larger rural towns to establish local libraries. But the metropolitan collection quite irrespective of the large number of readers whose wants it is to meet must obviously be built so to speak on far broader foundations and be far and away a vaster affair than any other library in the territory need be. A good average collection of standard works in literature and philosophy and such an array of the latest scientific publications as will keep the student and the inquirer posted up in the yearly progress of discovery and invention will be sufficient for years to come for the majority of country libraries in Australia. But the metropolitan library should be the storehouse and armoury of learning and knowledge for the whole colony - the place whither youth and adult learner and teacher statesman and artizan may alike repair with a certainty of finding as far as the public means will allow whatever human intelligence has achieved and presented in his particular field of investigation. A good edition of Gibbon's "Rome" for instance as regards the special object it proposes to itself the history of the decadence and overthrow of the Roman power is sufficient for any prominent public library in a colony like ours; but the National Library in the capital should have the Byzantine historians as well as the other fontal sources at which they drew. Sismondi's literature of the South of Europe would perhaps be sufficient in the country; but the cycle of historians of Italian letters Tiraboschi Muratori Ginguene nay the great works of Bouterwek and the learned Germans the man of letters would look for as a matter of course in the National Library. A fair Greek text of Plato Sydenham's version and the translation of the contributor to Bohn's Series and possibly by way of luxurious addenda Victor Cousin's performances in French would make a tolerable rural item for Platonic philosophy quite as much as for all practical purposes would be requisite; but in the metropolitan library there should be fairly accessible the files of the Neo-Platonists the Italian Platonic thinkers and as much as might be of the literature in later days of this most influential of all purely secular philosophies on the mind of man. In the natural sciences it is obvious that books of net results are those which must and ought mainly to be on the shelves of libraries for general use; but somewhere in the Colony and most appropriately in the institution now about to be provided should be kept available for society at large the books weighty voluminous and expensive as they are in which all scientific advances are originally and accurately registered - monographs for instance transactions of learned societies publications made by commissioners and under the auspices of Government and those frequently rare and gorgeous contributions to science which are actually only printed for princes and communities. Scarcely one man in twenty thousand in a community like ours is likely to have or likely to want a copy of the noble volumes which represent the labours of Agassiz; but the country at large if it pretends in its public capacity to care about science at all should have one. And hence one of the practical suggestions we would very respectfully tender to those likely to have superintendence of the promised Public Library is to early possess themselves of such. The foundation and much of the whole structure of the collection should consist always of course of works valuable on further and other grounds than those of mere bibliographical rarity - of those works the costliness of which puts them beyond the reach of the majority of readers. Books that anybody may buy anywhere at any time inasmuch as such works are luckily amongst the very best the highest literature being happily like the highest beauty in the natural world for the most part that most easily found should be of course on the shelves. But it should be always kept in mind that the main object is to supply what the colonists at large cannot individually supply themselves with. [80] [81]  The Library must if there be any force in the preceding remarks be one in which the books are not allowed off the premises. Ample accommodation for reading and study must be made for ladies as well as gentlemen as at the Queen's Room of the Public Library at Melbourne; and those wishing to avail themselves of the advantages must go to the building and do so. This is the fundamental rule at the British Museum and at the Bibliotheque Imperiale and the public libraries of Paris and the other continental cities. Those latter were public libraries in the truest sense of the word whose leaves of books were alike turned by the jewelled finger of the peer of France and the hoary hand of the artizan long before anything of the kind was thought of in England. There the national repository at the British Museum was for years practically as much a sealed treasure to the people at large as the private collection of the Duke of Devonshire or Earl Spencer or of Mr. Heber before its dispersal. Quite irrespective of individual dishonesties - in which as concerns matters of this kind we are by the way no great believers - and the drawback of unconscionable retention of favourite volumes by somewhat selfishly enthusiastic readers it is plain that various casualties will in the nature of things connect themselves with the removal of books from the premises. To accumulate a great essentially valuable and complete collection will therefore be a work at some point or other continually exposed to defect. For other reasons besides those of pecuniary economy care must be taken on this head. It must be borne in mind that really fine editions of the books mainly worthy of national attention are not to be picked up every day even in London or Paris. There are always anxious and active persons men of taste wealth and leisure in those capitals to pick up not only bibliographic gems and rarities but the finer the better edited and more carefully selected impressions of scarce works. The United States of America are in this walk keen and active competitors and it is a well-known fact amongst book buyers and booksellers in England that very large sums of money are yearly sent to Europe from the Union for the acquisition of all first-class property of the kind for sale. The library of Neander by no means of extraordinary extent but of rare value for patristic literature and ecclesiastical history was purchased for and removed en masse from Germany to the University of Rochester recently founded by wealthy residents of New York. It is painfully mortifying to think that one of the objections made for years in the mother Country to the opening of the public collections was the risk of loss to which the property was exposed. [82]  At the Public Library at Melbourne in a capital with perhaps in the ratio of its size the largest floating and unsettled population in the world and at an institution frequented by crowds in the freest manner conceivable only one instance we believe has ever occurred; and the experience extends over a sufficiently long period to afford a criticism of a book having been abstracted and it was then an ordinary sixpenny song-book.   Whatever be the period at which the Government will find themselves in a position to commence operations the recurrence of an evil is to be guarded against which has unfortunately vitiated and crippled the activity and the progress of public institutions of the kind in this country heretofore. We refer to the constitution of the governing body. Hitherto the administration of cognate establishments has been selected on grounds altogether connected with mere social position and wealth in point of fact from cliques who look upon the whole thing as an additional symbol of local dignity and importance to those already in their possession much as a K.C.B. [83] would contemplate the addition to his chivalric style and honour of the initials G.C.H. K.H. or the dilettante of F.L.S. or F.S.A. supplementing the cardinal distinction already acquired of F.R.S. Individuals thus originally forming the governing bodies of these institutions have had the power amongst themselves of filling vacancies. Experience has shown and a very slight knowledge of human nature might have anticipated it how a régime of this kind eventually partakes of the worst qualities of a close corporation. A gentleman was some time since elected a Fellow of the University here upon no other ground than that of his enormous wealth; and vacated seats of another institution of scientific character have been filled as far as human intelligence judging of things by ordinary means can find out simply because the individuals chosen belonged to a particular set. If the Public Library is really to be the great success it may and ought this kind of thing must not obtain. Fitness for this special office should be the only test; and the odious principle of close election in the administrative body be done away with. There are plenty of high places and to spare for sheer wealth and mere political and social influence.   For the sake of the country's best interests let those establishments sacred to learning and science be in the hands of men whose lives and faculties have been devoted to qualifying themselves to minister in them and discharge intelligently and adequately the duties they demand. At least half of the board or committee should consist of men of letters purely on the grounds that they are such the poor schoolmaster to be as eligible as the Member of Parliament; for this would while by no means a costly yet nevertheless be a graceful mode and one sure of appreciation of recognition by the higher authorities of lettered worth in humble circumstances - a species of worth in this bank-note-worshipping and pre-emptive-right-purchasing community getting generally more kicks than kindness. The other half might be composed of men noted for their business qualifications but always of course of fair education. As the establishment will be a national one and there is no constituency of persons specially interested in the matter we would place the appointment of the Committee in the Government for the time being holding it responsible for the fitness of those appointed. The utter absurdity of the old system of making Ministers members of such boards already busy enough as they must be is obvious. [84]  Carlyle says "The true university of these days is a library;" true anyhow true ten thousand times over in a youthful democratic country like ours whose young men who will govern the land and make the laws ten years hence are perhaps serving behind the counter to-day. Let those now entrusted with the affairs of the country and the interests of society look to this. Let them give those young men the only practical means of qualifying themselves for great and solemn trust - fraught either with benefit or danger according to the discharge of them to the community at large. Let them place the appliances ready for those whose circumstances and fortune in life debar them from the privileges of a university nearer at hand in more senses than one than the big toy in carved stone that as in mockery and derision of its lofty object is perched away at Grose Farm away from everybody but those who like Thurtell's "respectable man" can drive thither in "a gig" or can spare the hours snatched from earning daily bread to trudge backwards and forwards from the main quarter of the city to the embouchure of the Parramatta Road.   A public meeting was some time since held in the metropolis for the purpose of considering the best means of dealing with that most wretched and hopeless of all questions the name of which in the periphrasis of the publicists stands at the head of this column.   A great deal was said on the occasion a good deal of sympathy and much spasmodic speechifying. But nothing pertinent was suggested and nothing practical was done. A great many of the gentlemen present were very admirable in their way very admirable indeed; but scarcely we suspect the sort of men to grapple with this question. It was a matter of pitch and they had gloves on very white ones too. [85]  It may do excellently well for a number of reverend ministers of the Gospel to appear upon a platform and pronounce on the horrors and the woes the curse and the corruption of body and soul in this lowermost abyss of human misery. But that affair of preaching has been going on for centuries; and on this peculiar question in the hearts of those most concerned there lurks a grim satiric sense of differences between the world's talk upon the subject and the world's practice. And there is no use burking or shirking the matter. There are terrible psychologic difficulties surrounding the question which none other not even drunkenness itself presents and which homilies and advices by themselves even from the lips of angels will not affect. All the preaching since the days of Him who dealt mercy to the woman taken in adultery never brought back an erring female to the forsaken path.   Preaching on the subject is simply preaching whether the thing be worked up in the best infernal patterns and coloured with brimstone or full of sympathies and sentiment and graceful mournings for what is holiest and loveliest in woman. Very few of the preachers know the pathology of the frightful disease they pretend to treat. They do not and for obvious reasons they ought not. Their prescriptions for the evil are therefore in the main practically idle. Whoever attempts to deal with it must know something about it practically and thoroughly dark though the price which was paid for the knowledge bitter as the curriculum of the loathsome study may have been.   There are two points of view from which the question is to be regarded - as it concerns the individual and as it affects society at large. The latter point the only one upon which legislation and the exercise of statesmanship is demanded because the only one upon which they can be practically effective has been pushed out of sight and persistently ignored in British communities. Unfathomable and immeasurable in some directions is the cant and hypocrisy of English social opinion and practice. Horrors such as the cities of antiquity and the vastest abodes of barbarians presented scarcely a shadow of are allowed to fester and rot in English society under the pure eyes of cherished and guarded English maidenhood simply because English masculine ears must not hearken even in the service of God and God's most forlorn creatures to anything that savours of what is "naughty." And then of a surety honourable members of the legislature virtuous husbands and fathers keep no "mistresses" and only sneak under cover of night into the verandahs of a brothel. [86]  This goes on in this eminently practical nineteenth century in supremely practical British communities where practical men look upon the economics of public health sanitary legislation as the most practical of things. Ventilation in public lodging houses must be provided for by special Acts of Parliament and fifty other matters which range themselves round the salubrities of sinks and sewers. But on matters that far more deeply and insidiously affect the health of the people there the national Mr. Pecksniff and the national Mrs. Grundy and the Decencies of Society all dimanché and in white neckcloths meet one inexorable and impracticable "melancholy train." God help us; and the father with eyes too and in their hopeless woe for a tear to wet the sockets gazes on his son dropping piecemeal before him a mass of hideous syphilitic carrion the victim of some error in the climacteric of youthful passions which the Decencies of Society never committed in the calends of their youthful adolescence.   On the pavement beside the house walks with those fresh cheeks and the full eyes of childhood which Jeremy Taylor so touchingly speaks of offspring cursed with the curse which will bask and warm its hateful life in the blood of the unborn the children of those doomed little ones. The pretty little maiden but three months ago in honest service is "on the town " to-night where she never would have been had she not seen Betsy This or Nelly That flaunting in King Street in hat and mantle satin flounces and lavender boots doing what the law seemed to take no notice of and everybody looked at as a matter of course. Law this which with all the disgrace of police-office inquisition and the heavy checks of large pecuniary penalties and gaol confinements in default meanwhile puts down the slightest approach to irregularity in the sale of spirituous liquors. British and therefore Colonial law has by the way a logic of its own on this head. The wretched woman shall expose herself as ware for sale in the streets nay call attention by some horrible process of devices akin to those of the hawker and the chapman and the law does nothing and has power to do nothing the while. But when the interests of public decency and the open scandal of the thing cease and the abomination of it is about to be completed in secret then the constabulary impersonation of the law dives into "houses of ill fame" then the majesty of Quarter Sessions is invoked and the culprits punished much in a Spartan fashion not for anything done but for being found in places which the law regards as objectionable. How the creatures who ply their wretched trade on the streets try to reconcile this obvious contradiction in the regulation of things if they do at all we know not. Their opinion upon legislation and legislators roughly and readily in their own simple and unthinking way arrived at gives a practical result perhaps not very different from that of persons who have set themselves the task of watching parliamentary men and parliamentary proceedings. [87]  "Hideous disorders" says one deeply learned in the dismal statistics of this province of human shame Dr. McCormack "attend the unlawful commerce of the sexes blighting the infant unborn inducing inevitable ruin and decay. The skin throat bones even do not escape. The beautiful structure of the eye is doubly implicated first in syphilitic iritis and then in gonorrhoeal ophthalmia that wretched malady which as I conceive has housed itself in Egypt and infects our race. These diseases are at once acute and chronic nor does one attack yield exemption from another. The evil is urgent the very remedy is dire. Medical writings are rife with details only to be surpassed by the yet more horrible reality. Very children even are found in the Lock hospitals of great cities while millions it may be affirmed are lavished on the wages of debauchery. In Edinburgh he counts one-fourth of the annual mortality as amongst the female victims to prostitution this so brutish vice and utter violation of the loftier destinies of our kind. Brothels and low lodging-houses if possible worse subsist in all our larger towns and there prostitution and syphilis the sin and the soil go hand-in-hand. Forty thousand illegitimate children according to the Registrar are yearly born in England besides those who perish sometimes mother and child together through the execrable arts of hired aborters. In London alone two thousand women it is said annually replace those who die in their sin and misery." [88]  Something more must be done then than preaching and making speeches. Upon this matter as on all others which prejudice or are likely to prejudice its interests society has a right to legislate on the grounds of self-protection. The affair from this point of view is simply one of police correctionelle. As things in this world just now are and are long likely to be it makes one's heart ache to think how long to put down prostitution is impossible. But it is not impossible to keep it in check and impose upon it those regulations which will protect the morally untainted from the terrible scandals and temptations hourly paraded in public places before the eye which will to some extent guard public decency and while doing this act as a discouragement to the wretched trade itself by denying it the open facilities that at present obtain for pursuing it with success. One step simple summary and easily taken would we think in the course of a year revolutionise the abomination in some of its most public and therefore most dangerous characteristics. Remove by law from the thoroughfares and highways all women of abandoned character or whose demeanour or habit of loitering in the streets makes it fair to believe them abroad for improper purposes and you will do it is impossible to say how much in the right direction. Without mentioning that portion of King Street adjoining the Prince of Wales's Theatre or the neighbourhood of the Victoria Hall there is one spot in this city which for everything that can disgust and demoralise and be a disgrace to a civilized community is unparalleled by any locality in the world used as a public promenade - the walk in Hyde Park. And often as we hear and have heard pretty lavish praise given to our police authorities we have marvelled as they were so admirable with whom the blame of this crying evil lay. [89]  We presume we ought not to be above taking some hints here and there from what French statesmen have thought and done upon this subject especially as the results are very satisfactory evidences of the wisdom and the benefits involved. An immense amount of vulgar and ribald persiflage is talked in English society upon French police administration in this matter. But all honour say we to the brave and enlightened legislation that has dared to cope for the benefit of society with this darkest and wildest of all the evils that encompass it. Here are the regulations of the French authorities and we put it to every sensible and reflecting reader how much by even a partial adoption of them might be checked and diminished the present abominations left to welter and riot in open carnival of debauchery amongst ourselves with a nonchalance on the part of our law makers that cares neither for the prostitute nor the victim : -   "Brothels are suffered by license to exist in certain quarters; but at and from the period of their establishment they are placed under the entire management of a servile yoke of a portion of the police whose office is to guard attentas aux moeurs." What a check this of itself would be on visitants of a certain class is sufficiently obvious. "Such places are not permitted in the vicinity of a public school or a church or indeed of any public institution whatever. The keeper of the brothel is bound within twenty-four hours to forward to the Prefecture of the Police the name for the purpose of registration of every young woman who may seek to reside in the house. Immediately after this formality it is necessary that the woman should appear before the authorities; she is then cautioned and warned that if she enter on that course of life she is under the surveillance of the police and told her name once entered as une fille inscrit that name must always remain as a lasting record of her degradation. If her youth be remarkable she is sent to the Hospital of St. Lazare where she is employed in needlework; and if she be from the provinces her parents or the mayor of her locality are written to for the purpose of interposing to induce her to return home. If she be friendless she is received into the Hospital of St. Lazare. If this fail she is then suffered to place her name upon the roll and her residence is numbered in the books of the prefecture. She is forced to carry with her and to produce to any person when required a ticket showing the weekly medical report of her health made by the physician appointed to inspect houses inhabited by persons of her class and those who dwell with them. Women of the kind are prohibited from wearing showy dresses and (at Paris) from appearing in the Gardens of the Luxembourg of the Palais Imperial or the Tuileries or other public promenades and they are not allowed upon any occasion to appear at the windows of the houses they inhabit. For a breach of any one of those regulations the penalty is two months' imprisonment. Those who live quietly in a similar course of life have also the eyes of the law upon them; even the fille isoli is tracked through her course of sin; and in fine upon the French prostitute every indignity that woman can suffer is inflicted by an active and vigilant police." Whether the best interests of society and those of the wretched women themselves are most consulted by English non-legislation or French law we leave the intelligent reader to judge for himself. [90]  How far some system which for the female herself would render the walk of infamy an intolerable and odious road shorn of the glaring riot and excitement which make its fascination and its reckless license would drive her to some other calling may not be unworthy of attention. People who with the very best intentions in the world talk of voluntary reform in Magdalens and asylums forget the terrible physical change a course of prostitution makes in women; and of n women; and of whatever worth this may be in the individual it is too fragile and too precarious a matter as far as society's own interests are concerned for it to trust to.   In the obituary of September brought us by the Malta is the honoured name of Leigh Hunt. He died at Putney on the 28th August 1859 in the 75th year of his age. Forty years ago Shelley addressed him from Rome in the dedication of The Cenci "One more gentle innocent honourable and brave - one of more exalted toleration for all who do and think evil and yet himself more free from evil; one who knows better how to receive and how to confer a benefit though he must ever confer more than he can receive; one of simpler and in the highest sense of the word of purer life and manners I never knew: and I had already been fortunate in friendships when your name was added to the list." Loftier tribute of respect has rarely been paid or sincerer - for the man was never born that Shelley would have flattered. How precious this truth of character in a world where our friends tell as many lies to please as our enemies to pain us! [157]  Leigh Hunt's nature was of the most graceful and beautiful kind fresh resilient and flowering to the last. Like the shepherd boy in Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia he piped as if he never would grow old. His mission seemed as Spenser said of the presence of Una to make sunshine in the shady places of the earth. There was too much boyish goodness and sweetness in him to sympathise very heartily with the fiercer struggles of men. At his heart was for ever the whispering consciousness that things might be better brought about by that power of gentleness of which he has sung with a grace more delicate than the graces of the Sicilian muse he so loved. He was right if men would only look upon the thing as the loving poet did. But meanwhile Leigh Hunt had philosophy as well as pleasure on his side. "Nothing" says Goethe "is an illusion that makes us happy." No truer heart than Hunt's and no more courageous intellect in the cause of right and what he held to be truth will you find in the history of our modern literature. His faith in good his unquenchable hope his charity tender and boundless made his writings a fountain and an oasis in an era "when Zahara under the breath of the most lone simoon" was thought a type of the higher ideal; and this will make them lovely and a solace for ever.   He had his own sorrows and his struggles ; and his circumstances in life were always dim and sorry enough - now a poor man tossing with his family in Italy trying to throw up a shelter under the somewhat bleak and gloomy ranges of Lord Byron's friendship - now in late age flying into such raptures as seen in Royalty after its decided liking for the Legend of Florence at the theatre something like an embodiment of all human virtues conceivable. We allude to this because we see or think we see in it the pathos of an overflow of gratitude from one who had grown old in comparative neglect. It "Flattered to tears that aged man and poor." [158]  Yet no shade of uncharity or moodiness or hate in his poetry the while. There the precious elements of his noble genius its sweet airs its sunbeams and its dews the bloom and the fragrance of a nature more like Chaucer's or Boccacio's than any in modern times were gathered as his contribution in aid of the cause of human happiness which he looked upon literature as altogether created to serve.   He was the Stothard of poetry. The region of grace deepening ever and anon into beauty was the haunt and vantage-ground of his genius. His poems were sensuous but with a spontaneous perfectly organic growth out of his own nature which neither the sensuousness of the great living poet Tennyson nor Mr. Dobell's nor that of any of the laureate's other disciples possesses. Art is with them often conscious and has to seek. The thing was in Leigh Hunt part of his temperament; the weakling tendril as much as the rich bough grew out of and belonged to Mother Earth. He was deficient in passion; and this disqualified him not only for dramatic art but combined with the sunny hilarity of his nature made the depths of tragic strife and tragic woe distasteful to him. He shows in his preface to the "Stories from the Italian Poets" - one of those charming critical prefaces which Leigh Hunt alone could write alike fitted for schoolboy and sage from the transparency of expression and simple directness of thought - the superiority in Shakespeare to Dante because of the large element of human gladness. We suspect that even if Shakespeare had been inferior to the "sad Florentine" in essential poetic power Leigh Hunt on the one ground that the former had admitted more of the light of human gaiety and cheerfulness into his world would have preferred him. The grim images of the Dolorous City were not a whit less in unison with his natural tastes than "the dark sorrows of the line of Thebes." But this scarcely ever impaired his fine critical instinct. He devotes pages to an attack on the sort of taste and feeling exhibited in the mediaeval theology of the Inferno for reasons which would make the Paradise Lost only a degree or two less objectionable. [159]  But Carlyle himself with all his worship of power has said nothing finer of the intensity of Dante. A single passage will give one who has never read the Divina Commedia either in Italian or English a livelier more concrete idea of the general characteristics of the poet than a volume of tolerably good criticism:- "The invisible is at the back of the visible; darkness becomes palpable silence describes a character nay forms the most striking part of a story; a word acts as a flash of lightning which displays some gloomy neighbourhood where a tower is standing with dreadful faces at the window; or where at your feet full of eternal voices one abyss is beheld dropping out of another in the lurid light of torment." And the ineffable majesty and beauty of Dante's angels and the Elysian interspaces of repose in the poem are described with almost equal felicity. He was the kindest and most genial as well as one of the best of critics. He came disposed to find merit high or humble much or little in the work before him. He had a word of praise - so wise and so gentle it was! - for the poor daisy that grew beside the field-stile as well as for the most gorgeous blooms. Look through the whole range of his miscellaneous writings from the days of the Indicator upwards and you will find no one harsh much less an arbitrary phrase of criticism. A blow at cant he aimed whenever he could but his nature always overflowing with truth in nine cases out of ten when the blow fell the canter was dead and gone. A collection of Leigh Hunt's criticisms inclusive as well of his special essays on books and of the notices scattered throughout his numerous publications as of such comparatively brief observations as occur in his notes and prefaces would make one of the most fascinating books in the language. The Legend of Florence was his dramatic effort. It is very graceful full of purity gentleness tenderness pity. The husband is a wretch; the lover much to be sympathised with; the lady a sweet and noble creature to love and be sad for. But it is not a great drama. To compose one there was as we have just said too little sympathy or self-identification in Leigh Hunt with the grandeurs of passion the magnificent warfare of the daring spirit with circumstances. [160]  He thought - far overmuch - this world too beautiful and too good ever to be a great dramatic poet in any sense much less a tragic poet. The "burthen and the mystery" pressed on him too lightly his spiritual being had struck no root deep enough in the Unseen where the solutions wait. It is perfectly impossible under any circumstances to conceive Leigh Hunt creating such grand types of the struggle as Robert Browning's Djabal or Luria or King Victor or Richard Horne's Cosmo de Medici or his lordly Marlowe.   Bright is the day the air with glory teems  And eagles wanton in the smile of Jove:  Can these things be and Marlowe live no more?  Circumstances long prevented Leigh Hunt's recognition as a poet which show how much tact might have done in the world of letters as it does in lower and coarser regions. He was saluted by the scribblers of the day as the Coryphaeus of the Cockney School. Keats as his protégé of course belonged to it; Hazlitt was sometimes ranked on the forms (as by Maginn in his parody on Yarrow Unvisited); and so was John Hamilton Reynolds whose promise never gave fruition. So might have been Hood. Now if there were any internal weakness in the school any affectations at all Barry Cornwall in his earlier and longer efforts exhibited them in common with Hunt and his friends. But he had never written sonnets about Hampstead and the other pleasant environs of London. "He sang of Africa and golden joys;" he took himself in fact to Sicily and   "The shores of old romance."  And if Hunt had consented to burn a great many occasional verses written under suburban inspirations he might have saved himself much annoyance. His beautiful story of Rimini in its own history affords a proof of how little ground as regarded Hunt's poems there was either in philosophy or fact for the cry of Cockneyism; how little a man of genius requires the culture of "travel" to enable him to write fine poetry of which the scene happens to be laid in foreign lands: Rimini with its landscapes the wood of Ravenna included was published before Leigh Hunt had visited Italy and the beauty of scenic description sank into the soul of every reader of sensibility to remain there for ever. After the poet had beheld the actual places he altered the scenery treated the thing photographically but with so deep and pursuing a sequence of failure that late in life in the last editions of his poems the original landscapes were restored as the "environments" of Francesca and her lover. [161]  How the beautiful episodes of Rimini live in the memory - the nuptials the journey through the pine forests the garden and the funeral of the lovers at the close of autumn with the last few leaves flying over the chill darkening road and the crowd awaiting till the sad cortège made its appearance when   Turned aside both young and old  And in thin hands the gushing sorrow rolled!   But the poem of the Nymphs so full of "the warm South" and the sonnets in the volume called "Foliage" long out of print appear to us most to exhibit the spécialité as a poet of Leigh Hunt. Of his prose writings - his romances of real life his charming revivals of classic story copies as it were by Fiamingo and Canova of the women and children on a Greek frieze and his exquisite essays forming in themselves the freshest and sunniest nook in the great literature of the day which saw them produced - we have now no time to speak. They will never be read by a man fitted to appreciate the grace and the affection for all good that inspire them without a love for the author simultaneous with admiration for his work.   In that grave of Leigh Hunt sleeps as true a friend of humankind as ever drew the breath of life. An earnest we trust of the loving admiration which awaits on his memory wherever the language and the literature of the land is known is the poor offering we have tried to hang up as it were in funeral honour - the tribute of one born and bred in a community which had scarcely existence at all in the days when Leigh Hunt began the noble labour of his life long years ago.  [1] i: Chapter I.  INTRODUCTORY.  Near the end of February 1857 I think about the 20th or so though it don't much matter; I only know it was near the latter end of summer burning hot with the bushfires raging like volcanoes on the ranges and the river reduced to a slender stream of water almost lost upon the broad white flats of quartz shingle. It was the end of February I said when Major Buckley Captain Brentwood (formerly of the Artillery) and I Geoffry Hamlyn sat together over our wine in the veranda at Baroona gazing sleepily on the grey plains that rolled away east and north-east towards the sea.   We had sat silent for some time too lazy to speak almost to think. The beautiful flower-garden which lay before us sloping towards the river looked rather brown and sere after the hot winds although the orange-trees were still green enough and vast clusters of purple grapes were ripening rapidly among the yellowing vine- leaves. On the whole however the garden was but a poor subject of contemplation for one who remembered it in all its full November beauty and so my eye travelled away to the left to a broad paddock of yellow grass which bounded the garden on that side and there I watched an old horse feeding. [2]  A very old horse indeed a horse which seemed to have reached the utmost bounds of equine existence. And yet such a beautiful beast. Even as I looked some wild young colts were let out of the stockyard and came galloping and whinnying towards him and then it was a sight to see the old fellow as he trotted towards them with his nose in the air and his tail arched throwing his legs out before him with the ease and grace of a four- year-old and making me regret that he wasn't my property and ten years younger; - altogether even then one of the finest horses of his class I had ever seen and suddenly a thought came over me and I grew animated.   "Major Buckley" I said "what horse is that?"   "What horse is that?" repeated the major very slowly. "Why my good fellow old Widderin to be sure."   "Bless me!" I said; "You don't mean to say that that old horse is alive still?" [3]   "He looks like it" said the major. "He'd carry you a mile or two yet."   "I thought he had died while I was in England" I said. "Ah major that horse's history would be worth writing."   "If you began" answered the major "to write the history of the horse you must write also the history of every body who was concerned in those circumstances which caused Sam to take a certain famous ride upon him. And you would find that the history of the horse would be reduced into very small compass and that the rest of your book would assume proportions too vast for the human intellect to grasp."   "How so?" I said.   He entered into certain details which I will not give. "You would have" he said "to begin at the end of the last century and bring one gradually on to the present time. Good heavens! just consider."   "I think you exaggerate" I said.   "Not at all" he answered. "You must begin the histories of the Buckley and Thornton families in the last generation. The Brentwoods also must not be omitted - why there's work for several years. What do you say Brentwood?"   "The work of a life-time;" said the captain.   "But suppose I were to write a simple narrative of the principal events in the histories of the three families which no one is more able to do than myself seeing that nothing important has ever happened without my hearing of it - how I say would you like that?" [4]  "If it amused you to write it I am sure it would amuse us to read it" said the major.   "But you are rather old to turn author" said Captain Brentwood; "you'll make a failure of it; in fact you'll never get through with it."   I replied not but went into my bedroom and returning with a thick roll of papers threw it on the floor - as on the stage the honest notary throws down the long-lost will - and there I stood for a moment with my arms folded eyeing Brentwood triumphantly.   "It is already done captain" I said. "There it lies."   The captain lit a cigar and said nothing; but the major said "Good gracious me! and when was this done?"   "Partly here and partly in England. I propose to read it aloud to you if it will not bore you."   "A really excellent idea" said the major. "My dear!" - this last was addressed to a figure which was now seen approaching us up a long vista of trellised vines. A tall figure dressed in grey. The figure one could see as she came nearer of a most beautiful old woman.   Dressed I said in grey with a white handkerchief pinned over her grey hair and a light Indian shawl hanging from her shoulders. As upright as a dart: she came towards us through the burning heat as calmly and majestically as if the temperature had been delightfully moderate. [5] A hoary old magpie accompanied her evidently of great age and from time to time barked like an old bulldog in a wheezy whisper.   "My dear" said the major; "Hamlyn is going to read aloud some manuscript to us."   "That will be very delightful this hot weather" said Mrs. Buckley. "May I ask the subject old friend?"   "I would rather you did not my dear madam; you will soon discover in spite of a change of names and perhaps somewhat of localities."   "Well go on" said the major; and so on I went with the next chapter which is the first of the story.   The reader will probably ask:   "Now who on earth is Major Buckley? and who is Captain Brentwood? and last not least who the Dickens are you?" If you will have patience my dear sir you will find it all out in a very short time - Read on.    [6] i: Chapter II.  THE COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE OF JOHN THORNTON CLERK AND THE BIRTH OF SOME ONE WHO TAKES RATHER A CONSPICUOUS PART IN OUR STORY.  Sometime between the years 1780 and 1790 young John Thornton then a Servitor at Christ Church fell in love with pretty Jane Hickman whose father was a well-to-do farmer living not far down the river from Oxford; and shortly before he took his degree he called formally upon old Hickman and asked his daughter's hand. Hickman was secretly well pleased that his daughter should marry a scholar and a gentleman like John Thornton and a man too who could knock over his bird or kill his trout in the lasher with any one. So after some decent hesitation he told him that as soon as he got a living good enough to support Jane as she had been accustomed to live he might take her home with a father's blessing and a hundred pounds to buy furniture. And you may take my word for it that there was not much difficulty with the young lady for in fact the thing had long ago been arranged between them and she was anxiously waiting in the passage to hear her father's decision all the time that John was closeted with him. [7]  John came forth from the room well pleased and happy. And that evening when they two were walking together in the twilight by the quiet river gathering cowslips and fritillaries he told her of his good prospects and how a young lord who made much of him and treated him as a friend and an equal though he was but a Servitor - and was used to sit in his room talking with him long after the quadrangle was quiet and the fast men had reeled off to their drunken slumbers - had only three days before promised him a living of 300£ a-year as soon as he should take his priest's orders. And when they parted that night at the old stile in the meadow and he saw her go gliding home like a white phantom under the dark elms he thought joyfully that in two short years they would be happily settled never more to part in this world in his peaceful vicarage in Dorsetshire.   Two short years he thought. Alas! and alas! Before two years were gone poor Lord Sandston was lying one foggy November morning on Hampstead Heath with a bullet through his heart. Shot down at the commencement of a noble and useful career by a brainless gambler - a man who did all things ill save billiards and pistol-shooting; his beauty and his strength hurried to corruption and his wealth to the senseless debauchée who hounded on his murderer to insult him. But I have heard old Thornton tell with proud tears how my lord though outraged and insulted with no course open to him but to give the villain the power of taking his life still fired in the air and went down to the vault of his forefathers without the guilt of blood upon his soul. [8]  So died Lord Sandston and with him all John's hopes of advancement. A curate now on 50£ a-year; what hope had he of marrying? And now the tearful couple walking once more by the river in desolate autumn among the flying yellow leaves swore constancy and agreed to wait till better times should come.   So they waited. John in his parish among his poor people and his school-children busy always during the day and sometimes perhaps happy. But in the long winter evenings when the snow lay piled against the door and the wind howled in the chimney; or worse when the wind was still and the rain was pattering from the eaves he would sit lonely and miserable by his desolate hearth and think with a sigh of what might have been had his patron lived. And five-and-twenty years rolled on until James Brown who was born during the first year of his curateship came home a broken man with one arm gone from the battle of St. Vincent. And the great world roared on and empires rose and fell and dull echoes of the great throes without were heard in the peaceful English village like distant thunder on a summer's afternoon but still no change for him. [9]  But poor Jane bides her time in the old farm-house sitting constant and patient behind the long low latticed window among the geraniums and roses watching the old willows by the river. Five-and-twenty times she sees those willows grow green and the meadow brighten up with flowers and as often she sees their yellow leaves driven before the strong south wind and the meadow grow dark and hoar before the breath of autumn. Her father was long since dead and she was bringing up her brother's children. Her raven hair was streaked with grey and her step was not so light nor her laugh so loud yet still she waited and hoped long after all hope seemed dead.   But at length a brighter day seemed to dawn for them; for the bishop who had watched for years John Thornton's patient industry and blameless conversation gave him to his great joy and astonishment the living of Drumston worth 350£ a-year. And now at last he might marry if he would. True the morning of his life was gone long since and its hot noon spent in thankless labour; but the evening the sober quiet evening yet remained and he and Jane might still render pleasant for one another the downward road toward the churchyard and hand-in-hand walk more tranquilly forward to meet that dark tyrant Death who seemed so terrible to the solitary watcher. [10]  I. THE GHOST UPON THE RAIL.  CHAPTER I.  It was a winter's night - an Australian winter's night - in the middle of July when two wealthy farmers in the district of Penrith New South Wales sat over the fire of a public house which was about a mile distant from their homes. The name of the one was John Fisher and of the other Edward Smith. Both of these farmers had been transported to the colony had served their time bought land cultivated it and prospered. Fisher had the reputation of being possessed of a considerable sum in ready money; and it was well known that he was the mortgagee of several houses in the town of Sydney besides being the owner of a farm and three hundred acres which was very productive and on which he lived. Smith also was in good circumstances arising out of his own exertions on his farm; but unlike his neighbour he had not put by much money.   "Why don't you go home John and see your friends and relations?" asked Smith; "you be now very warm in the pocket; and mark my words they would be very glad to see you."   "I don't know about that friend" replied Fisher. "When I got into trouble it was the breaking of the heart of my old father and mother; and none of my brothers and sisters - in all seven of 'em - have ever answered one of my letters."   "You did not tell 'em you were a rich man did you?"   [6] "No; but I don't think they would heed that much lad; for though they are far from wealthy as small farmers they are well-to-do in the world and in a very respectable position in the country. I have often thought that if I was to go back they would be sorry to see me even if I carried with me £100000 earned by one who had been a convict."   "Bless your innocent heart! You don't know human natur' as I do. Money does a deal - depend on't. Besides who is to know anything about you except your own family? And they would never go and hint that you had been unfortunate. Why how many years ago is it?"   "Let me see. I was then eighteen and I am now forty-six - twenty-eight years ago. When I threw that stone at that man I little thought it would hit him much less kill him; and that I should be sent here for manslaughter. But so it was."   "Why I recommend you John to go home is because you are always talking of home and your relations. As for the farm I'd manage that for you while you are away."   "Thank you Ned. I'll think about it."   Presently the landlord entered the room and Smith addressing him said "What think you Mr. Dean? Here is Mr. Fisher going home to England to have a look at his friends and relations.   "Is that true Mr. Fisher?" said the landlord.   "Oh yes" was Fisher's reply after finishing his glass of punch and knocking the ashes out of his pipe.   "And when do you think of going?" said the landlord.   "That'll depend" replied Fisher smiling. "When I'm gone you will hear of it not before; and neighbour Smith here who is to manage the farm during my absence will come and pay you any little score I may leave behind."   "But I hope you will come and say good-bye" said the landlord.   "Oh of course" said Fisher laughing. "If I don't depend upon it you will know the reason why."   [7] After a brief while the two farmers took their departure. Their farms adjoined each other and they were always on the very best of terms.   About six weeks after the conversation above given Smith called one morning at the public house informed the landlord that Fisher had gone and offered to pay any little sum that he owed. There was a small score against him and while taking the money the landlord remarked that he was sorry Mr. Fisher had not kept his word and come to bid him "good-bye." Mr. Smith explained that Fisher had very good reasons for having his departure kept a secret until after he had left the colony; not that he wanted to defraud anybody - far from it he added; and then darkly hinted that one of Mr. Fisher's principal reasons for going off so stealthily was to prevent being annoyed by a woman who wanted him to marry her.   "Ah! I see" said the landlord; "and that's what he must have meant that night when he said 'if I don't you'll hear the reason why.'"   "I feel the loss of his society very much" said Smith "for when we did not come here together to spend our evening he would come to my house or I would go to his to play cards smoke a pipe and drink a glass of grog. Having taken charge of all his affairs under a power of attorney I have gone to live at his place and left my overseer in charge of my own place. When he comes back in the course of a couple of years I am going home to England and he will do for me what I am now doing for him. Between ourselves Mr. Dean he has gone home to get a wife."   "Indeed!" said the landlord. Here the conversation ended and Mr. Smith went home.   Fisher's sudden departure occasioned some surprise throughout the district; but when the explanation afforded by Mr. Smith was spread abroad by Mr. Dean the landlord people ceased to think any more about the matter.   A year elapsed and Mr. Smith gave out that he had received a letter from Fisher in which he stated that it was not his intention to return to Sydney and that he wished the whole of his property to be sold and the proceeds remitted to him. This letter Mr. Smith showed to several of Fisher's most intimate acquaintances who regretted extremely that they would see no more of so good a neighbour and so worthy a man. [8]  Acting on the power of attorney which he held Mr. Smith advertised the property for sale - the farm the livestock the farming implements the furniture etc. in the farmhouse; also some cottages and pieces of land in and near Sydney and Parramatta; with Fisher's mortgagors also he came to an agreement for the repayment within a few months of the sums due by them.     CHAPTER II.  About a month previous to the day of sale an old man one David Weir who farmed a small piece of land in the Penrith Road and who took every week to the Sydney market butter eggs fowls and a few bushels of Indian maize was returning to his home when he saw seated on a rail the well-known form of Mr. Fisher. It was very dark but the figure and the face were as plainly visible as possible. The old man who was not drunk though he had been drinking at Dean's public house pulled up and called out "Halloa Mr. Fisher! I thought you were at home in England!" There was no reply and the old man who was impatient to get home as was his horse loosed the reins and proceeded on his journey.   "Mother" said old Weir to his wife while she was helping him off with his old top-coat "I've seen either Mr. Fisher or his ghost."   "Nonsense!" cried the old woman; "you could not have seen Mr. Fisher for he is in Old England; and as for spirits you never see any without drinking them; and you are full of 'em now."   [9] "Do you mean to say I'm drunk mother?"   "No but you have your liquor on board."   "Yes; but I can see and hear and understand and know what I am about."   "Well then have your supper and go to bed; and take my advice and say nothing to anybody about this ghost or you will only get laughed at for your pains. Ghostesses indeed! at your age to take on about such things; after swearing all your life you never believed in them."   "But I tell you I saw him as plain as plain could be; just as we used to see him sitting sometimes when the day was warm and he had been round looking at his fences to see that they were all right."   "Yes very well; tell me all about it to-morrow" said the old woman. "As I was up before daylight and it is now nearly midnight I feel too tired to listen to a story about a ghost. Have you sold everything well?"   "Yes and brought back all the money safe. Here it is." The old man handed over the bag to his partner and retired to his bed; not to rest however for the vision had made so great an impression upon his mind he could not help thinking of it and lay awake till daylight when he arose as did his wife to go through the ordinary avocations of the day. After he had milked the cows and brought the filled pails into the dairy where the old woman was churning she said to him:   "Well David what about the ghost?"   "I tell you I seed it" said the old man. "And there's no call for you to laugh at me. If Mr. Fisher be not gone away - and I don't think he would have done so without coming to say good-bye to us - I'll make a talk of this. I'll go and tell Sir John and Doctor MacKenzie and Mr. Cox and old parson Fulton and everybody else in the commission of the peace. I will as I'm a living man! What should take Fisher to England? England would be no home for him after being so many years in this country. [10] And what's more he has told me as much many a time."   "Well and so he has told me David. But then you know people will alter their minds and you heard what Mr. Smith said about that woman?"   "Yes. But I don't believe Smith. I never had a good opinion of that man for he could never look me straight in the face and he is too oily a character to please me. If as I tell you Mr. Fisher is not alive and in this country then that was his ghost that I saw and he has been murdered!"   "Be careful David what you say; and whatever you do don't offend Mr. Smith. Remember he is a rich man and you are a poor one; and if you say a word to his discredit he may take the law of you and make you pay for it; and that would be a pretty business for people who are striving to lay by just enough to keep them when they are no longer able to work."   "There's been foul play I tell you old woman. I am certain of it."   "But that can't be proved by your saying that you saw a ghost sitting on a rail when you were coming home from market none the better for what you drank upon the road. And if Mr. Fisher should still be alive in England - and you know that letters have been lately received from him - what a precious fool you would look!"   " Well perhaps you are right. But when I tell you that I saw either Mr. Fisher or his ghost sitting on that rail don't laugh at me because you will make me angry."   "Well I won't laugh at you though it must have been your fancy old man. Whereabouts was it you saw or thought you saw him?"   "You know the cross fence that divides Fisher's land from Smith's - near the old bridge at the bottom of Iron Gang Hill?"   "Yes."   "Well it was there. I'll tell you what he was dressed in. You know that old fustian coat with the brass buttons and the corduroy waistcoat and trousers and that red silk bandanna handkerchief that he used to tie round his neck?" [11]  "Yes."   "Well that's how he was dressed. His straw hat he held in his left hand and his right arm was resting on one of the posts. I was about ten or eleven yards from him for the road is broad just there and the fence stands well back."   "And you called him you say?"   "Yes; but he did not answer. If the horse had not been so fidgety I'd have got down and gone up to him."   "And then you would have found out that it was all smoke."   "Say that again and you will put me into a passion."   The old woman held her tongue and suffered old David to talk all that day and the next about the ghost without making any remark whatever.     CHAPTER III.  On the following Wednesday - Thursday being the market day in Sydney - old David Weir loaded his cart and made his way to the Australian metropolis. True to his word with his wife he did not mention to a soul one syllable touching the ghost. Having disposed of his butter eggs poultry and maize the old man left Sydney at 4 p.m. and at half-past ten arrived at Dean's public house.   He had travelled in that space of time thirty miles and was now about eight or nine from home. As was his wont he here baited his horse but declined taking any refreshment himself though pressed to do so by several travellers who wanted to "treat" him. During the whole day he had been remarkably abstemious.   At a quarter to twelve the old man re-harnessed his jaded horse and was about to resume his journey when two men who were going to Penrith asked him for "a lift." [12]  "Jump up my lads" said old David; and off they were driven at a brisk walk. One of the men in the cart was a ticket-of-leave man in the employ of Mr. Cox and had been to Sydney to attend "muster." The other was a newly-appointed constable of the district. Both of these men had lived for several years in the vicinity of Penrith and knew by sight all of the inhabitants male and female free and bond.   When they neared the spot where the old man had seen the apparition he walked the horse as slowly as possible and again beheld the figure of Mr. Fisher seated on the upper rail of the fence and in precisely the same attitude and the same dress.   "Look there!" said old David to the two men "what is that?"   "It is a man!" they both replied. "But how odd! It seems as if a light were shining through him!"   "Yes" said old David; "but look at him; what man is it?"   "It is Mr. Fisher" they said simultaneously.   "Hold the reins one of you" said old David. "I'll go and speak to him. They say he is at home in England but I don't believe it."   Descending from the cart the old man who was as brave as a lion approached the spectre and stood within a few feet of it. "Speak!" he cried. "Don't you know me sir? I am David Weir. How came you by that gash in your forehead? Are you alive or dead Mr. Fisher?" To these questions no answer was returned. The old man then stretched forth his hand and placed it on what appeared to be Mr. Fisher's shoulder; but it was only empty air vacant space - that the intended touch rested upon!   "There has been foul play!" said the old man addressing the spectre but speaking sufficiently loud to be heard by both men in the cart. "And by heaven it shall be brought to light! Let me mark the spot." And with these words he broke off several boughs from a tree near the rail and placed them opposite to where the spectre remained sitting. Nay further he took out his clasp-knife and notched the very part on which the right hand of the spectre rested. [13]  Even after the old man returned to the cart the apparition of Mr. Fisher exactly as he was in the flesh was "palpable to the sight" of all three men. They sat gazing at it for full ten minutes and then drove on in awe and wonderment.     CHAPTER IV.  When old David Weir arrived home his wife who was delighted to see him so calm and collected inquired laughingly if he had seen the ghost again. "Never mind about that" said the old man. "Here take the money and lock it up while I take the horse out of the cart. He is very tired and no wonder for the roads are nearly a foot deep in dust. This is the fifteenth month that has passed since we had the last shower of rain; but never mind! If it holds off for a fortnight or three weeks longer our maize will be worth thirty shillings a bushel. It is wrong to grumble at the ways of Providence. In my belief it is very wicked."   "Well I think so too" said the old woman. "Thirty shillings a bushel! Why Lord a'bless us that ull set us up in the world surely! What a mercy we did not sell when it rose to nine and sixpence!"   "Get me some supper ready for as soon as I have taken it I have some business to transact."   "Not out of the house?"   "Never you mind. Do as I tell you."   Having eaten his supper the old man rose from his chair put on his hat and left his abode. In reply to his wife's question "Where are you going?" he said "To Mr. Cox's; [14] I'll be home in an hour or so. I have business as I told you to transact."   The old woman suggested that he could surely wait till the morning; but he took no heed of her and walked away.   Mr. Cox was a gentleman of very large property in the district and was one of the most zealous and active magistrates in the colony. At all times of the day or the night he was accessible to any person who considered they had business with him.   It was past two o'clock in the morning when David Weir arrived at Mr. Cox's house and informed the watchman that he desired to see the master. It was not the first time that the old man had visited Mr. Cox at such an hour. Two years previously he had been plundered by bushrangers and as soon as they had gone he went to give the information.   Mr. Cox came out received the old man very graciously and invited him to enter the house. Old David followed the magistrate and detailed all that the reader is in possession of touching the ghost of Mr. Fisher.   "And who were with you" said Mr. Cox "on the second occasion of your seeing this ghost?"   "One is a ticket-of-leave man named Williams a man in your own employ; and the other was a man named Hamilton who lived for several years with Sir John Jamieson. They both rode with me in my cart" was the old man's answer.   "Has Williams returned?"   "Yes sir."   "It is very late and the man may be tired and have gone to bed; but nevertheless I will send for him." And Mr. Cox gave the order for Williams to be summoned.   Williams in a few minutes came and corroborated David Weir's statement in every particular.   "It is the most extraordinary thing I have ever heard in my life" said Mr. Cox. "But go home Weir; and you Williams go to your rest. To-morrow morning I will go-with you to the spot and examine it. You say that you have marked it Weir?" [15]  "Yes sir."   The old man then left Mr. Cox and Williams returned to his hut. Mr. Cox did not sleep again till a few minutes before the day dawned and then when he dropped off for a quarter of an hour he dreamt of nothing but the ghost sitting on the rail.     CHAPTER V.  The next morning - or rather on that morning - Mr. Cox at eight o'clock rode over to the township of Penrith and saw Hamilton Weir's second witness. Hamilton as did Williams corroborated all that Weir had stated so far as related to the second time the spectre had been seen; and Hamilton further volunteered the assertion that no one of the party was in the slightest degree affected by drink.   There was a tribe of blacks in the vicinity and Mr. Cox sent for the chief and several others. The European name of this chief was "Johnny Crook" and like all his race he was an adept in tracking. Accompanied by Weir Hamilton Williams and the blacks Mr. Cox proceeded to the spot. Weir had no difficulty in pointing out the exact rail. The broken boughs and the notches on the post were his unerring guides.   Johnny Crook after examining the rail very minutely pointed to some stains and exclaimed "white man's blood!" Then leaping over the fence he examined the brushwood and the ground adjacent. Ere long he started off beckoning Mr. Cox and his attendants to follow. For more than three-quarters of a mile over forest land the savage tracked the footsteps of a man and something trailed along the earth (fortunately so far as the ends of justice were concerned no rain had fallen during the period alluded to by old David namely fifteen months. One heavy shower would have obliterated all these tracks most probably and curious enough that very night there was a frightful downfall - such a downfall as had not been known for many a long year) until they came to a pond or water-hole upon the surface of which was a bluish scum. This scum the blacks after an examination of it declared to be "white man's fat." The pond in question was not on Fisher's land or Smith's. It was on Crown land in the rear of their properties. When full to the brink the depth of the water was about ten feet in the centre but at the time referred to there was not more than three feet and a half and badly as the cattle wanted water it was very evident from the absence of recent hock-prints that they would not drink at this pond. The blacks walked into the water at the request of Mr. Cox and felt about the muddy bottom with their feet. They were not long employed thus when they came upon a bag of bones - or rather the remains of a human body kept together by clothing which had become so rotten it would scarcely bear the touch. The skull was still attached to the body which the blacks raised to the surface and brought on shore together with a big stone and the remains of a large silk handkerchief. The features were not recognisable but the buttons on the clothes and the boots were those which Mr. Fisher used to wear! And in the pocket of the trousers was found a buckhorn-handled knife which bore the initials "J.F." engraved on a small silver plate. This was also identified by Weir who had seen Mr. Fisher use the knife scores of times. It was one of those knives which contained a large blade two small ones a corkscrew gimlet horse-shoe picker tweezers screwdriver etc. etc. The murderer whoever it might be had either forgotten to take away this knife or had purposely left it with the body for all other pockets were turned inside out. [16]  "Well sir what do you think of that?" said old Weir to Mr. Cox who looked on in a state of amazement which almost amounted to bewilderment. [17]  "I scarcely know what to think of it" was Mr. Cox's reply. "But it is lucky for you David that you are a man of such good character that you are beyond the pale of being suspected of so foul a deed."   "I sir?"   "Yes you. If it were not that this dead man's property is advertised for sale it might have gone very hard with you old man. It would have been suggested that your conscience had something to do with the information you gave me of the ghost. But stay here all of you with the body until I return. I shall not be absent for more than an hour. Have you a pair of handcuffs about you Hamilton?"   "Several pair sir" replied the constable.     CHAPTER VI.  After leaving the dead body Mr. Cox rode to Fisher's house in which Mr. Smith was living. Mr. Smith on being informed of the approach of so exalted a person as Mr. Cox one of the proudest men in the colony came out to receive him with all respect and honour. Mr. Cox - who would not have given his hand to an "ex-piree" (under any circumstances) no matter how wealthy he might be - answered Mr. Smith's greeting with a bow and then asked if he could speak with him for a few minutes. Mr. Smith replied "Most certainly sir" and ordering a servant to take the magistrate's horse to the stables he conducted his visitor into the best room of the weatherboarded and comfortable tenement. The furniture was plain and homely but serviceable nevertheless and remarkably clean. The pictures on the walls formed a rather motley collection having been picked up at various times by Mr. Fisher at sales by public auction of the effects of deceased officials. Amongst others were two valuable oil-paintings which had originally belonged to Major Ovens an eccentric officer who was buried on Garden Island in the harbour of Port Jackson. These had been bought for less money than the frames were worth. There were also some Dutch paintings of which neither Mr. Fisher nor those who had not bid against him little knew the real value when they were knocked down for forty-two shillings the set - six in number! [18]  "I have come to speak to you on a matter of business" said the magistrate. "Is the sale of this farm and the stock to be a peremptory sale? That is to say will it be knocked down bona fide to the highest bidder?"   "Yes sir."   "And the terms are cash?"   "Yes sir."   "Sales for cash are not very common in this country. The terms are usually ten per cent. deposit and the residue at three six nine and twelve months in equal payments."   "Very true sir but these are Mr. Fisher's instructions by which I must be guided."   "What do you imagine the farm will realise including the stock and all that is upon it?"   "Well sir it ought to fetch £1500 ready money."   "I hear that the whole of Mr. Fisher's property is to be sold either by auction or private contract."   "Yes sir."   "What will it realise think you in cash?"   "Not under £12000 I should say sir."   "One of my brothers has an idea of bidding for this farm; what about the title?"   "As good as can be sir. It was originally granted to Colonel Foucaux who sold it and conveyed it to Mr. Thomas Blaxsell who sold it and conveyed it to Fisher. But as you know sir twenty years' undisputed possession of itself makes a good title and Fisher has been on this farm far longer than that. All the deeds are here; you may see them if you please sir." [19]  "There is no occasion for that; as Mr. Fisher's constituted attorney you will sign the deed of conveyance on his behalf."   "Yes sir."   "What is the date of the power of attorney?"   "I will tell you sir in one moment"; and opening a bureau which stood in one corner of the room Mr. Smith produced the deed and placed it in Mr. Cox's hands.   With the signature of Fisher Mr. Cox was not acquainted; or at all events he could not swear to it. He had seen it - seen Fisher write his name it is true; but then it was that sort of hand which all uneducated and out-door working men employ when they write their names - a sprawling round-hand. But as to the signatures of the attesting witnesses there could be no question whatever. They were those of two of the most eminent solicitors (partners) in Sydney - Mr. Cox's own solicitors in fact.   "And the letter of instructions authorising you to sell by auction for cash; for it says in this power and to sell the same or any part thereof in accordance with such instructions as he may receive from me by letter after my arrival in England.'"   "Here is the letter sir" said Mr. Smith producing it.   Mr. Cox read the letter attentively. It ran thus:   "Dear Sir - I got home all right and found my friends and relations quite well and hearty and very glad to see me again. I am so happy among 'em I shan't go out no more to the colony. So sell all off by public auction or by private contract but let it be for cash as I want the money sharp; I am going to buy a share in a brewery with it. I reckon it ought altogether to fetch about £17000. But do your best and let me have it quick whatever it is.  "Your faithful friend  "JOHN FISHER."   There was no post mark on this letter. In those days the postage on letters was very high and nothing was more common for persons in all conditions of life to forward communications by private hands. As to the signature of the letter it was identical with that of the power of attorney. [20]  "All this is very satisfactory" said Mr. Cox. "Is this letter dated five months ago the last you have received?"   "Yes sir. It came by the last ship and there has not been another in since."   "Good morning Mr. Smith."   "Good morning sir."   Another colonial nuisance is the abundance of insect life. Flies - black blue bumble and blow - musquitoes cockroaches spiders tarantulas and even centipedes annoy and terrify the new arrival. The musquito is a beast. It comes buzzing against your cheek with a drowsy singsong whir fixes its suckers into the flesh and bounds off with another song - a kind of carmen triumphale - leaving a large red mark behind it which is far more irritating than a healing blister. While I am writing this little book our ship is in the neighbourhood of Cape Horn and my hands and feet are covered with chilblains. Still I can safely say never did chilblain - in its frostiest and most abandoned form - vex like the bite of a well-trained and experienced musquito. They use in the colony what are called musquito curtains; but so far from these keeping away the insects I never found them of any other use than in imprisoning the little fiends who had sneaked in during the process of bed-making. Some nights they have driven me almost mad forced me out of bed and compelled me to dress myself even to the putting on of gloves in order to protect my skin. They have a great relish - being epicures in their way - for the round fat mottled part of the hand ridging the off-side of the palm. In about two seconds one will sow it with bumps and blisters from the wrist to the little finger. Strange as it may read I used to let my beard grow in order that I might rub this part of my hand against my serried chin and thus allay the irritation. If I slept in gloves they punished my legs; if I slept in stockings they riddled my hands; if I tried both they punctured the edges of my ears. [228] The walls of my bedroom were stencilled with their corpses; for whenever I was driven from the sheets I used to go round with a slipper and - with intense satisfaction - settle hundreds of them as they stood stropping their stings upon the wall. They too especially hate and harass the new-chum.  Having thus given an outline - somewhat hard and dry I am afraid - of the everyday doings and ordinary aspects of Australia let me here frame the coup d'oeil with one or two little bits of description calculated to convey an idea of the natural beauties and peculiarities of the country. Australia is not the level and unvaried waste that some have represented: its trees are not all gums its flowers are not all scentless. I have gathered posies in the wild bush which for beauty and perfume would have delighted the most fastidious lounger at Chiswick. I have seen twenty different kinds of trees of twenty various shades of foliage growing naturally in the space of about an acre; I have walked through rich and ever-changing scenes - verdant valleys zoned with blue-capped hills - and but for the somewhat dusty foliage the ring of the cicada the guffaw of the laughing jackass or the rattle of the snake might have imagined myself in the fairest and fairyest spots of the Mother land.  The evenings in Australia are singularly beautiful. I have often read a newspaper by the light of the moon. The stars are very white and large and seem to drop pendulous from the blue like silver lamps from a dome of calaite. I used to visit a house a long way out of Sydney for the pleasure of being lighted home by the stars. Generally I did not admire the Australian climate - its sudden changes occasionally of thirty or forty degrees in two or three hours its clouds of dust its awful storms and its hot winds; but an Australian evening - especially in winter - in its serene loveliness defies all attempts at description. I have looked from my little study window sometimes at midnight and seen the harbour so brightly argent with the moon that it seemed as though He had walked again upon the sea and left the glory of His footsteps on the water.  Having mentioned in passing a hot wind let me endeavour to convey some notion of what a hot wind really is. It is early morning and as you look from your window in the suburbs of Sydney you see a thin white vapour rising from the far-off bush. The sheep out there in the distance are congregated beneath the trees while the old cows are standing knee-deep in those clayey creeks of water that trickle from the headed-up rocks above. [229] You have seen all this before and know too well what it means. Before breakfast time there will "be" a hot wind.  It comes. The white earth cracks as it passes over it as though it were a globe of crystal struck by some invisible and mighty hand. The air is hot and murky as the breath from an oven; and you see trees wither - the fruit shrivel and drop from the vines - as though the Last Seal were opened and the breath of the Destroying Angel had gone forth. The cicadas seem to shriek (their shrill note is always shrillest in hot weather) and the birds drop dead from the trees. The dogs in the street lie down and hide their dry protruding tongues in the dust. Higher and higher rises the mercury in the glass until now at noon it stands at 147°! You stop up every keyhole and crevice in your room to keep out the burning Sirocco and endeavour perhaps to read. In a minute stars dance before your eyes and your temples throb like pulses of hot iron. You allow the book to fall from your hands and strive to drop to sleep. It is not much relief if you succeed for you are safe to dream of the Inferno or Beckford's Hall of Eblis. There is only one thing you can do that gives relief. Light your pipe mix your sherry-cobbler and smoke and drink until the change arrives.  The "Southerly Buster" as this change is called generally comes - sounding on  Like the storm-wind from Labrador  The wind Euroclydon  early in the evening. A cloud of dust - they call it in Sydney a "brickfielder" - thicker than any London fog heralds its approach and moves like a compact wall across the country. In a minute the temperature will sink fifty or sixty degrees and so keenly does the sudden change affect the system that hot toddy takes the place of the sherry-cobbler and your great-coat is buttoned tightly around you until a fire can be lighted. Now if you look from your window in the direction where you saw that white vapour ascending in the morning a spectacle terrible in its magnificence will meet your eye. For miles around - as far as the gaze can reach - bush fires are blazing. You see the trail of the flame extending into the interior until it grows faint and thin along the hilltops as though a wounded deer had moved bleeding upon the road. Nearer however the sight is grand and awful and hints of the Final Apocalypse when the stars shall fall like those charred branches that drop with a thundrous crash and scatter a cloud of glowing embers around them.  No matter where you live in Sydney looking from your window across the harbour into the surrounding bush you can always see sights like this after a hot wind. The reflection upon the water itself is very fine. [230] The emerald changes into ruby - the water into wine. The white sails of boats become of "purple" and "their prows of beaten gold". Everything seems bathed in an atmosphere of romance and if the impression were not lowered by the idea the sheets of flame in the distance might be taken for the crimson walls of Aladdin's palace gleaming through the woods.  Sometimes these hot winds last for two or three days and then the effects are something lamentable. Scarcely a blade of vegetation is left in the ground - the sere leaves fall from the trees as in a blast of autumn. The same week that I landed in Sydney a hot wind lasted for four days on the last of which no less than thirty persons dropped dead in the streets. I remember I had a little garden to my house and the white-starred jessamine was in full flower in front of the lower windows. Before the wind was over nothing remained but a bunch of dry sticks kept to the wall by the pieces of cloth with which they were fastened. But I have witnessed other phenomena in Australia as remarkable - if not as terrible - as a hot wind and I must therefore pass on.  Soon after my arrival in New South Wales I went up the Paterson a charming river watering some of the richest soil in the country. While here I saw that beautiful phenomenon known as the Aurora Australis. Imagine reader an arch of palest gold built right across the heavens and set along the top with rows of Gothic spear-like points suffused with violet and tipped with burning crimson. Imagine further these lambent spears darting out a thousand varied coruscations until every tree around glows like the bush of Horeb and the tops of the distant mountains flush with a pale uncertain consecration. Imagine now that the arch is first splitting into purple gaps and now falling into molten fragments mixed with a rain of many coloured stars - that the night is moonless and all without the influence of the palpitating light as dark and sullen as the blasted strand of Erebus - imagine all this and you will have a limning faint and feeble enough of one phase in the luminous existence of the Aurora Australis.  A leaf or two from my Up-Country Note Book will not come in amiss here:  Monday  Nothing but gums and three-rail fences. Flies and parrots in abundance. Saw a flock of at least 500 paroquets chased by a hawk. He caught one and not being able to kill it on the wing darted down to a gully and held his little victim beneath the water until it was drowned.  Tuesday  Scenery improved. Fine dark hills clothed with verdure. At night I witnessed a "corroboree". [231] About twenty naked blacks painted hideously with blue stripes along each rib and down each leg - white around each eye and splashes of red upon the forehead - were dancing beneath the moon and grunting all the while with a husky hooh! - hooh! - hooh! so as to keep a very common time. Five or six "gins" one with a little boy upon her back were sprawled upon the ground tomtoming on opossum rags piling the fires with fresh logs and occasionally breaking in with a wild chorus of  Corinda briar  Corinda briarre!  prolonging the last syllable for nearly half a minute. Catlin would have given a little for the picture.  Wednesday  (I extract two brief paragraphs from a lengthy passage.) - A single fork of lightning struck the brow of a colossal rock rising from the waters along which we journeyed. A boom of thunder - low rumbling and long-continued - just wrinkled the face of the stream and one or two large gouts of rain fell with a heavy plash upon the beach. There was a smell of balm wafted for a moment across the air. The atmosphere flushed suddenly to a pale lilac and the water slept beneath its weight of lilies. The white leaves lay upon its surface like flakes of snow.  Fair prelude to the coming storm! In half an hour black huddled clouds came sweeping up the sky and presently stream upon stream of lightning (no other words will convey what I mean) began to pour down until the air seemed saturated with the sulphurous vapour. The thunder appeared to shake the rocks and the rain came upon us like a perfect deluge. It fell in water-spouts rather than drops and we had to use our hats to bale the boat out. All nature seemed convulsed. Deep shadows moved upon the hills and we could see the tallest trees upon their sides struck down or rent in twain by the half-blinding lightning. The storm however did not last long. In an hour the air was as clear as ever and flocks of black wild-duck rose out of the cool reedy fens where they had taken protection and went careering with a hearty caw-caw after their leader up the stream.  "To the Editor of the HERALD.   "SIR- As it has to-day been intimated to me that notwithstanding my yesterday declining an overture by telegram on behalf of various parties in the electoral districts of the Upper Hunter to bring me forward at the ensuing election in opposition to Mr. John Robertson a nomination of me will nevertheless be persisted in will you allow me probably with the result of saving a contest and some expense to say through your columns that I am not a candidate for the representation of the Hunter? I have telegraphed that even if elected I shall decline to sit. Of course I did this with every feeling of gratitude to the gentlemen who did me the honour of placing such confidence in me. I have in fact no desire for the present to return to political life. I make this statement for two reasons - firstly that it has both at and since the general election been too largely the practice to bring me forward rashly and injudiciously without in most instances consulting me and in some against my will under circumstances of disadvantage where a person of far higher pretensions than the humble writer of these lines could not have a chance of succeeding - the disadvantage to one who has once tried to serve his country faithfully and who hopes some time hereafter to be of use to her is obvious. and secondly for far higher reasons. I take a very different view of what is due to those men who at a crisis undertake to work our new institutions to that of Mr. John Robertson and those who in company with him from the very first hour of my honoured friend Mr. Forster's ministerial existence did their dear utmost to thwart him to check and restrain his every effort. [26]  " Even if I had the certainty of being returned - and with Mr. John Robertson at the Hunter few men in this country would have such a certainty - Mr. Robertson having taken upon himself to attempt the government of the country I should be sorry in any way to interfere with him in the achievement of his onerous task. The man who accepts the responsibilities of the present hour is entitled to a large measure of favour on all sides though it is possible that this view is more generous than constitutional; and I may add that I am far from believing that Mr. Robertson's own public conduct renders him worthy of either forbearance or generosity. A severer code of ethics than I care to look at just now would deny the giving grace to an individual even at a 'crisis' when that crisis was brought about by his own discreditable conduct and shameless abnegation of the ordinary rules of political morality.   "I am Sir   "Your Obedient Servant   "D. H. DENIEHY.   "Sydney April 3rd 1860."   If Mr. Martin had had the persuasive declamation of the angels unfallen and the debating powers Milton gives the angels damned he could have done nothing with his motion of the 14th. Any amount of intellectual power which the honourable and learned gentleman might have exhibited would have been neutralised by a recognition on all sides of his utter want of any one moral principle which should govern the conduct of public men.   In the eyes of the country he symbolises a political profligacy; within the House he is a moral isolation and he deserves to be. His proceedings are taken less as the results of anxiety for the public good than as the activities of sheer personal spite. Men have made up their minds that the removal of Mr. Martin from office tenderly as that was brought about after all much more than any recent change in his former colleagues had altered the honourable and learned member's point of view. His return to the present Parliament at all sprang far less from belief in him than from distrust of Mr. Cowper and an opinion that the latter should be kept in check by any means whatever even by Mr. Martin faute de mieux. The history of responsible government presents nothing so disgraceful to the individual nothing so painful to everybody concerned as the explanation Mr. Martin volunteered the Assembly when after the lapse of many days he showed himself within the walls of the House as an ex-Attorney-General there to give reasons why he was so. Mr. Martin seemed the only man in the Chamber insensible as if by some disability and essential callousness of his moral nature to the position of utter degradation in which he chose to put himself by avowals altogether unchallenged and altogether uncalled for. A cast-off mistress on the flags before the door of her former entreteneur shrieking out with aimless wrath her own shame with the view of prejudicing the character of the once erring but now pale and penitent gentleman within to passers-by and to a startled neighbourhood would alone figure Mr. Martin pronouncing his own political infamy and the sacrifice of principle for the sake of "gratified personal ambition"; and all this amid the sardonic laughter and the contemptuous cheers of Mr. Donaldson and his followers with Mr. Cowper the while if he had a million faults the injured one sur la scène looking very white and trying very hard to seem at ease. Universal suffrage is a cardinal point of our own political creed. Still we can perfectly comprehend and very fully respect the honest convictions of those who believe the making it law a final step for converting the country into a Gehenna. But what epithet can convey scorn sufficient what expression deep enough of distrust in the man who looking upon it as shipwreck of the best interests of society could remain the leading member of a Cabinet whose only claim and perpetual appeal ad misericordiam through a career of marvellous incompetency of extraordinary profligacy and extraordinary folly was that it had under pressure of popular demand been the instrument of effecting a reform of electoral law based practically on manhood suffrage? To be sure in a smaller way another legal member of Mr. Cowper's Government had distinguished himself by an equally serious and equally suspicious change in his opinions on this fundamental principle of politics. Mr. Solicitor-General Hargrave on his first public appearance as a lecturer on law at the School of Arts went out of his way travelled positively beyond the legitimate limits of his thesis to denounce universal suffrage as involving madness and wickedness much of such a kind as sober English society sees in Pierre Leroux or Louis Blanc. On his latest public exhibition of himself returned at Illawarra in exchange for the big Breakwater bribe to the end that he might be made a law officer of the Crown he opened a great trumpet-stop on the somewhat stiff and tuneless organ of his eloquence for a Laudate and a Gloria in Excelsis of Mr. Cowper on manhood suffrage. But poor Mr. Hargrave like ce cher Lyttleton Holyoake was an adventurer: worse still not only a barrister without a brief but a barrister without bread. Our constitution embodies a provision for the relief of gentlemen of the upper branch of "the profession" thus unhappily placed. Mr. Hargrave in becoming a Minister in forma pauperis like Mr. Lutwyche before him was simply human. [92] [93]  But Mr. Martin's case was very different. He really belonged to the country was bound up with its interests and had run a career of some promise and certainly of very remarkable success. Had Mr. Cowper not resigned on Thursday it would have been worth his while to have offered inducements to Mr. Martin to continue his hostilities. While on the other hand till the Opposition had succeeded in making their disclaimer of being identified with the honourable and learned gentleman fully known and fully believed in they would often have been without the sympathies of the right feeling and the right-minded in the community. But Mr. Martin displayed neither angelic address nor diabolical dexterity in moving his vote of censure of the 14th. In point of fact in homely language he made a mess of it. A better vantage-ground could not have offered for attacking Mr. Cowper's corruption than his recent judicial and legal appointments and the perversion of justice gross and patent to which the Government had lent itself. Mr. Martin instead of selecting signal and almost unquestioned instances of this specific corruption of Mr. Cowper chose to adopt the chronological and exhaustive method with the view no doubt of showing that every legal appointment that had been made since the era of Mr. Martin's own resignation had been a bad one.   His case might have rested on the circumstances connected with Mr. Owen's appointment as a judge and the purchase from Mr. Chambers of his seat by an office refused him before he had been returned to Parliament; the conduct of the Administration in the committal in Walsh v. Oxley and one or two matters of a similar character and for which the Government had not and could not have offered even the shadow of an excuse. He lost time and lost ground by talking of the wretched fatuity of making Mr. Lyttleton Holyoake Bayley Attorney-General and amusing the House by the electioneering tom-fooleries the naiséries and ninny hammerings of that remarkably absurd person. The Bayley business besides is generally understood to be the work of a power behind the throne - of a political entity equally without discretion and responsibility and like Cupid in the pleadings of the older poets "too young to know what conscience is" - the honourable Member for Windsor Mr. William Bede Dalley. The overweeningly parental fondness for this young gentleman of Mr. Cowper and Mr. Robertson made them yield it is said to him in the matter and put into the hands of a stranger of two months' standing and utterly unknown to themselves as they have since confessed the somewhat important function discharged in England by grand juries. This method of Mr. Martin's necessarily took in appointments fairly and properly enough under the circumstances made as well as objectionable ones. For Mr. Hargrave as a politician or any claim of his to be a minister of the Crown we have as we have already shown ineffably small respect. But we do think no better choice could have been made for the bench of a District Court than the honourable and learned gentleman. Regarded simply as a lawyer we believe him to belong to an order which Mr. Martin himself with all his acuteness tact self-confidence and best industry will never attain. As to the remarks of the honourable and learned gentleman on Mr. Dalley's appointment as Solicitor-General they were simply unjust and ungenerous and no sufficient ground was presented for including him in the general indictment. [94]  Mr. Dalley's acceptance of the office was as Mr. Martin's before him on purely political grounds and the last-named gentleman should have recollected that his own political position and standing in the House made him a Crown law adviser rather than any professional prestige that was attached to his name. That came afterwards and the memories of the public are not so bad as not yet to have traces of the way in which Mr. Cowper went about puffing his first law officer's success at the bar as justifying his choice of an Attorney-General.   And granting even that Mr. Dalley did commit some oversight in the conduct of some particular case surely Mr. Martin is not so wrapped up in his own unchecked successes and confined to so poor an experience of things professional as to make that a ground for pronouncing wholesale unfitness for office. Did Mr. Martin never by any chance Commit a blunder in the management of a case himself? If he did not he in one respect from which lawyers we have always understood can claim no exemption as human beings lies out of a category that includes alike Scarlett and Follet and Bethel. [95]  Mr. Dalley's sins as Solicitor-General are of a very different order to those which flow from inattention to official duties or such marked incompetence to perform them as made his tenure of office objectionable. For certain things we believe Mr. Dalley to be deeply answerable - to men of very different stamp and with very different opinions to Mr. Martin's - men who have seen in Mr. Dalley's conduct betrayals of solemn pledges and also moral incapabilities to perceive the sacredness and the real nature of purely political responsibilities of a kind which but little trench upon the code of ethics Mr. Martin throughout proposed to himself as the rule of his public life.   No; Mr. Martin was not the man to move a vote of censure on the Cowper Government corrupt enfeebled and unprincipled as it was. And if the honourable and learned gentleman has really the good of the country in view by keeping Mr. Cowper out of power he will best and most effectually serve it by abstaining from action altogether.   A German philosopher by name Immanuel Kant was in the habit of declaring that two things pre-eminently excited his wonder - the starry heavens above and the moral law within. Worthy of marvel are both. But one who does not happen to have the habits of abstraction of a philosopher and a German philosopher to boot finds often enough something as wonderful in its way. Kant it may be presumed had perhaps never seen - certainly never felt - an attorney. Metaphysician as he was and casuist to him a lawyer's conscience was a thing unknown. And he lived and died there in Konigsberg without dreaming of a phenomenon connected with the municipal law far transcending and laughing at all moral law within or without - an attorney's impudence. To him who pretended to map the mind of man there was a terra Australis incognita requisite for the completion of his gigantic surveys. The critic of the pure reason never dreamed of such a moral and intellectual impossibility as Mr. William Whaley Billyard. [96]  Once upon a time the British Colonial administration with that learned sagacity which has always marked its proceedings determined to establish a new settlement on the northern coast of Australia. Of course the most important part of the affair and therefore what the authorities "at home" understood best was the duty of making the appointments. A governor was necessary and so was a judge. In those days perhaps "the Bar" was not such a drug in the English market as to make the exportation of Holyoake Bayleys a profitable speculation; but at all events an attorney was chosen for the North Australian ermine. Doubtless Her Majesty's Government expected "a good stroke" in land in the new colony. For the judge was neither nisi prius nor a criminal lawyer. His sole qualification was that he had been a pupil of the learned Jarman and if he had no claims to what Mr. W. B. Dalley would term "lots of law" he was a proficient in the law of "lots." This judge was Mr. William. Whaley Billyard. He arrived at Port Curtis in an age of iron realities preceding the bell éta dell' ora of Rockhampton and Canoona. He never ascended the Bench for the unhappy fortunes of the settlement never permitted it to furnish board much less a bench for the learned gentleman's use. He arrived in Sydney carrying with him as his capital for investment in the community his claims upon the Imperial Government. In those historic days such claims were like claims upon Mr. Cowper recently of far safer and more solid nature than property similarly named in auriferous regions. Mr. Whaley Billyard's claim furnished an astonishing yield. After doing a little journeyman jobbing for the profession a particular breeze which carried off a Mr. Cooper Turner from some of his creditors was the ill wind that blew Mr. Whaley Billyard good. Mr. Billyard was made Her Majesty's Crown Solicitor for Civil Business. We ourselves and we are told various honourable members of the Legislature at those searching eras when the estimates have come on for consideration have found a fruitful subject for marvel in the necessity for a Civil Crown Solicitor at all. What the particular civil business is of the Crown Law Department demanding the presence of a solicitor or at all events anything more than that of an expert clerk we never could divine; nor have we believe the public at large yet learnt. That the Crown required a solicitor to do its business is obvious enough; and equally obvious to anybody who understands such matters that one solicitor would suffice for all the business the Crown has to do. With the exception of preparing bonds of sureties and similarly simple documents in connection with the public service of certifying as to the right of parties to receive grants of land and some other small matters during the days of Mr. Whaley Billyard's salary and Mr. Whaley Billyard's perquisites it is hard to see what a Civil Crown Solicitor had to do. An action brought by the Government was what that quotation in the Eton Latin grammar from the poet of an age of similes prior to the investigation of our own interesting ornithology calls a rara avis. The whole legal transactions of the Railway Commissioners after even railway management had become a public department were conducted by an eminent legal firm in this city Messrs. Norton Son and Barker at an expense to the public of about one thousand pounds per annum. And meantime the actual the positive law required by the Government that for which an attorney charges you interesting and interested reader six and eightpences and thirteen and fourpences was furnished altogether by the Attorney- and Solicitor-General. Mr. Whaley Billyard had in point of fact as a public officer nothing to do. All that the Civil Crown Solicitor might have been asked to perform besides signing his name was done by a clerk - a respectable person by name Mr. Jackson and who except that high necessities of State prevented it might have discharged his laudable functions for years past as clerk to a Crown Solicitor for All Business as well as to a Crown Solicitor for Civil Business. Such was what persons in practice in the Courts of Equity call we believe "the state of facts." [97]  [98] Mr. Whaley Billyard fully as he recognised the propriety of persons of abilities and "claims" like his own being salaried with a view of preserving that hold on social respectability which let Mr. Rotten and Mr. Daniel Egan talk as they like is a prime necessity of Government had energies and activities the whole of his time and office accommodation for a considerable period in one of Her Majesty's buildings to spare. Mr. Billyard therefore went to work and to his honour be it said founded and conducted a very large and lucrative private practice. But the extraordinary energies and powers of the learned gentleman had space and time for still further operations. He became an agent on a majestic scale for some of our absentee landlords and to an impressive extent an "attorney" in the vicarious and not the professional sense for money lenders in the British Isles. This was "pretty good" as an accomplished Scottish friend of ours is wont to put things with emphatic idiom. But "panting Time" to use a complimentary poet's line about Shakespeare " toiled after" Mr. Whaley Billyard "in vain."   On the demise of a partner in a well-known firm in the city still retaining his multiform duties Mr. Billyard as locum tenens took charge of perhaps the most extensive legal business in New South Wales.   The Civil Crown Solicitor's department we may remark by way of culmination went on swimmingly the while. And though Government when it required the presence of a solicitor to guard its interests in the inferior courts was specially compelled from time to time to retain Mr. Williarn Roberts or some other advocate practising at the Police Office bar at outlays of from ten to twenty guineas the veriest tyro in the practice of the law will see that could flow from nothing defective in the purely solicitorial arrangements of the Crown business. And Mr. Whaley Billyard a man of small proportions being raised to the pedestal of the Civil Crown Solicitorship before the public gaze which as in the cases of men of similar merit might otherwise have missed him made his fortune.   But the most interesting portion of Mr. Whaley Billyard's nature his conscience had not yet come publicly into play. Hitherto it was operating apart in tender shadow "all there" as the popular phrase is but by no means exhibiting or seeming disposed to exhibit before the public eye those remarkable proportions and qualities which have made us deem it a duty to render it as far as our humble means will permit historical. In the course of the present year the Government under the frequent remonstrances of the Assembly abolished Mr. Whaley Billyard's functions as distinctive ones and consolidated the offices of the Civil and Criminal Crown Solicitor into one. The new Crown Solicitor was to devote himself entirely to the public service and to receive the handsome salary of £1000 per annum. The office on the new conditions was tendered to Mr. Billyard who refused it. Indeed the thing to a gentleman in his circumstances and with his views of the duties was in point of fact nothing short of an insult. To the Criminal Crown Solicitor originally we are informed a nominee of Mr. Plunkett's though as far as right and courtesy went as fully entitled as his colleague in the department Mr. Cowper was pleased to refrain from making the offer. But Mr. Whaley Billyard with a sagacity and prevision in themselves evidences of his high professional fitness was prepared and armed for such a conjuncture. Shortly after the learned gentleman's appointment he had applied paid for and secured from the proper office in London a patent transforming him through a colonially appointed functionary to his own satisfaction into an Imperial officer. The thing has the highest order of beauty about it that matters of the kind are susceptible of. And to pantomime constructors of the theatres in want of unlooked-for transformations likely "to pay" we recommend it as a study unparalleled in the range of "Colonial experience." "Mr. Billyard" quoth the honourable the First Secretary on one of those golden Australian mornings to the little gentleman who having made his "pile" could afford to listen to a Prime Minister with a smile of philosophic irony "we shall no longer require your services." "Very good" said Mr. Whaley Billyard; "but there is a little matter of compensation for the abolition of my office I shall expect." "Compensation echoed the honourable gentleman. "Why you can no more demand compensation than Mr. Moore Dillon; you are both officers appointed in the Colony - " "True" replied the retiring guardian of the Crown's civil litigations "but Mr. Dillon didn't take care to secure an Imperial patent of office as I did." Whatever be the grounds for this colloquy as an historical fact Mr. Whaley Billyard shortly after the abolition of his office presented a memorial to his Excellency the Governor-General praying that an allowance might be made him on the grounds of the abolition for purely political reasons of his patent office of some two thousand pounds or a sum of two hundred per annum. A printed copy of this petition remarkable for typographical beauty lies before us. [99] [100]  Considering "the unique nature" of the memorialist's case as the document sets it forth the mythical character of the main services for which the public money was paid yearly to Mr. Whaley Billyard the fact that for the more tangible portion of his work he was remunerated by individuals in the shape of perquisite fees and that if compensation be at all due in the case it is eminently owing to the public not only for what it paid Mr. Whaley Billyard for very small palpable returns but for what it helped him to we wish to rescue it from an oblivion it might have fallen into as the most memorable manifestation of the legal conscience that has yet been seen in this hemisphere - a monumentum vere perennius of that conscience we should say drawing upon the few stock phrases of schoolboy Latinity that still float in our memory if brass itself were not the very material out of which the whole thing is fashioned brass of more Corinthian quality than the Greeks who had no "lower branch of the profession" and never reached that point at which a nation needs Civil Crown Solicitors even dreamt of.   Few more interesting spectacles could be presented to the eye of the political observer than Mr. William Forster's experiment in the formation of a Government.   [101] Called to office evidently by the advice of those who hoped he would be neither able nor willing to undertake the task he makes an attempt in which we believe he will have the sympathies and the good wishes of every man with an iota of fair play in his composition. Clearing the administration stage completely of the combatants who have hitherto filled it and have been engaged in bitter conflict from causes some reaching as far back as the old mixed Legislative Council and some dating with the era of responsible government Mr. Forster's aim is to try if the new institutions cannot be worked by new men entirely unconnected hitherto with political warfare and almost unidentified with party or faction. No man could so fairly attempt this as Mr. Forster himself for whilst a damaging opponent both of the Governments of Mr. Donaldson and Mr. Parker he signalised himself as one of the most uncompromising and indomitable denouncers of Mr. Cowper's corruption nevertheless the while keeping himself aloof from any party or clique in the Assembly. He might be "crotchety" as some astute members of the House were wont to regard him; he might be "idiosyncratic" in the loftier phrase of the newspapers. But one thing was certain that the measure or the motion before the House on its own merits and not as the issue affected anybody concerned with it was what Mr. Forster dealt with and dealt with alone. "Sworn to no master" as once went the motto of a leading local journal "of no sect was he." In the hands of Mr. Cowper as well as of Mr. Parker responsible government has been in point of fact a failure. With the former infinitely more so than with the latter. From the very beginning Mr. Parker's administration was looked upon as a sort of resurrection of Mr. Donaldson's masked and disguised. It had not only to contend with a powerful opposition with the prestige about it which clever men have who have never tried their hands at defence while acting in attack but it had the public opinion of the country against it. There was no recovering the first false step of Mr. Donaldson. Election after election showed that the principles upon which it was believed the Government wished to rule far more than the men who composed it were unacceptable to the country at large. When Mr. Parker and his colleagues retired and Mr. Cowper and his friends took office no fairer chance ever yet presented itself for the completest and most beneficial success in any country under parliamentary rule. The preceding Administration instead of presenting a close active and vigilant opposition seemed at the same time worn out and convinced that the day for the policy they had throughout their colonial history been identified with had passed away. Almost every man of mark departed at once and those who did not closed their political career with the dissolution of the recent Assembly. Mr. Cowper came in with the prestige of the victorious Liberal party entering into their long denied political inheritance. He came in with large popular confidence. Though still by a very large portion of those who supported him because of his identification with progress politics the private character of the man his sincerity and truth were doubted and doubted as events have shown with good cause. He came into power with a tremendous working majority - one which showed itself prepared not only to enable him to carry his measures of political reform but even to back every act of his administration; ready because of his connection with former struggles and the great things he was expected to initiate to condone almost anything truly with the charity that covered a "multitude of offences!" On he went; but his career to the close of the last session of the late Assembly was as pitiable and as wretched as it is possible to conceive of any course of administration. The ablest and most energetic of an opposition which gradually formed and threw itself into action was composed of men who had fought in the front ranks in order to help Mr. Cowper on to power. But they had recoiled shocked and incensed at finding the very privilege they had struggled to place in his hands made use of for purposes not only corrupt but so mean and so base as could only belong to a man who with every dishonesty lacked the intellect and the courage to be greatly and boldly bad. Electoral reform was carried through the recent House. Mr. Cowper embodied in the measure besides its benefits a pet idea of so cutting up into small constituencies the country as to give the various electorates the quality as far as he could of mere parish vestries; thus regulating the return of the members far more on a narrow basis of the municipal principle than a national one and so trying to ensure that no man of a greater mental calibre than himself would be returned. Even this did not do; and though the country at the first general election sent into the Legislature no very remarkable new men they sent in a great many who showed at a very early era of their parliamentary life that they thought Mr. Cowper no model man and no reliable leader. [102] [103]  Nevertheless so many difficulties from an absence of any principle of party cohesion were found in the way of replacing the honourable gentleman that for want of better himself and his colleagues were allowed to go on and every grace and indulgence given to enable them to proceed. All did not do and after a brace of Ministerial crises during a very short parliamentary existence indeed we have Mr. Cowper really out and Mr. Forster's drama about to come before the political footlights the curtain still down but a cheery overture playing. There will be perhaps one interesting fact shown in connection with the new Government. We shall have a clear and certain chance of seeing this phenomenon very much talked about but never yet very plainly described - of factious opposition.   Mr. Forster has belonged to no distinctly marked side and his colleagues are altogether new men with no career like poor Mr. Plunkett before the epoch of free institutions and no damning taint of having like Mr. Hay or Mr. Murray been constituent elements of former Governments. We shall therefore see how the gentlemen who have recently dropped the reins and those who have driven in their machine now that there is nothing for recrimination or revenge will comport themselves in the presence of the first Ministerial impersonation of Novus Homo.   The Liberal Government which has just retired from power however much abstract democracy it talked on fitting occasions and however loudly it boasted of the change from the régime of Colonial Toryism to its own on the hustings and in the Assembly was by no means remarkable for the even-handed treatment it dealt out to high and low rich and poor of Her Majesty's liege subjects. The charge that for ends of its own it tampered with the administration of justice has never yet been met or repelled. Mr. Jones upon whom all the Honesties of Politics and the Decencies and Proprieties of Life waited as attendant genii to carry to the Universal Public Heart as Gospel truths what from the mouth of an honourable member of less respectability would have been looked at as ingenious partisan sophistries touched uniformly this state of things very lightly. Even Mr. Dalley the parliamentary knight-warden for the late Administration put his shining little shield into his pocket and sheathed the finely tempered little rapier of his debating canter in a walking-stick which he forthwith proceeded to "cut" whenever this ugly fighting ground disclosed itself. Not only was what we refer to a sinister characteristic of Mr. Cowper's Government in its loftier public stages but also when in a purely administrative capacity handling minor matters affecting persons poor and humble and helpless and from whom nothing as regards the safety and comforts of the tenure of office was either to be hoped or dreaded as from the culprits in Berry v. Lang (afterwards Lang M.P.) and Walsh v. Oxley (afterwards Oxley M.P.) [104]  A very notable instance of this is presented in the history of the lamentable railway accident to the late Mr. George Want placed side by side with the facts set forth in a petition ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be printed on the 11th October 1859   The railway accident which took place in July 1858 be fresh in our readers' mind. On that painful occasion a respectable solicitor Mr. George Want was - and we allude to the matter with genuine sympathy for those bereaved - killed. Various persons besides were seriously injured and amongst others a Mrs. Frances De Courcey a lady residing at Parramatta poor almost to destitution and as we gather from the petition above referred to supporting a large family prior to her mishap by her own exertions as visiting governess in Sydney and Parramatta united with those of an elder daughter who conducted an infant school. Her income she values as having been worth £150 a-year. She sets forth in her petition that the injuries she received were a dislocation of the wrist of the right hand and several contusions on the head and right eye by which her eyesight has been permanently injured and the use of her wrist impaired. She states too that the injuries are of a permanent nature and will preclude her in future from following the occupation by which she has hitherto obtained a livelihood. Corroborative certificates to this effect are appended to her petition from Mr. R. C. Rutter and Mr. Gordon Gwynne medical practitioners resident at Parramatta. [105]  Mrs. De Courcey also says that the Government after the accident afforded her medical assistance and other comforts and advanced for some short time a sum of five pounds per week for the support of her family. In September last the Government under the impression that she would have been able to follow her professional avocations handed her a sum of twenty-five pounds and gave her a free ticket for the Railway for six months and at the same time obtained a receipt in full for all claims upon them. Mr. Gwynne the petitioner further states told her her injuries were purely accidental and that it was to the kindness of Captain Martindale she was entitled to anything; and that under those circumstances she signed the receipt referred to. Finding her health still impaired and that she had during her illness lost her pupils she applied for further compensation; and the Government paid her a further sum of twenty-five pounds taking another receipt in full. Mrs. De Courcey owns that the payments made by the Government were under the impression that her injuries were of a temporary character. When this was shown to be otherwise the Administration nevertheless on her application for further compensation declined to make it on the ground that she had signed "a receipt in full" but by way of charitable gratuity gave her a sum of twenty pounds to meet her "immediate wants."   This is the case of a person in humble life. Let us now look how the widow of the late Mr. George Want was treated. A claim was shortly after Mr. Want's decease made by his relict on the Government. As the sister-in-law of a leading member of the Legislative Council and one of the wealthiest and most influential legal practitioners in the country the claim seems at once not only to have been entertained with the respect it undeniably deserved but with an amount of empressement somewhat beyond what mere sympathy with the loss sustained by the dead man's relations need have called forth in a Minister of the Crown acting unquestionably under melancholy circumstances but nevertheless in the discharge of a cool business duty that connected itself with a heavy demand on the public purse. On reference we are informed to the legal advisers in the matter of the Government the first question those gentlemen wished to satisfy themselves on was connected with the liability. At this stage there is good reason to believe that the claimants would have been satisfied as they fairly might have been we think with a far smaller sum than was eventually obtained. [106]  But all considerations of this kind and all legal preliminaries were suddenly stopped short by Mr. Robertson who at once declared on the part of the Government that the liability was admitted and that the sole matter that remained was the amount and this was at once placed in the hands of arbitrators who were pleased to rate the amount of liability at seven thousand pounds and the sum was accordingly paid. Now we do not wish to place Mrs. De Courcey's injuries on the same level with the fatal catastrophe to the unfortunate gentleman mentioned. But the utter disabling from being able to earn bread for herself and a large family of a helpless female fairly throwing aside any arguments in the case connected with moral suffering caused to the bereaved must have put Mrs. De Courcey and her children in pretty much the same position qua Mr. Robertson as Mrs. Want and hers. Both were to some extent deprived of the means of living from the same cause - one directly by having her bodily faculties impaired; the other indirectly but by a sadder deeper misfortune in the loss of her husband. But how differently the two women were treated and how infinitely beyond any real practical disparity in these respective cases the results; Mrs. Want at once receives some seven thousand pounds and this dealt out with a species of eagerness which whatever the amount of sympathy people do not often show in paying away their own money. Mrs. De Courcey has a few pounds doled out to her from time to time Her Majesty's Government upon the occasion of each donation securing itself by a receipt in full in a spirit of huckstering below contempt almost eking out the bargain by throwing in a railway ticket for six months. Then when the injuries are at length discovered by Mrs. De Courcey to be of such a character as will invalid her for life what is done by Mr. Robertson so eager and so prompt to admit the liability in Mrs. Want's case? Why he repudiates liability on the grounds that a receipt for a certain small sum (twenty-five pounds) had been signed without caring to inquire or examine under what circumstances of belief in the passing character of her mishaps the lady had signed it. Mr. John Robertson is a very amiable man in private life as ready as most men to give his aid to a charitable work. But he will perhaps pardon us if we take leave to suspect that if a very poor and humble professional man quite as dear to his wife and children as the late Mr. Want and with his exertions quite as necessary to their support as his had met with a similar fate Mr. Robertson would not have been such a cheerfully consenting party to the paying over of seven thousand pounds of the people's money as compensation in the affair. [107]  Our Caesar did not wrap his robe about him with decency when he fell. He might have done so with impressive dignity. He infused a deeper woe into the catastrophe than the career promised or spectators had a right to expect. The defeat on the Education Bill Mr. Cowper made to involve not only his ministerial abdication but the close of his existence as a public man. The dying scene was not worthy of the materials that the retiring patriot and war-wearied and worn-out public servant had at his command. [108]  There was stuff at hand for something artistically pathetic and memorable. A model might have been left for the native youth on such occasions as hereditary senatorial properties like a mace or a speaker's chain. The thing might have been done so as to have furnished the subject of a picture in the genre of Copley's "Death of Chatham" with an absence of course of the deeper tragic element and fine imaginative promise hinted in the main figure with foreground that if ever the Liberal Chief was wanted for any of those affairs which connect themselves in Mr. Parkes' mind with "sacrifices on the altar of one's country" the retiring leader will like a marked halfpenny turn up again.   But the artistic sense as well as another sense that of common propriety was wanting. Mr. Cowper then instead of doing the great Roman properly made that august individual at once bully and whine and tell spiteful fibs to boot. In his adieu he was pleased to tell his successors whoever they might turn out to be that they would find something more than common sense and common honesty necessary. No doubt; for a governing statesman with the destinies of a growing nation entrusted to his keeping a little sense is wanted that is not very "common;" something broader deeper and of longer range than Mr. Cowper's intellect or Mr. Cowper's education could help him to do; a sort of thing very different from that which placed the National domain in Mr. Robertson's hands or raised Mr. Weekes from the sale of smoothing irons and Britannia metal tea-pots to that place where intelligence is required by a sort of fiscal alchemy to make gold and silver for public uses. Something more than honesty too. Mr. Cowper is not a good logician and when he used the accumulative formula he doubtless meant scarcely a thing extra so much as something which could effect what some other thing could not.   No doubt the honourable gentleman meant that the requisite was that which men too far committed to action to be scrupulous use when the better material is ineffective. If so while he loves and cherishes his patriotic anxiety for the country's welfare Mr. Forster has only to come to his predecessor and succedendum that will fill the cavity long enough for practical purposes. [109]  But for one thing we should have thought it scarcely worth while to allude to Mr. Cowper's valediction in the Assembly or to the terms of the address in which he thought fit to intimate his resignation to the electors of East Sydney. The real secret of that gentleman's retirement is pithily enough put by our contemporary the Sydney Morning Herald - his consciousness that his occupation was gone that the time of shams (for him at all events) had expired. And this perhaps furnishes a key to the principle upon which the ex-Minister's farewell remarks hinged themselves and suggests why the quality of them was of so thin a fustian. Amongst the other delineances of an impotent vexation and a mortification which must talk though it has nothing to say Mr. Cowper alludes in his address to the attacks of "a venal press." If the honourable gentleman really cared to attach precise meanings to the phrases in his "long farewell" which certainly we do not believe this assuredly as our Irish friends have it "beats Banagher." It is a sublimity of impudence which it was left for a "People's Minister" at Botany Bay to arrive at. Till the very hour of Mr. Cowper's resignation with the exception of an occasional grumble such as that of the Illawarra Mercury at the Oxley escape and the Chamber's collusion; and stray suggestions from the Goulburn Chronicle that really decency must be sometimes consulted the whole rural press of the Colony did nothing but sing peans in honour of Mr. Cowper. His talents his purity his sacrifices his services were as a burthen that went up weekly or biweekly in all directions like the roar of many waters. Did any man dare to doubt Mr. Cowper's virtues or Mr. Cowper's talents? Though that man might have been baptised at the political font of Joseph Hume and been confirmed by O'Connell - though he had fought with Kossuth and fasted with Mazzini though he held doctrines too wildly democratic for an American "caucus" - though he might be ready to go to the stake for the five points of the Chartist's " Charter" yet he was no "Liberal." [110] And in the metropolis the case was with the exception of the Sydney Morning Herald which gave opposition mild and intermittent enough to suit any Minister precisely the same. Latterly even the Freeman's Journal which has been supposed to be the organ of a party which has always mistrusted Mr. Cowper for the narrowness and meanness of his bigotry took it into its head to chant a Magnificat three times a week in honour of the "Popular Minister." It is well known that Mr. Cowper spared nothing at his disposal to buy wherever the press was purchasable. We use the word "buy" advisedly; there are more ways of arranging a bargain than on a mere pecuniary basis. We know not if Mr. Cowper's ideas are really final ones. The pathos of the whole thing may after all have been got up for a purpose. When the main principle of a man's life is found to be a dishonest one unfortunately even for the honesty which circumstances force upon him he gets no mstances force upon him he gets no credit. It is suspected that he may dodge even Fate herself; and so thoroughly are we convinced that trickery and deception are the guiding principles the very ethics of Mr. Cowper's nature that we should not be at all surprised to find him very shortly indeed bowing himself back where he has so recently said farewell. The coffin must be well nailed the pit sufficiently deep and the superimposed tombstone - we care not what lies are engraved upon it - pretty heavy that will ensure the satisfactory political sepulture of Charles Cowper.   MR. COWPER has yes finally retired from public life. The by means utterly insoluble enigma presented by his declining to say "yes" or "no" to his supporters before the East Sydney election is now open enough.   The crisis involved the loss of Mr. Cowper himself as well as of a Premier. It was a tide in the affairs of man which the great democratic constituency should have taken at the flood. Not only gratitude for the past but hope for the future should have animated it. There was a Land Bill yet to come and a People's Minister was wanted to make it and embody it victoriously in law. There was Reform of the Second Chamber in arrears and we needed a democratic leader true and tried to carry it. But the giant metropolitan constituency made feeble sign of matching its energies and power with the demands of the emergency. Only a small section of the electors polled and though Mr. Cowper's position was the first he was placed there but by a narrow majority. Worse still Mr. Black a man of yesterday and an ingrate in the shoes of his patrons and protectors was returned also. It was the "sunset of life" and Mr. Cowper practically exhibited the "mystical lore" befitting that critical time of day. [113]  As Mr. Cowper is no longer a public man we have no further right and we have no wish to say much more about him than has already appeared in the pages of this journal. Not a thousandth part of what might have been said has been said or anything but a mere fragment of the charges preferred upon which before any impartial tribunal of public opinion he would have been convicted. He has done well in more senses than one to retire. His deserts would have come betwixt the retorts of those he might by bare possibility have screwed up his courage to attack in the House and all sorts of journals without. He would have stood as fair a chance of being prominently pilloried for his treasons to principle for the lowest and meanest of purposes as he richly merited.   He goes back into private life if he has anything in the nature of a conscience at all with the sense that he has succeeded in utterly demoralising politics in this country for many years to come. His simple object was of course to keep his hold on office and that with some men is perhaps natural enough. But few we believe would have consented to make the country pay the terrible price for it which he did. Before his Administration men by no means fitted for the discharge of its functions might have crept into the Legislature. They were supposed to have done so from a variety of reasons more or less connected with mistaken notions of their vocations or with vanity. [114]  It remained for Mr. Cowper to make a seat in Parliament the only chance of pecuniary success to those who had failed in or were unfitted for any other walk or who looked upon political life solely in the light of a business vocation. Principles as a public man he had no more than the veriest black-leg who is matched by whatever means to keep his stake on the table.   But this is not all. He had not mental capacity enough to comprehend in all its bearings the tremendous results which would eventually follow his reckless game. If he had whatever might have been his frailties his hankerings his tenacity to place he would have desisted with an uneasy fear of consequences.   The poor fools and dupes about the city led by those deeper than themselves still babble on Mr. Cowper and Electoral Reform Mr. Cowper and Democratic Progress. As if the great rushing organism of Democratic Progress wanted the puny aid of Mr. Cowper in a new country like this with free institutions to allow it room and play. As if Democratic Progress had not controlled Mr. Cowper as it would have done any other Minister and not Mr. Cowper Democratic Progress. As if the question of Electoral Reform overthrowing Sir Watson Parker and armed and in the field to overthrow any Minister who faltered or hesitated a moment about it was a grace flowing from the deepest and most ardent convictions of Mr. Cowper's inmost heart though generous chief had he liked he might have haughtily scoffed at it as some patrician leader below the immemorial blazonries of the New Palace at Westminster! The poor "Tail" of the great "Liberal Party" that curls itself impotently and writhes at the street corners should flap quietly in this hour of supreme trouble with the sense that Mr. Cowper took office with Electoral Reform as the condition of receiving it. He took office with an honourable and learned gentleman who had about the same amount of respect for the doctrine as that entertained by Mr. Thomas Paine for the Holy Evangelists. Our one object in saying this to the "Tail" just now in mourning for it is to assuage the wild desolation of its woe by reminding it that though Mr. Cowper was a mild believer such as peace-loving Protestants who marry strong-minded Catholic partners he was no fiery enthusiast and under no circumstances was he in a political sense prepared to go to the stake for the great popular dogma. A compromise far below manhood suffrage would have suited Mr. Cowper if a majority of opinions lay in that direction or a tolerably narrow franchise indeed if need were. Besides Ministers will always be found and in plenty to give any number of popular privileges running from license to liberty so long as they are left in possession of power and allowed to use it as they think fit. The Ministry could only have been and must be for years to come "Liberal." We congratulate the country on being released from the peculiar theory of morals upon which Mr. Cowper's Administration was laid. When it will be the duty of any journal to congratulate it on its release from utter scepticism in principle and the belief that the government and legislation of the country are other than mere games of personal interest it would be hard to say. [115]  It is upon record that the Right Honourable Robert Lowe once said of Mr. Charles Cowper that if he saw the gates of heaven thrown open he would not walk through straight but wriggle in. As to the vermicular nature of that gentleman's entrance into the abodes of the just we shall say nothing because the fact of his ever entering in any style rectilinear or otherwise is without any uncharity on our part problematical enough.   But certainly from the heaven of peaceful private life he has within the last few days most characteristically managed to wriggle back to the militant earth of politics. Just as Mr. Oakes and Mr. Byrnes had wiped their eyes with cambrics bleached in the orange groves of Parramatta at the thought of their chief - [117]  [...] that chief like Harlequin turns up again and as usual by a dodge is back in the midst of that parliamentary turmoil and strife where the wicked have not the remotest idea of ceasing from troubling and where the weary should by all means put the notion out of their heads of ever being at rest.   Whether the late Prime Minister making use of his temporary absence from Sydney visited the tomb of one who he believes was literally sacrificed by the Opposition to the late Government on the Moloch altars of their hatred and whether at the sight of that holy urn he felt his wrongs incite him to return and take revenge only Mr. Cowper himself and his more intimate friends know. At all events it is likely something of the kind will be alleged by the honourable gentleman as the main ground upon which he allowed himself to be brought back into political life. If so there will be about as much truth decency and manliness in the reference to buried affection as a reason for coming back as there was in alluding to it as a cause for retiring. When we hinted a doubt last week as to the fact that Mr. Cowper's political obsequies had at length taken place there was if not exactly prophetic instinct in the matter something at all events like real knowledge of the true character and habits of the individual under manipulation. We reasoned from the internal nature of things like philosophers as we are and the event has pretty fully borne out the prediction and justified the predictor. Mr. Cowper goes back of course in opposition. He will take his seat side by side with Mr. Martin and Mr. Darvall Mr. Parkes and Mr. Hay and feel it a duty he owes the country to oust as soon as possible from office Mr. Forster and his friends.   Opposition benches will certainly present as curious an assortment pure and impure as Noah's Ark or the Wandering Jew's museum in the American tale. Not only will the lion lie down with the lamb but the leopard will have changed his spots.   [118] Mr. Martin will at once discover that an Administration without a Minister who happens to be a lawyer must of necessity be continually doing things which shake the safety of society to the centre. And Mr. Cowper whom Mr. Martin so lately by way of a practical joke tried to upset in connection with the maladministration of the laws will see that there are weighty charges in what has fallen from "the honourable and learned member." Of course Mr. Cowper cannot call him "his honourable friend" he can never descend to that but he will feel bound to give the motion of the "honourable and learned gentleman" his warmest support. Or Mr. Parkes will revive his warfare on the tea and sugar duties. Mr. Cowper with the fresh feeling in his mind how spontaneously and with what ardent love and gratitude he has just been re-elected for East Sydney whatever difficulties might have once been in his own way as a Minister will ne'er consent to see the poor man's cup "the beverage that cheers but not inebriates" taxed in a country where the luxurious positively go free. Or possibly Mr. Darvall may jump up again on that bête noir of his the Moreton Bay Separation question. Mr. Cowper now a free agent no longer hampered in a manner men in office can alone know or fully understand will do his devoirs to his constituents and the country at large.   How far the action taken from that new angle from which a sense of duty strikes a gentleman who has recently left the position of Premier to take his seat in opposition may meet the convenience of his successor it is scarcely necessary to anticipate. Mr. Hay perhaps with the modesty of a man who has not practised law in this country may hint a doubt or hesitate dislike at some judicial appointment hereafter made by Mr. Forster; for there is nothing we know of in that gentleman his character and talents notwithstanding removing him from the fallibilities and frailties of humanity. Then think of Mr. Cowper's dignified indignation in addressing the House at seeing a passing shadow thrown much less a permanent spot fixed on the purity of the ermine. Perhaps too the Tory Attorney-General of Mr. Forster's Cabinet - for if that promising orator Mr. Richard Driver Junior is to be credited Mr. Forster has already to this extent followed in Mr. Cowper's footsteps - may refuse redress against some corrupt and incapable justice of the peace. [119]  A magistrate may have sat on his own case with the view of consummating by the forms of adjudication the robbing a poor man of his beast. Hereupon the immaculate Mr. Cowper who has taken the manufacture and preservation of the commission of the peace under his care will feel bound that evening before the question is put to make a few remarks. If the public only receive timely warning how the theatres will empty! And if photography could work as effectually by artificial as by solar light what a moment for Mr. Dalton to take the living sketch which embodied in a full length on oils will preach mildly to coming generations of Australian statesmen the clearness the charm and the beauty of honesty as a policy.   What exact position Mr. Cowper will take in the House it is hard to conceive. The shallowest man has often a surer and better sense of his own difficulties than the most sagacious of his friends. And we believe it was a feeling of this kind which induced the late Prime Minister to retire for a while at all events from public life. He had considered probably more narrowly than those who have recently secured his re-election the political horizon as it affected himself. A policy on any of the great local questions he had not and had declared none for that simple reason.   He was not a waiter on Providence - there might have been something in that; he was a watcher for stuff to make his measures of whatever rose to the surface as to the shifting majorities of the day. Had he had a policy in the real sense of that word or any fixed and definite views of his own on cardinal public questions he might have fallen as the greatest statesmen have grasping his principles in his fall and with that immortal basis of party which principles good or bad few or many furnish.   Holding by a living political creed believed in by men allying them by a common bond interweaving itself with their interests a Minister may go down but he goes down with a strong likelihood of returning. The difference betwixt this and a Minister who having lived on credit and kept himself up by mere personal props tumbles or rather falls in without a scrap of political credit worn out and found out is terrible. As there was no inherent political life so there is no chance of revival or resurrection. For the greater portion of his tenure of office Mr. Cowper governed by the help of a mere coterie. In bygone times the affairs of the country were administered by a clique at the Bent Street Club in our day by a clique at the Victoria Club; formerly by irresponsible officials controlled by aristocratic squatters latterly by responsible Ministers with the advice and consent of a number of men who in most cases with very mean pretensions to intelligence had amassed money and so raised themselves to parliamentary positions. This fact of hole-and-corner government was pretty clearly pointed out and pretty plainly denounced by the Hunter's River constituency at the recent general election. They gave trouble not because they were specially hostile to Mr. Cowper but because they felt indignant at being parcelled out in electoral lots betwixt this and that gentleman members of the Government set "thick and thin supporters." In a later stage Mr. Cowper tried to galvanise his effete Ministerial existence by such a use of patronage as to make as many friends in the enemy's camp as his own. When this failed for even the most extensive patronage must find its limits he resorted to a device perhaps more desperate than any Minister on his "last legs" ever dreamed of before; - he took to resignations so contrived as to involve the necessity of his being recalled to office. Practically the honourable gentleman put the matter thus: - "It is quite evident that I am not exactly the right man in the right place but as I am the best you can get under the circumstances you must take me and take me on my own terms." It was a forlorn hope. It was the hope of a shallow schemer at bay; not of one hard hunted but of one who had taken chase having little or no wind to run with. The pitcher went too often to the well. A quiet cynical young man of small experience Mr. William Forster disposed of the broken crockery on the disastrous occasion; and the well itself seems likely to turn out a Fountain of Oblivion for the distinguished personage who went to draw at it. Mr. Cowper's reputation as a leader was made in the absence of the dii majores who had controlled our public affairs with an intrepidity and an intelligence which elicited for the shabby little chamber in Macquarie-Street the admiration of enlightened avengers even. Before Mr. Cowper's small candle had caught men's eyes the lights of Mr. Wentworth and Mr. Lowe had been removed and Richard Windeyer's had been quenched for ever. Besides the Minister's political prestige was made in Opposition. There a knowledge of details and of particulars made him effective in the hostile analysis of that mass of minor matters which make up the main business of official administration in a small community. Your man of this stamp is the drop of water on the stone; he kills by inches but he kills. The man of larger brain sweeps down too often like the thunder shower and the stone is either bodily swept away or it remains where it was. Mr. Cowper's head without a high faculty of any kind in it is as was once said of somebody else's a perfect nest of pigeon holes. Facts and figures in all Parliamentary papers and matters of public business are there stowed away arranged and docketed with exquisite precision and matchless regularity. This has done good service in its way and the Minister of State who has such an under-secretary may look upon himself as a fortunate man. But it became necessary to work out a free constitution to construct a land policy to give the country a sound and expansive apparatus of laws. With the need came power as a prize of contest amongst men of keen and daring and powerful intellects heretofore kept outside the gates. Mr. Cowper with undeniably good abilities of their kind was not the man. The time for the mere analysis of local appointments and auditing items of estimates had passed; the hour for creation and construction had come. Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. Stringy bark is capital stuff for three rail fences but useless for building purposes. With no pretensions to ability to deal with great questions Mr. Cowper in the older Legislature and in opposition [122] to Mr. Donaldson and Mr. Parker won for himself on the part of the coutitry something like a feeling of confidence that if ever he got office he was pre-eminently the man to exhibit administrative honesty. He obtained this prestige by a sort of reflex operation. As he was one who so well detected faults in others he must assuredly be one also who possessed none himself who over and above the honesty it was fair to assume in him till the contrary was proved was the person to guard and supervise others. The logic of this was open to objection ; there is a homely proverb about setting certain people to catch other people with weaknesses similar to their own; but it took. [120] [121]  Tried and found grossly and signally wanting in the common honesties and even the common decencies which should surround as with an impregnable and insurmountable wall power and place what is he to do now when summoning others to judgment ? To fix opponents with corrupt practices was the only faculty and talent of Mr. Cowper's parliamentary life. He will resume his place once more on the Opposition benches but where will the grace of his vocation be?   It strikes us that the main value of adopting a system of competitive examinations in the public service will reside after all in the purging from the great range of subordinate offices the purely political element which has hitherto controlled them. The trading in politics which has since the establishment of responsible government found us so plentiful a supply of demagogues and stump orators ashamed to beg except in the office of a Minister and afraid to work would find its occupation gone. The town agitators who supply to what they themselves choose to baptise "Liberalism" its main activities would scarcely think the chances of office quite so proximate as to suit them if those chances lay altogether in an examination as to specific competency for the office sought. It would be a poor speculation that for the sort of people who find nothing better to do in a new country than to work daily the oracle of professional agitation. [123]  Those gentlemen take very little abstract interest in politics and have very dim notions of the real merits of any of the questions which surround the advances of legislation or the stability of government. Their real object is to lay under obligations this or that parliamentary magnate and so to invest claims to be honoured when the magnate's season of power shall have arrived. Fitness in the applicant is of course neither understood on one side nor the other at all to enter into the arrangement.   The necessities of party government however shocking the fact forbid it. A Minister may hesitate and feel difficulty from the fear of exposure from an Opposition for the edification of the country at large when gross moral delinquencies happen to flow through a case of immense political devotion. But intelligence training knowledge of the technics of any office business habits or any other intellectual requisite has never hitherto been for a moment held a preliminary indispensable for appointments made at a Ministerial bureau. We know what the consequences of this kind of thing have been in England.   The governing class as the noble and privileged inhabitants of the United Kingdom have been called have looked upon all public appointments as their prerogative and property. The affair has always been of the quality of blood and not the quality of brain. It is for all the aristocratic intolerance ignorance and incapacity of the realm; and when this is provided for then the creatures and protégés of those who have received shares according to the measure it has held good to mete. But in America - and it seems very likely unless something is done at once that we shall have the same here - the thing is we cannot say essentially worse but far more dangerous to the interests of society and government and to that process of the education of public feeling and public principle which the early working of responsible government in every profound and permanent national sense mainly effect. At worst the elegant and well-born imbecilities and nonentities of the mother country are kept out of harm's way and enabled to live as those finer products of the Creator who have never handled any instrument of coarser character than a fowling-piece or a billiard cue should. There is a good deal of injustice a good deal of hardship in all this it must be admitted. But it is only men of talent who feel it; and if they cannot push themselves forward in independent individual circumstances the Colonies are open for them. Political philosophers sages not alone of Conservative colours but philosophical writers on abstract polity far removed from the disturbing sympathies of party or even broadly popular politics tell you in the abstract the country feels nothing of this. The mischief even Mr. Henry Vincent and his Chartist friends however justly and naturally indignant at the monstrous wrong would admit was but negative. In America it is positive and threatens to be so here. [124]  The late Government we think convinced every true friend of the country how all political principle all idea of right and wrong and all attempts to consider party action on grounds of public interest became vitiated corrupted and degraded. Men who had in bygone days supported Mr. Cowper and those with whom he acted on grounds of sheer principle began gradually to catch the infection and yield to the belief that instead of the real task being only commenced everything as citizens they ought to have done had been done and now for a share of the scramble. What every one says must be true says a proverb of equivocal authority. What every one does argued these men can hardly be unworthy of a citizen. We have no desire to point anew to what has been done in filling offices of the most sacred character. Enough for us to discuss the system of appointment on its abstract and general grounds and with reference to its influence on the higher progress of a country just now taking into her hands the management of her own affairs. Two things Mr. Forster's Government can do to make itself memorable amongst public benefactors and to secure moral and political advantages with little splendour or pomp about them but which go deep down into the groundwork of a pure administration because they go to the very root of human nature itself. In the first place by some restrictive enactments binding on their successors to purge the social and political element from the magistracy and make it what it should always have been - a purely judicial body. And secondly to help towards the abolition of the traffic in appointments betwixt governments and partisans by establishing strict competitive examinations in the public service. A variety of auspicious circumstances enables the present Administration to do this at a much smaller loss of party support than men who longer in public life are more or less from the exigencies of things committed to the evil that it is. Whatever time may show to be fatal in Mr. Forster's shortcomings he has two premier qualities for this task - the want of which in his predecessor were he a Richelieu a Mazarin a Pombhal or a Peel would have disabled him from effecting change in an apparatus of government - courage and honesty. [125]  Only in New South Wales where the importance of it should be perhaps most obvious do people seem to look upon the great question of Australian Federation with indifference. It has been mentioned as an affair of moment in the speech placed by one Ministry in the vice-regal mouth and extinguished with the characteristic shuffle of Cowperism by that of another. Our legislators can fight with the acharnement of a storming party night after night in the House about questions too trivial almost for the attention of a rural municipality. But this great business of securing national growth and national advancement on a basis of territorial union there is no one to call attention to. Mr. Deas Thompson did we believe take some preparatory action on the matter in the Legislative Council but there it rests. Is the neglect because of a general belief that nothing good can come out of the Nazareth of that most ancient and honourable gentleman? Is the fact of a question which is not only a party one but transcends in magnitude and certainty of beneficial results all other general questions taking inception at the hands of Mr. Deas Thompson sufficient to have left behind a deterring trail of the serpent? [126]  But however supine we in New South Wales choose to be in this business the neighbouring Colonies view it as its paramount importance deserves. Victoria South Australia and Van Dieman's Land (Tasmania) have for a considerable time past by their respective Legislatures appointed delegates for the purpose of meeting to consider the matter fully and of endeavouring to fix the terms of a Federation. The mother-territory of New South Wales has alone neglected to send representatives and mainly from this cause we believe nothing has yet been done: either therefore our Parliament is infinitely more sagacious than the combined legislative wisdom of the three Colonies and stands aloof with haughty indifference for a thing too puerile to be even worth talking over; or other-wise our rulers and our representatives are guilty of a dereliction of duty quite as worthy of debate as for instance the motion on which some nights since that illustrious triumvirate Messrs. Weekes Pemell and Robertson divided in the prettiest minority that ever found itself "like honey pots all of a row" since in very recent times representative bodies have come to be a laughing-stock.   Surely some of the public time set apart for such performances as the juvenile Member for Windsor's scapegrace levities and the ill-chosen asperities of the gentleman representing Paterson might be devoted to the examination of the policy of endeavouring to effect the great scheme of Australian Federation.   The political benefits of Federation range themselves we take it into two classes. The first connects itself with the creation and preservation of a broad national polity. Though the advantages of this are directly and practically political yet it is in its essential nature a moral and social gain. The curse of a small community in dealing with questions of State - that is questions moving on great principles and liable to arrest from powerful interests - is the municipal spirit and the spirit of personality. These are intestine evils. But if the community be one of a group it has external ones besides.   [127] History ancient and modern illustrates this - the wars of the Saxon Heptarchy the feuds of the petty Irish monarchies as well as the everlasting heart-burnings and strifes of the Italian and Flemish republics. Under the influence of this spirit to hinder mutual progress and to do immense damage it is not necessary that the spirit itself should take active practical shape in vast armaments or invading squadrons. Its destroying power under the conditions of modern society when much of the military thirst of aggrandisement has given way to the commercial may be felt in a variety of ways; and even in a group of British Colonies like our own strongly enough. It will be recollected that during the period extending from the latter days of the American Colonial Confederation that sprang up to oppose British tyranny to the times of the specific settlement of the Federal Union the trade of these Colonies and their commercial honour were almost ruined by mutual jealousies and obstinacies. We suspect at this moment that there are Victorian and South Australian colonists who as regards people from New South Wales or Tasmania have the germs of that which in their native born descendants will ripen into national differences and certain qualities of national feeling about which resides some danger. And clearly by way of a moment's digression if the Australian Colonies are ever to become a powerful nation it must for every conceivable reason local and general internal and external be by union.   If then union be good the sooner we have it the better in order that the natives of the soil may as soon as possible feel themselves citizens of one great state and fellow-countrymen; particularly as there are immense practical advantages to come into operation the moment the thing is effected.   Let us have no local differences some no doubt from ethnologic causes but not a whit the more to be desired for that and some for political reasons both of which may be figured by the cases qua each other of the Englishman and the Scotchman the Austrian and the Prussian. But of this first class of advantages of Federation that which we would particularly insist upon as a sure result is the elevation and enlargement of the nature of administration and of parliamentary government on all great questions. The mischief to arise and that has already arisen by legislation on matters affecting Australian interests of general character as contradistinguished from purely local affairs and local questions would be kept in check without interfering with the constitutional rights of the different colonies. We see here in New South Wales day by day election after election what parliamentary government is coming to. The element to be most vigorously and thoroughly eliminated in a National Council is the merely municipal or parochial one. None brings in while operating under motives perhaps honest and well intentioned enough so much ulterior danger none is so likely to prevent a new community from dealing with and treating all things in that advanced spirit which is creative of nationhood. We have men worthy men no doubt but altogether out of place entering Parliament latterly whom not only no employer would trust in matters requiring intelligence capacity and experience matters of any profound complex or comprehensive kind - but who themselves would claim no higher endowments than those which are loosely generalized under the phrase "common sense" which means in fact the skill to drive a good bargain to purchase store bullocks or to do a "stroke" in land jobbing. To think of these men handling matters which may affect the country as a component of the Australian States and so eventually affect entire Australian interests is no very pleasant thought to people clearly alive to the possible power and glory and the benefits for mankind to flow from a great British Confederation in the Southern Ocean. In the administration of federal government on a larger arena we should have larger men; on a national platform we should have powers and sentiments of national bulk and comprehensiveness. Noble ambitions would have a noble field. Mr. A. or Mr. B. from various local causes such as we have seen exercising themselves around very little men indeed in the recent Ministries in New South Wales would on the floor of the Federal Chamber be reduced to the dimensions which really belong to small people away from Sydney or Melbourne or Adelaide as the case may be when challenged on the grounds of native and actual incapacity to govern and their equivocal abstract of character to be trusted. The other class of benefits a Federal Union of the Colonies would obtain us are too obvious to enlarge upon. A uniformity of tariff an assimilation of landpolicy and ultimately a central power somewhere to deal for purely national purposes with the public lands a harmonious because national management of mail systems a large dealing with economics of immigration a removal of all vexatious barriers of regulation likely to prevent the most fluent intercourse of the inhabitants of Australia such as affect professional men and others are amongst the benefits. [128] [129]  One has been touched upon especially in this journal - the establishment of a Court of Appeal from the local supreme tribunals of the various colonies which should supersede the only appeal at present existing - that to the judicial Committee of the Privy Council so ruinously expensive and inconvenient as in effect to be prohibitory. In times of war by Federation alone could the colonies effectively protect themselves with England with enough to do on her hands elsewhere as when war does break out she will have. And this as an able Melbourne contemporary - the Examiner we think - puts it and not Dr. Lang's experimentum crucis of "cutting the painter" while the "painter" is an admirable appendage is alone the way to meet war emergencies.   We have mentioned Dr. Lang. With that honourable and reverend gentleman we have few sympathies and the measure of our respect for him is by no means large. But he is a man of great ability and has far more of the statesman's perception in him than is generally found amongst local men. From his turn of mind and his habit for years of looking at Australian topics through a medium of national largeness we know no man in the House just now in whose hands the question of Federalism would be safer.   Philosophically considered perhaps a Punch is objectionable. A laughing philosopher is an excellent thing in its way perhaps a better and a deeper than a crying philosopher. But you can't make a joke of everything. For instance you can't laugh at a man's finding his way to office through the doors of the Insolvency Court a gentleman who has gone in to be whitewashed but because the dirt was unusually thick the cleansers of commercial immorality in a place proverbially not fastidious as to its subjects declined to apply the brush. [130]  We can conceive then how the old Empire as severe and stoical in its morals as the late Empire - a young lady notoriously of questionable character as loose and complying in hers - would have arraigned the conduct of a special uncertificated insolvent who with an effrontery no other man in the country in his unfortunate position could have exhibited not only managed to slip into Parliament but did all he could to annoy and obstruct honest and deserving men because forsooth they hadn't made him a Minister of State and to the end that he might make himself one. We know how that stern and rigid purist the older Empire used to bare all blushing to daylight the imputed delinquencies of Mr. Parkes' present friend and patron Mr. Darvall at seasons when it was most ungenerous to do it. And then Mr. John Bayley Darvall's imputed peccancies were peccancies that touched nobody's pockets but Mr. John Bayley Darvall's own. It is very unpleasant to have to say this kind of thing. But in politics you're forced to say unpalatable things. For a reader who has continued that poetic and purely imaginative view of politics which mankind calls Patriotism the most essential feature in politics is that it oftenest consists of the audacious attempts of an impudent and unscrupulous fellow with assurance as the largest portion of his stock-in-trade to get rule of his fellow-citizens and his salary to boot by any means whatever. Lay to your soul O unsophisticated and tender-hearted reader who thinks us unkind the moral of our contemporary The Sydney Morning Herald's first leader on the fall of the Forster Ministry. It was admitted that the Administration was an honest one but that it wanted "cleverness." Cleverness! William Forster poet journalist acknowledged political thinker eminent debater in the House not clever? Geoffrey Eager sparkling speaker thorough man of business keen philosophic writer on political topics; John Black most ornate of local orators and framer of a land policy for the commonwealth; Saul Samuel always a Saul amongst profits and not only a financier but a Jew financier - these men not "clever"! Pre-posterous you say; the Herald never does tell the truth. Ah but reader look here. The Herald knows political technology better than you do. "Clever" refers to that particular idea of dangerous excellence which presents itself to your embittered moral mind in connection with a fellow who having swindled you barefacedly actually "bilked" you out of a hundred or two has made everything so neat and clean so right and taut that you are bullied up in King Street as a vindictive Shylock and your archetype of all human rascality is granted his certificate tenderly and with many condolences by that most credulous of men considering the society he keeps ex officio Mr. Purefoy. And just again reader having got a correct idea of the meaning of the phrase don't you regard Mr. James Martin as a public man of course a very "clever" fellow? [131]  We think it was right or at all events acceptable to say this before we showed you the picture. Now Brunhilda pull away the curtain and let us look at the first cartoon.   There it is! It's a roaring place that isn't it? You see the feeding-place of the lions of the fold of Judah of the representatives of the people. It's the only place in the county where they really know how to make Badminton and dish up a turkey. You're thinking of Cheval's? Well yes Cheval's is a nice place for French kickshaws and a palatable pint of vin ordinaire. But for the solid supports of the British Constitution in Her Majesty's Colonies you must steal a look at the refreshment-room in Parliament Chamber Macquarie Street just as the House has emptied for vesper-stomachics. Never mind that solitary ruminative figure with the glass of pensive sherry and the cold fowl before it and two big volumes like law books under its sturdy elbow. That's little Pid as honest as gold let them say what they like about him whom Mr. Cowper holding Jack Robertson as he always used to do as a fly at the end of his fishing rod (he hooked Chambers of Maitland in that way) once angled for. But look at the corner of the wine room where the "Peers" as they call the Second Chamber within the precincts take their hot whiskey during late sittings. The three figures - what a group! The colour is a little sombre but what drawing! Henry Parkes has a pen in his hand and he draws better than the Crown Law Officers when there is anything to be gained. But he knew that before he went into Darvall's Chambers. He owes that distinguished man nothing for the lore. Ask Wilshire. [132]  Somehow you know the Eastern origin of the Jew comes out in his love of personal ornament. Up in George Street he doesn't put an aigrette of diamonds on his Sabbath turban because British Jews don't wear turbans they leave them to their dowager ladies. But look at the big chain on the velvet waistcoat and the showy ring on the little finger not to speak of the glittering stones on the shirt studs. The other figure - well he is a beauty to be in the Parliament of an English community. He doesn't talk English. No certainly. I don't mean to say he's a foreigner. He is perhaps North of England or North of Ireland more likely. You who are not yet cured of your poetic illusion about politics want to know why men without intellect education standing or important services in spheres other than political ones are sent into the Great Council of the country to make laws for and to guard the interests of the commonwealth. Well do you happen to have the honour of knowing Mr. Terry the honourable Member for Mudgee or Mr. Lucas who represents unepiscopal Canterbury out in the bush? Fit only to break stones or drive bullocks you say; well you are blunt but you may be right. But constitutionally the majority has more right than either you or I have and the majority (God bless it!) thought them the democratic majority fit men mind you to cope with Martin and Hay and Darvall and other very lofty-notioned people to protect and do battle for popular rights.   You are amused; but really you must pardon me if I do not see the element of humour in what I say. I set out by saying Punch as universal commentator is a mistake; there are some things which have no possible joke about them. The honourable gentleman who took up the Prime Minister's glove and moved the direct want of confidence forthwith is Mr. Gray. Ask him if the functions of the judiciary are by any constitutions necessarily separate from those of the executive or whether select committees of the House might not abridge the means of the Supreme Court business by hearing motions for new trials instead of leaving them to the Court in banco: he'll settle it. What is he doing? Sitting there listening to the strains of certain dulcet charms. Jack Robertson is patting him on the back; - Jack always does pat people he is managing on the back. And that political Stoic that man of Roman virtue quite plain enough as the ladies would say to be distressingly good is perusing the words of a resolution for the Catspaw the aforesaid Mr. Gray who could not write his grammatical sentences in a petition against a king - now gone out of fashion the chopping off the head for treason - if he were compelled to make prayer in that behalf. Candid sincere patriotic and at the same time thoughtful gifted Mr. Parkes makes the balls; poor stolid stupid Mr. Gray fires them. Mr. Parkes just now supports but doesn't move votes of want of confidence in Ministries. [133]  By the way how poor Forster used to be praised in the old Empire. Forster in those days by some miracle had no share in original sin. And how well Forster could write leading articles in those times - the period when Sir Henry Watson Parkes cried like a child at the way he was worried. But look at Henry Parkes the figure I mean which is painted writing at the table the resolutions which some time later in the evening Mr. Gray "big with the fate of Caesar and of Rome" is to move. He's a grotesque figure in that picture certainly; all arms and legs like some mischievous creature you meet in the grass. But that's nothing; from Æsop downwards providence has pleased to lodge splendid intellects in very queer trunks. The ladies - bless them! with their instincts infinitely surer than our masculine minds - know this.   John Wilkes you recollect said - with his squint even - [134] the handsomest man in a room had only half-an-hour's advantage of him. But he's what they call a psychological curiosity Henry Parkes I shan't go into that. Who would have thought that he who commenced life selling little innocent blue and white toys for your small Marys and jemmies to break would approach its zenith by himself breaking Ministries of the people in the Sovereign Parliament of the land? There was a powerful man here in New South Wales once who ruled the councils of the country William Charles Wentworth. He did once on a time go to buy toys of Mr. Parkes. Perhaps he did it on commercial principles - going to the cheapest market gratifying his household angels at a low figure; perhaps he did it to insult one of the demagogues and supporters at public meetings of the day; for Mr. Wentworth could do paltry things for a great man. He thought he was an able and gallant man bearding Mr. Deas Thompson and the imperially nominated officials of his day. Did he dream that the toyman would do greater things in planning and executing the destruction of responsible Ministers in after times? Somebody once told us that Mr. Parkes of all the toys in his shop loved most the Chinese puzzle in ivory. As no one ever appreciated him as a man for a Ministry perhaps to beguile time he takes to old fancies and indulges in a love for political puzzles. But his puzzles are not as white or clean though they are almost as polished as the old toys in "laborious orient ivory."   You see Mr. Gray has made up his mind to take in the resolution. Poor man! he looks as firm as when once he frightened a bull which Mr. justice Owen allowed into his dairy paddock at Wollongong. But we who love democracy and the people are sick of the crimes committed in a sacred name and the people who make democracy a trade. That's the first cartoon. We'll show you the rest. Brunhilda draw the curtain over the picture and ask Heraclea to bring in some cigars. Ah! Berenia come at last queen of Colonial lady politicians what a delicious shade of colour in the feather and ribbons of that Argyle hat the autumnal turn of the beech in Europe! Pray what is Sir Daniel Cooper's next trick? He's been working - oh I know! You went down harbour in a skiff like the Lady of Shalott and met him trying to paddle his lonely dingy up in answer to the Governor-General on the moonlit waves of Broken Bay. Reader you have seen the picture you must not hear the lady and you don't smoke. [135]  It is a very absurd thing that feeling of the relative superiority and inferiority of trades and professions which obtains in modern society. You shake your head a little. Ah I am afraid you don't go along in democratic opinion with Mr. Cowper and The Empire and The Era and The Southern Cross though the latter's notions on this point differ somewhat from those of the preceding authorities; the three former basing the business on what will pay the latter on principle. Aristocracy was a capital spec before the passing of the Electoral Reform Bill. But there isn't a newspaper or an orator in the country mad enough now to go in for anything but democracy in some shape or other. There are pretty broad interspaces in democracy however; for instance between the mild ideas of Mr. Jones the honourable Member for the Hunter and the extreme views of the raciest of stump orators Mr. White of the Land League. Mr. Jones as you are aware is a born democrat; sprung from the people he should stand by the people. But then democracy after all must be cool and cautious in a man whose savings are in bank stock who protects property as a member of assurance boards of management and keeps an eye on incendiaries which you know is a phrase as much recognised amongst steady and respectable politicians as amongst the newspaper reporters of arson and the police. Ah well you will shake your head at my remarks on the distinction between the trades and professions. I presume reader you would rather have Miss Pincherwell at the Globe say at her merciless tea-table your wife was the daughter of a solicitor than of a shoemaker. Well perhaps I'm a cynical philosopher but I know which of the two vocations is likely to be the honestest. It is a curious speculation. But did ever any man a widower for instance who wanted his children taken care of after the death of his beloved - they're the most paternal of men these widowers - did ever any one hear of a man's wedding and taking to his bosom the daughter of his lawyer? There have been pillar saints and there are Indian faquirs; and Heaven only knows but there may be men unaccused of nympholepsy who have done this kind of thing before. BaIzac in all his diggings into human nature never hit upon so abnormal a curiosity of human nature as the man who had married the child of his avocat. [136]  Trades and professions! I have known carpenters and tailors not only with more refinement of feeling more honour and what is with greatest strength dwelt upon more education than two-thirds of your attorneys - than as a writer in the Southern Cross once called them the Geebung Solicitors. Talk of the Hebrew lawyers at the Old Bailey! And how hard some of the sharpest of them have tried at dodging the schoolboy examination in the ancient literatures and mathematics which is made by law a qualification for admission to the bar of New South Wales. Even Mr. Martin tried to induce Parliament to legislate in this way once at one stage of his career - to suit himself of course as Mr. Martin usually tries to obtain legislation. They wouldn't do it for obvious reasons. Perhaps as beasts of prey everywhere but here especially attorneys object to the Humanities. And Mr. Martin who has pluck if he hasn't principle buckled to and with the aid of old Dr. Adelong Suffix went at his Greek and Latin grammar to qualify himself for the silk gown which candidly he wore as well as he discharged the political charges connecting themselves with it - basely and unworthily.   But why O reader I talked of the difference between the trades and professions was this. The next cartoon I shall exhibit to you represents a "Cabinet making" at the Victoria Club. I'm given to moralising and if you had not intimated doubt I was going to ask you which of the two vocations was most respectable most moral most purely beneficial to society - cabinet making at Lenehan's or Sly's where money is earned by solid sober work or Cabinet making as understood by Mr. Martin or Mr. Arnold? Trades and professions! I don't think the Greeks thought more of the man who gave them boluses and knew a thing or two out of Hippocrates and Antaeus than they did of the skilled hearty honest fellow who had squared the marble blocks for the pedestals of the glorious bronzes of Lysippus or the breathing marbles of Phidias and voted as he liked for the particular Athenian Dr. Lang of the day at the bema without caring a rush for any physic man even if his father had been an archon. You want to see the second cartoon. I promised you should see all the pictures and so you shall. They are in Brunhilda's custody; but as that young lady is just now at church Heraclea shall exhibit. Here she is. Heraclea ma mignonne show the reader Number Two while I do cicerone for him. It is really a good room you see well-proportioned and nicely corniced with French lights with a verandah worthy of an Indian bungalow with veils of mellow shadows given by the grand old fig-tree in front of the house. How delicious in a sitting-room in these noons of summer the twilight of a superb old tree's shadow! Everything is as calm as it is fair and cool. Though you are in Castlereagh Street and see when you look out of the deep verandah the spire of St. George's Church soaring with its vanes and its pure graceful pinnacles into the sweet deep blue air you have as little noise as you might expect at Bong-Bong or Jurabit's Gally. The furniture is gaudy; more like the properties in a theatrical scene than the appointments of a saloon which men of taste and refinement and a sense of elegance in form and colour could by any possibility have fitted up for themselves. The furniture was bought at a very great price for the old Sydney Club by a very great man who was once a Law Officer of the Crown here. His notions of marbles were rather narrow. His ideas of the superb in that line being in fact gathered from the big rooms in Colonial hotels. His claims to taste really lay in cookery; and that is you know so easily and universally acquired - a taste for which nobody needs an acquaintance with the entertaining volumes on the subject of the Alison. Latterly getting rich this great man has taken to affecting erudition in the finer vintages of Europe rather risky for a self-raised man of Colonial education. O James! do you imagine the Hocheimer you gave Isaacs had ever Teutonic origin at all? [137] [138]  Ah! we natives must not try the fashionable extravagances of Englishmen unless we happen to be gentlemen to begin with and have had a European education like Sir Daniel Cooper's affecting to buy chef d'oeuvres in pictorial art. Genuine white Hermitage out here is only some degrees rarer than original sketches of Rubens.   Four interesting figures these seated in the room. The one with the bald head and somewhat darkened teeth is Mr. Charles Cowper. Back again! Yes and engaged in the congenial task of cabinet making. He doesn't care a fig bless you for office and has lost all taste for politics. But the necessities of the country at this crisis and his own unquenchable patriotism have induced him once more to launch upon the troubled waters when the syren voices called. At his side is the restless Eastern figure you saw in the First Cartoon the non-historical Robertson. O Murrurrundi when you sent Jack down did you ever dream he would be Prime Minister? A solid man of iron that to the left of Mr. Cowper a man who says "How do you do?" with funeral pomp of tone and imitates what he thinks must have been Dr. Johnson's way when he asks "What's o'clock?" Did you ever see or hear him rise to a point of order in the House and administer grave rebuke to a parliamentary transgressor of the minor ethics. You haven't! Well it's quite as good in the slow way as Vivian Grey or Don Juan is in the fast. Talk about magic: the true gramarye in the British Colonies is responsible government. Did Elias Carpenter Weekes behind Burdekin's counter ever dream that he should be Treasurer of New South Wales?   You hesitate and talk about men who have raised themselves from pauper boyhood to be chancellors and rulers of kingdoms. But reader I claim responsible government in the Colonies as endowed with witchcraft or wizardcraft on this particular ground. Your Chief justices and Chancellors in the Old World had intellect. Elias Carpenter Weekes was never charged by his worst enemy with having a distinct idea in his head. He understands Britannia metal well enough it is true and is capital albata himself; though Cowper who is nickel is the better washed of the two. He's a big brawny man the other figure what the Irish would call "a clever man." The Hibernians use the phrase in a physical as well as a mental sense. [139]  I'm no admirer of the man but I'm not quite sure that he's not entitled to the epithet in both senses. Politically I think him a profligate; but there are good qualities in him nevertheless. The big man is William Mumings Arnold. His opposition to Mr. Forster's Government was both rancorous and factious on the very face of it a personal opposition. In political morals that sort of thing is unspeakably bad. But as far as human nature goes you must make this allowance for the Member for the Paterson. Forster really should never have invited Arnold's co-operation in forming a Ministry. The right thing was declining to act with Mr. Arnold but the incurably wrong one was ever to have asked him to join. Alas for Forster! Asking a man of talent and education with a bad political character like Arnold you may condemn; but think of his inviting the quondam driver of the Bathurst mail coach to take a seat in the Cabinet. Still you say Jack Robertson is Prime Minister. Well well Heaven knows what we shall come to; Milton you know talks of something lower than the lowest depth. They're Cabinet making. Think of Mr. Charles Cowper back again to aid in that operation. People said he had an affection in the head; don't believe a word of it. There will always be something wrong at his heart but his head for such a head is right enough.   Things are arranged you see as far as they can be. Jack says - his face getting very red just as at Christmas examinations you've seen a boy's when the blue ribbon to which the silver medal was attached was put round his neck his mamma and his sisters looking very steadily the while at him - Jack says "I'll be Premier; in fact I suppose I must." Cowper looks mildly at Jack but says nothing; and Jack drops the Eastern eyes and wonders so why people in Brussels make diamonds and squares always as patterns for carpets. [140]  Jack thinks for a moment of his father's shop at the old Queen's wharf with its chronometrical watches and comforts himself with an image of poor old Robertson père. Then dreams an instant of his battles with the magistrates in the bush and his attendances on Richard Windeyer and he whispers to himself "Well old fellow" (he thinks of his boyhood does Jack) "your son is Prime Minister of the Colony"; and another thought crosses him "I don't know much about governing but I'll try!"   MR. JOHN ROBERTSON is a remarkable man a very remarkable one indeed. Not because he is Prime Minister. Because under the present whirligig Government the very humblest of mankind may be that next week. Transformations and changes are so rapid and frequent that we find ourselves too experienced and too blasés at political marvels in Australia to feel even a throb of surprise if some injured man under Government guardianship whose time is up to-day and who took his farewell promenade on the penitential flags at Cockatoo last night should after the next general election be found in supreme control of the Treasury.   But Mr. Robertson is a remarkable man because beyond all his compeers and political associates his coolness is so perfect his nonchalance is so consummate and so exquisite in its consummateness at throwing every atom to the winds to-day when place and pay are shedding their golden lights about him of what rather than give up yesterday the honourable gentleman as "principle" was not only ready to die much oftener than the providential dispensation calls upon any man to die at all but to devote the very children of his bosom to the flames. There is a thoroughness and a bravery about this - some people would call it barefacedness or shamelessness but we are not cynics - that after the vermicular slyness of Mr. Cowper and the arrant hypocrisy of Mr. Elias Carpenter Weckes the political [141"] white chokerism" of that sleek well-fed gentleman is as refreshing as a breeze or a perfume or anything else the reader chooses to accept as figuring a restorative.   Mr. Robertson appeared before his constituents at Scone - historic Scone - on Monday last. The honourable gentleman was in his glory. There was nobody to oppose him; he had his twenty auditors entirely to himself; and as regards some questions put to him though Mr. Thomas Dangar may be a clever fellow in his way Mr. Robertson is a clever fellow too; and when the clever fellow who chances to be Prime Minister tries conclusions with the clever fellow who happens to be nobody to foresee the result requires no great amount of mystical lore. Mr. Robertson built the exordium of his speech on allusions to his friend Mr. Deniehy and his friend Mr. Charles Kemp at present a candidate for Liverpool Plains who had been spoken of in connection with the representation of the district - the friendship of the former gentleman we apprehend being much of the quality that would hesitate to trust him and his colleagues with the making of a police constable on fit grounds or the receipt of revenue at a suburban toll-gate. The speech was very interesting; and though the soul of its wit was by no means brevity it furnishes one or two valuable illustrations of the character of the new Administration and more especially of the Premier himself.   Mr. Robertson told his Scone constituents that the Government merely intended to pass the Estimates put an end to the session and take a recess. The consideration of any measure connected with the Lands or any public question of sufficient importance to endanger the tenure of office of Mr. Robertson and his party is therefore postponed for something like six months. This may be very proper may be only fair. Considering Ministerial labours and Ministerial difficulties we are not prepared to say it is not. But a very short time since when Mr. Forster took office after "those sent for" before him had refused to undertake the Government on the 14th December last Mr. Roberson and his colleague Mr. Weekes voted for the famous embarrassing resolution of Mr. Parkes "that the Government should not be allowed to proceed with the Estimates for 1860 until they had introduced a Bill to regulate the sale and occupation of Crown Lands." This was the view Mr. Robertson took of what public interests demanded then. His idea now is not only that the Estimates should precede a Land Bill but that no step relative to the public lands should be taken this session at all. [142]  Something richer follows; "there are pippins and cheese to come." One of the shibboleths which the self-styled "Liberals" have borrowed from the genuine Democracy on whose shoulders they have climbed to power is Abolition of State Aid to Religion and abolition without falter or parley of any kind. But what says the Arch-Democrat who now occupies the place of First Minister with his foot on his own heather at Murrurundi? Is the Reverend John Dunmore Lang M.P. alive and well; and if he is is he still in possession of that neat little college building about which there have been so many whispers of nefarious acquisition? If both conditions are as we hope has the honourable and reverend gentleman read the hyper-Democratic Premier on State aid at Scone? The honourable gentleman in point of fact abandons the principle and with the magnanimity and large generosity of phrase of a great statesman who has reached the apex of power "unbosoms" himself to the twenty men women little boys and girls who so frequently said "hoo-ray" over the three rail fences of Scone during the Premier's manifesto of state policy: "I will be no party to taking away from those gentlemen full pay during their lives." So that the Robertsonian reading of the doctrine of Church Aid abolition is that the thing is to continue until the longest living of existing clergymen shall have been gathered to his fathers. The point de départ is the funeral of the strongest and youngest of the extant clerics who is likely to put in his coming forty years or more. Ah! if Mr. Forster had broached so damning and deceptive a reading of the State Aid text a month ago how much labour Mr. Robertson would have given the unfortunate reporters of the daily press.   In Memoriam "ALAS for poor Whitty! He died last night in Booroondarra" was the telegraphic message from a dear and honoured mutual friend of Edward Whitty's and our own put into our hands on Thursday morning. The author of "Friends of Bohemia" and "The Governing Classes" has passed away in the very springtide of his youth having given the world barely an indication of his extraordinary powers. For years few things have shocked and saddened us more than this.   Mingled with our intense admiration for his genius was a deep sympathy with griefs which made his case signal and salient in the annals of domestic sorrow. We had never had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Whitty but kindly letters had been exchanged and mutual friends had created a mutual interest and he once wrote of his intention to visit us in Sydney. Some weeks since however we met in the city the amiable physician who had attended Mr. Whitty with paternal care and his sad notification at once quenched a hope we had very dearly cherished. In the opinion of the medical man Mr. Whitty's health would not even sustain the slight fatigues of the voyage up from Melbourne.   But still we had no thought that the dark hand was so near. Only a few months since he arrived in Melbourne. In England his wife and two children had been carried off within the space of a fortnight by typhus fever. Far advanced in consumption he was driven abroad to seek in change of scene some little relief from the weight of his anguish some little solace too for his own poor withering frame. And with the darkness of these things about him in a strange land - though well we know he had beside his pillow in the last hours friends as true and tender and loyal as ever man had - Edward Whitty died on the night of the 21st instant in his thirty-fifth year or thereabouts. There is to our mind no story in the whole melancholy chronicles of the misfortunes of men of genius so sad as this of Edward Whitty. That he was something more and something higher than a man of genius that his nature was moulded of the profoundest sensibilities and that he altogether lived upon deep and passionate affections is evinced by the utter shattering of health hopes and interests in the world which followed the loss of his dear ones. Others and men of fine minds and fine feelings too would have perhaps come out of the typhoon dismasted and with broken timbers but eventually to repair and to ride quietly for years on the world's waters. So young too so gifted so abounding and ebullient with the life-blood of intellectual power; not the mere faculty of writing graceful verses or beautiful trifles of any kind but with that power disciplined by learned experiences in the ways of life to deal with men and things hard and cold and clear and bright and warm and joyous just as they are. He knew life. He knew men and women as it is only given to those destined in time to become masters to know them. And in indications of this lies the value of "Friends of Bohemia" as an implement for gauging the author's genius. The book it is true is a mere bundle of sketches with no connecting thread of story and a very shadowy and undefined plot. It was obviously no intention of the author to make it specifically a story. He only cared to present sketches of life and character of a peculiar kind. But there are scattered through it gleams of insight into human nature worn and haggard and wilful as it is under the régime de Bohème such as one seldom found beyond the pages of Balzac or Thackeray. [144]  Any writer with "adequate experience" can write of Bohemia. But to know and tell how the poor jaded wild heart beats in Bohemia to see and depict clearly and keenly without cloud or impediment of any kind the story of a human life flowing forward all heartless and reckless through the systematic vice of communities with an intensified civilization only Edward Whitty could.   His creation of Nea in "Friends of Bohemia" the poor girl-wife that her father a selfish peer deeply in debt to an old commercial speculator had given to the latter Bohemian's son though but a sketch is a picture of the very highest beauty and positively a contribution to the imaginative literature of England. [145]  Saddest of all now that Edward Whitty has passed away is the fact that his genius has developed itself in no adequate degree and in no work commensurate with its power. "The Governing Classes" is a collection of the most brilliant and as a hostile reviewer admitted the "justest" political sketches of modern times. But they are the mere croquis of an artist that could paint if he chose to work like Hogarth. "Friends of Bohemia" was thrown off so hastily and with so little purpose of matching his abilities with the task that we are told Mr. Whitty never even corrected his proofs. But we have no heart to write criticisms of his genius or his writings now. Some other time perhaps. Enough to pay this tribute to his memory. And to think too with a sad sad heart of all that might have been and all that never will be; to shape sorrowfully for ourselves some faint image of the man we admired so deeply and hoped one day to know personally and to love. His last letter to us was as cheerful as if written by a healthy and prosperous man in the sunshine of a happy home. He spoke of several projects and said he was then engaged in writing "a Frenchy little book." How that gay expression haunts us. Poor Whitty! it is to us somewhat like the little watch and the trifles taken out of Jack Wortley's pocket " things that women who had loved him had given him" when the poor youth fell with Diego's bullet in his heart. Alas! alas! poor Edward Whitty! many of the vastest and dearest projects that employ those foolish hearts of ours must yet lie away in that dim melancholy region where the "Frenchy little book" which the pale wasted hand was writing when the cloud descended must stop for ever!   What has squatting done - what is it doing now - what will it ever do - for Victoria? How often have we put these questions? And how often have we placed on record our convictions and the proofs of our convictions that squatting was slow death not merely to the prosperity but even to the very existence of this colony as a self-sustaining community. But we have for the most part presented the question in its political and social aspect. Its commercial aspect - that which refers to its direct monetary value as an institution professing to utilize a large portion of the public material resources of the country - has not however been hitherto put before the public eye in that balance sheet fashion which supplies the plainest and most easily understood view of the matter. And fitly enough it has been reserved for a commercial man who is also a member of the Legislature first to bring the question under the notice of the public in that way which is at once the most intelligible the most striking and the most mercantile method. The able communication from Mr. ROLFE the member of the Upper House which we published in our columns yesterday put this squatting question before the public fairly upon its merits as a matter of profit and loss to the country as respects pounds shillings and pence. [107] And if there is any one who has read that communication that can come to the conclusion that squatting should not be put an end to as being a gigantic evil of the most ruinous kind to the common weal such a perverse opinionist is not a person to be reasoned with on the subject. He is beyond the reach of reason. None in fact but a madman or one immediately interested in the maintainance of the evil will refuse to admit that Mr. ROLFE makes out a case against the squatters which is wholly incontrovertible. He condenses the facts and figures disclosed by the latest official returns on the subject; and he shows the following startling results. Out of the 31467816 acres in the hands of the squatters as licensed runs the yield or produce obtained for home consumption in the colony and for export is of the net value of only £1997469 or at the rate of 1s. 34d. per acre. And for the exclusive privilege of thus keeping down the produce of the soil of the country to the smallest quantity and value possible the squatters pay a fee of twopence per acre to the Government. And at this incredibly low figure they hold in their possession the whole of the available or accessible public lands of the country - an area in fact comprising more than one-half the extent of the entire territory which constitutes the colony. Let the public for a moment dwell upon these two facts. A small body of individuals occupy the whole of the land of the colony at a charge or rent of 2d. per acre per annum and the entire value of the produce which they take out of this vast tract of land is 1s. 3 .5d. per acre per annum. Is it any wonder we are a poor insolvent community? We seem to have undertaken as a community the task of solving the problem of how to subsist in an organized 'state of society upon the scantiest sustenance conceivable pretty much after the style of the Yankee's horse which by practice had come to be able to live upon one straw a-day.  Thirty millions of acres and upwards - a region of country larger than Belgium and Holland put together - possessing some of the most fertile soil and one of the finest climates in the world producing as its utmost yield food and other commodities to the value of 1s. 34d. per acre! Would the thing be credible if it Were not supported by the irrefragable testimony of official and carefully compiled returns? In the United Kingdom the average rent which those who occupy the land as farmers grazers &c. pay to the owners of the soil is about £2 per acre per annum. In Australia it is 2d. per acre per annum. In the United Kingdom besides this charge for rent to the landlord the soil also bears in addition such charges as tithes assessed taxes county rates poor rates and so forth. And yet with all these burdens upon it the soil yields in addition food for millions of people and likewise a good living and handsome profit to the agriculturist who tills it or the grazier who feeds his stock upon it. With us here in Australia the entire charge upon the land - no capital having been even expended in purchasing the fee-simple - amounts only to the paltry sum of 2d. per acre and yet those who occupy 30000000 of acres of it on these absurdly low terms cannot supply half-a-million of people with food nor take more produce out of the soil than what is of the value of 1s. 3.5d. per acre. [108] How many hundreds of tons of gold should we raise annually to save us from national bankruptcy under such an extraordinary system of State economy if persisted in? There is something positively so monstrous and so passing belief in such a condition of things being tolerated by a civilised community for any length of time that we find it necessary to reproduce some of Mr. Rolfe's figures in order to satisfy the public that there is no exaggeration whatever in the way we put the matter. Mr. ROLFE says: - I find by the last returns thirty one millions four hundred and sixty seven thousand eight hundred and sixteen acres of Crown lands were held by squatters in runs and the quantity of stock upon this land in March 1860 was as follows: - Sheep 5119230; cattle 387845; horses 17187; together 5524262. According to these returns it takes five acres and three quarters to keep one animal. We imported for the year 1859 from the adjoining colonies: - Sheep 415937; cattle 126144; horses 4446; together 546527. The amount paid by the squatters annually for these 31467816 acres is by assessment £250000; and by depasturing licences £20000; together £270000 being an average of rather less than two pence per acre.  The extent of country occupied by the squatters and the annual charge they have to pay to the Government for that occupation being thus shown together with the amount of the capital invested by these "Sons of fortune" in their occupation of the soil the next consideration is what is the gain realised by the country out of this branch of industry in the form of produce for home consumption and for export. And Mr. ROLFE shows this in the following statement:  The articles for export from this source are wool hides skins tallow bones horns and hoofs.  The exports for 1859 were:- [...]  Then if we add to this the value of the balance between the imported stock and that slaughtered for consumption we shall arrive at an approximate benefit to the community. The cattle slaughtered were in 1859 165730; the imported cattle were in 1859 126169; the balance is 39361 which taken at an average of £6 per head will be £237366. The sheep slaughtered were 745457; imported 415939; leaving a balance of 329518 which at 15s. per head will be £247158. Adding these two amounts to the exports will be £2436111 apparently the value of produce raised by squatters in this colony that is to say exported £1952087; consumed us the colony £484524. [109] [...]  We have extracted fully from Mr. Role's communication the figures which he has taken from official returns and upon which he founds his indictment from the mercantile point of view against the squatters and the squatting system in order than an intelligent commercial man's opinion upon that system as a- paying concern may stand out clearly on its own merits before the public eye. And in so marshalling the heads of the mercantile argument on the topic we know that we put the matter forward in the way that will have most weight with all classes of the community. [110] Let them then consider the subject well and ask themselves if such a wretched result as is there placed before them is enough to induce them to tolerate the maintenance of squatting one moment beyond its natural term of existence in the present year of 1861?  Many a cloudy morning turns out a fine day" says a hopeful adage which in these misty and rainy times it is very pleasant to believe. The day arranged for our excursion was a confirmation of its prediction and though the ride from Fernhurst to the foot of the hill at Wheeney Creek was performed under a cloudy sky with dewdrops sparkling on the branches by the wayside it was soon evident that the rains of the preceding day and night were not about to return again so shortly.  The South Kurrajong is a series of undulations extending from the foot of the higher portions of the range towards the Hawkesbury. Much of this tract is under cultivation and offers such cheery smiling trite home pictures as might tempt the artist to portray: cottages nestling among the dark foliage of the orange the higher branches of the acacia and bean-tree or the kurrajong (Hibiscus heterophyllus) now starred with its white blossoms; green slopes where sleek cows feed and horses roam at liberty or corn and the golden wheat vary the hues. The plentiful moisture of the past season has added those lively greens and luxuriant tints which are so essential to such scenery. The high-wooded mountains on one side and the glimpses of the low lands of Cumberland are accessories of great value to our picture.  Two or three miles of such scenery brought us to the forest land; the road was still good the grass green the trees fine and umbrageous and the transition was from one style of beauty to another only. [170] The owner of "Cabbage-tree Hollow" has constructed an excellent road to his property which winds along the side of a hill crowned with beetling masses of sandstone fretted and excavated by the atmosphere while below the road lies a vale through which a small stream flows bearing its waters onwards to join the Grose River. The extreme luxuriance of the vegetation attracts the attention no less than the greenness of the leaves and the superabundance of the ferns.  The deep shade only broken by flecks of sunlight or occasional gleams thrown across the road rendered the ride particularly pleasant and became doubly grateful as the sun gained power and poured a fiery glow upon the earth. Many little streams trickled down the hill side and crossing the path added their tributary waters to the brook in the glen below; altogether keeping up that pleasant cool sound which only running water can make.  Man's industry has already levelled some acres of the dense brush and we found an embryo farm and orchard in the vale. The labour of the harvest field was in progress and the slope of a hill was dotted with shocks standing amidst the stubble.  At the cottage we alighted and our horses were secured while we proceeded to investigate the course of the stream by which we had ridden for the last mile and another which joined it. Having been led to this spot by what an amusing modern writer is pleased to designate the Pseromania the most ferny spots had the greatest powers of attraction. By more than one fallen tree did we cross rills hastening through the wheat field between their steep high banks till the paling fence was reached. Here for a while bidding adieu to my companions I left the comparative civilisation of the farm for the unbroken solitude.  Rocks impeding the course of the stream lashed the water into puny wrath now leaping exultingly over an obstacle again creeping beneath it - a curious churning gurgling sound was the result fit music for these sylvan solitudes sombre with heavy shadows. On the edge and even in the stream grow Alsophilia Australis and A. offinis Todea barbara etc. with numerous lesser ferns which cluster beneath their arborescent compeers while the stones are green with Hymerophyllum and Jungermannia.  The stems only of the large cabbage-trees remain but numerous small palmate leaves indicate the presence of young trees. Pensile moss-woven nests attached to the extremities of the branches of trees or creepers swayed above the stream and their little builders flitted about them in all the importance of nesting season. The walk through the harvest field was varied by a rather large black snake crossing the path which little interlude kept the attention awake till we remounted. [171]  A rather abrupt and rocky path led up the hill and we soon passed from the luxuriant and pretty vale to the thick scrub of a sandstone range. Here the advantages of a guide who thoroughly knew the country and who could appreciate fine scenery was experienced.  Pursuing the top of the range I presently descried with satisfaction the fine species of dwarf palm which obtains on the Shoalhaven River. While our obliging guide was seeking for nuts some lyre birds (Menura superba) were disturbed but continued to whistle and flutter about in much agitation till we resumed the order of march. Suddenly the thick scrub gave way and the summits of distant mountains appeared. Hardly were the words uttered "We will alight here" before the ground was trodden and eager steps pressing forward to the edge of the valley of the Grose.  There are scenes which baffle description when we can only feel like -   - stout Cortes when with eagle eyes  He stared at the Pacific and all his men  Looked at each other with a wild surmise  Silent upon a peak in Darien.  Something of that hushed wonder for a moment held us spellbound and then came the deep heartfelt "Beautiful how beautiful - how grand."  We stood on a rock looking down into the deep gorge through which flowed a turbulent stream yellow and froth-laden from recent inundations while tributaries which in their course clove asunder the mountains dashed down the steeps. The heights are wooded to their summits with grand masses of yellow sandstone varying them and the rich greens of Backhousia myrtifolia Pittosporum and Tasmania aromatica indicating the course of the various rills. After having brought the sketch book into requisition we mounted our horses and rode through a scrubby piece of country not without interest to the botanical student to another spur of the mountain from whence we again obtained a fine view of the Grose perhaps hardly so striking as the first point of view or else the repetition of the scene had lost its first startling effects.  Down the right-hand ranges fall the waters of Burrolow and to the left is Springwood; through the furthermost part of the gorge we catch a glimpse of a distant cone - Mount Hay perhaps.  On our return we did not descend to the lovely Cabbage-tree Hollow but pursuing a marshy stream turned from thence across to a surveyor's road leading through a casuarina country till we reentered the farmlands and exchanged the grandeur of the vast scenes the great depths and dense woods of the other localities for the sunny homes of the South Kurrajong. - As we purposed to devote the remainder of the day to further explorations the kind invitation of one of our companions to dine at her house was cordially accepted and having been in the saddle almost uninterruptedly from nine till after three o'clock her hospitality was well appreciated. [172] Quite refreshed and in excellent spirits we started up the mountain and again bade soon farewell to the homesteads of man and turned our backs on orange groves and vine-covered porches to pursue a shady road which quickly led us up the range. The road being in use to draw timber from the mountains is broad and good and offers a pleasant riding ground. Numerous bellbirds made the brush vocal.  After reaching the summit the road leads over and along the opposite decline; from hence it is not in use for wheeled vehicles. It was originally cut by the former proprietor of Burrolow and is the only means by which vehicles can gain access to the valley. The scene gains in interest as we proceed high rocks rising on one side Pipeclay is found in the road and extolled as very pure an old woman who was collecting it for the use of the cleanly housewives of the Kurrajong was recently lost and exposed to a wet night.  The atmospherical effects upon the rocks increases in interest. In one place a mass has fallen from the cliff and rolling so close beside the path exhibits an aperture about eighteen inches in diameter which communicates with an extensive cavity occupying the centre of the boulder.  During a great part of this ride the forest is very dense and the path is over arched with luxuriant vegetation the trees being so festooned by creepers as at times to threaten to put a stop to further progress. Some rills of water cross the path and the whole place is very humid and shady. When expecting shortly to descend into the valley this path was found impeded by a fallen tree and therefore leaving it we wound through the scrub to the margin of the stream - the same which much augmented we had traced with the eye in its headlong course into the Grose. Many beautiful flowers adorn this portion of Bunolone. The vale is here contracted and wooded but a short ride led us to the more clear land and ruined dikes - the evidences of what had been - and thence by the usual narrow stony path we wound up the hill leaving the valley already grey with evening hues though the sun shone brightly on the mountain tops.    A NIGHT ADVENTURE IN THE BUSH 1861  A lady her family a friend and several servants among others a black boy had occasion to perform a journey which though not long was rendered tedious by the nature of the ground traversed. So steep were the mountains so unbridged the streams that no vehicle could cross them. Goods were therefore conveyed on pack-saddles placed on the backs of bullocks trained to the work. [173] The party excepting the drivers were mounted on horseback. The first fifteen miles accomplished not without great fatigues dangers and delays the cavalcade reached the descent of the M - Mountain. The pass had been improved by cutting steps down the face of the rocks and the oxen accustomed to such scenes stumbled down as they best could while the horses groaned audibly trembled and even in some instances sunk powerless on the dangerous declivity not encouraged by the sight of the gully yawning at the side of the narrow road.  Coaxing shouting and other exertions of will surmounted this difficulty and the party proceeded briskly leading their horses; the pack bullocks and their drivers soon falling into the rear. The nature of the country had entirely changed the barren sand had given place to vegetable mould; the flowering scrub to a dense semi-tropical thicket; the sun's rays were obscured by the over-arching branches or fell like mosaic upon the moss green stones and ferns. The cabbage-palms stretched their slender stems above the tangled copse and looked up at the face of heaven; the tree ferns elkshorn and birds-nest ferns revelled in the humid shades. The shrieks of the blue mountain and king parrots gave life to the green wood and every stream was occupied by frogs which vied with each other in their shrill-toned croaking.  Onward trudged the travellers hastening to the foot of the mountain where they were to encamp for the night. Darkness gathered round early in that deep narrow vale where mountains rose abruptly on either side of the creek. Persons who travelled these parts with stock had erected a yard near the little stream on a small level to secure their cattle in during the night and near this the party sat them down after lighting a fire awaiting the arrival of the tents provisions and servants for only the black boy Charley had accompanied them. But total darkness closed above them and the absentees came not; all ears were strained to catch the first sound of them; conversation had flagged then ceased.  During this anxious hush the fire had died down - it was a darkness which could be felt - when suddenly appeared a small light scarcely larger than a spark. "Charley what is that?' enquired several tremulous voices.  "Debel debel I believe" returned the lad in a tone as if his teeth were chattering. On came the light about two feet from the ground.  "Nonsense Charley; what can it be?"  Charley again hinted the possibility of the presence of his Satanic Majesty - while the little luminous speck crept cautiously onward towards the horror-struck group.  "Can it be a bushranger?" whispered the lady. "I believe so missus" returned the aboriginal. [174]   A bushranger with a lighted pipe in his mouth about to fire upon the helpless victims rendered visible by the flickering of a tongue of flame in the fire while darkness concealed him and goodness knows how many more! All this presented itself to the assembled imaginations. The lady fainted the young people were panic-struck Charley equally so. The gentleman who was recently from England and entirely unused to bush life although then on his way to inspect a station prior to entering on possession entered into the general alarm but surmounted it so far as to throw some dead branches on the almost expiring fire. A bright blaze shot up illuminating the surrounding scene - not revealing a band of brigands but setting the light flickering in a way that bore evidence of its insect origin.  Inspired by new courage active exertions were made and a small brown beetle about three lines long captured; the light appeared to be emitted from a pale yellow spot on the under part of the body.  Still the men and the pack bullocks did not arrive; the chill dews of evening were falling and no tents erected no supper to refresh and invigorate the weary travellers. There is nothing like sitting in the dark watching and listening to provoke or evoke fear. Spite of the bushranger turning out a little beetle fear held possession of all hearts when presently was heard the tramping of heavy feet; one of the pack bullocks was running wildly down the mountain dragging behind him a heavy body.  Again the black was applied to as being better provided with bush lore not courage for he was overpowered by cowardice and superstition. In reply to a volley of questions he expressed an opinion that the bullock had killed his driver and was dragging his lifeless body behind him. The ghastly suggestion was received in all faith everyone being too horror-struck to reflect that as the driver was in no way attached to the bullock's harness he would not be dragged.  On rushed the animal concealed by the darkness plunged into the creek and hurried to the stockyard where it was in the habit of being released from its load. There was a pause as of death - again were heard hurried feet and again. The three pack bullocks had assembled at the yard each dragging something behind them - their loads suggested some one; and so it proved.  Now came the drivers and related the cause of their detention. A bright fire warm cup of tea and the snug canopy of the tent disposed the travellers to acknowledge "that there is but one step from the sublime to the ridiculous".  As the family who formed the greater number of the party were intending to make rather a lengthy stay when they reached their destination - a cattle station - they had brought with them a very important member of the household no less a one than a pet bear. This rather portly gentleman had been accommodated with a seat in a pannier and swung on one side of the pack saddle while "to make the balance true" a hamper of earthenware and a writing desk were suspended on the other side. [175]   Whatever were Master Maugie's thoughts on this occasion he had manifested that philosophy which usually marked his actions and given no expression to them till he found his bearer descending the steep mountainside. This was too much for any choleric gentleman who had nerves. Maugie waxed wrath and stuck his long claws through the wicker-work into the bullock's back no doubt intending 'to make assurance doubly sure" but such a one-sided arrangement did not suit the ox; he began to run the shaking causing Maugie to roar aloud much to the horror of the bovine trio who thereupon ran away scattering such of their load as was insecure along the road breaking the fragile to wit the earthenware and releasing the bear who speedily made his way up a tree. The drivers being unable to coax him down felled it - a work of some time trusting to the bullocks keeping the right road and then had to secrete such of the loads as were scattered about by which time night had closed in.  The bear it must be understood was neither the great polar nor the Russian black the Californian brown or the North American grizzly bears but only a phascolarctus fuscus of leaf-eating habits not given to hugging its prey and a drug in the bears-grease market. And thus ends this "o'er true tale".  It had long been known that Melbourne had secured a large part of the trade of the southern portion of New South Wales. And we had no right to complain of their having done so provided that New South Wales obtained the revenue of the dutiable goods which Victoria sent into this colony. If Melbourne from her geographical position or from the superior enterprise of her merchants could supply goods at a cheaper rate to the inhabitants of this colony she was entitled to the advantage she would reap from it; but that should he thought be accompanied at the same time with a due regard to our rights and our revenue. This evil had occurred from the very commencement of the separation of the two colonies and almost naturally so because prior to separation the inhabitants of the southern part of New South Wales bordering on the Murray had long had a trading acquaintance with Melbourne. The attention of the Government of the day was called in 1853 to the large amount of dutiable goods that were being brought from the colony of Victoria into New South Wales and paid no duty in this colony. The consequence was that in 1855 Border Custom-houses were established respectively in the colony of Victoria as well as in New South Wales on the River Murray and these continued in operation only for a short period. There were several seizures made of goods which were held to be contraband and a considerable quantity of goods paid double duty the only alternative being confiscation. The harassing nature of this proceeding was felt to be so grievous in that part of the territory that the Government of this colony communicated with that of the neighbouring colony and they mutually agreed that the custom-houses on the River Murray should be abolished and in 1855 that took place. [278] At the same time the enterprise of a gentleman in the neighbouring colony - Captain Cadell - showed that the rivers of New South Wales - the Murray and the Murrumbidgee - were open to steam navigation. As the goods came from South Australia by these steamers it was evident that some arrangements must be entered into to protect the revenue of this colony. And that treaty being made with South Australia it was arranged that the customs should be collected on the Murray and be divided equally between the colonies of South Australia Victoria and New South Wales. This arrangement was put an end to on account of the great loss which it entailed upon New South Wales in consequence of the inequality of its tariff. The customs were then collected on the tariff of New South Wales as respected goods entering this colony but the loss to New South Wales was still very great. It was the desire of some that the revenue of New South Wales should be protected on the border by the seizure of such dutiable goods on the frontier as were being passed into this colony without payment of duty it being supposed that the result of such a course would be to ensure the due protection of the revenue in those parts. But he thought that it would on consideration be felt to be much more desirable that every expedient should be tried before any such course should be adopted - one which could not but cause a considerable amount of individual hardship and distress. Under these circumstances it was suggested that steps should be taken to bring about one uniform tariff of the whole. It might possibly be supposed that the Government of South Australia would be likely to go into the proposed conference with one particular view on the matter to be discussed (hear hear) and that the Government of that colony was in favour of the principle of free distillation although they would not press it to the exclusion of a more beneficial policy. He thought he was justified in coming to that conclusion of the view taken by South Australia by the course taken in the Parliament of that colony. In regard to the subject now under consideration on the 18th July 1862 in the Assembly at Adelaide the Colonial Treasurer moved the following resolution: "That in the opinion of this House it is desirable that the colony of South Australia should be represented by delegates at any conference to be held at Melbourne on the subject of tariffs and steam postal communication." An amendment was moved upon this resolution to the following effect - "And that previous to any delegate being appointed the Government submit to the House a scheme of taxation based on the principle of granting free distillation at once in this colony." This amendment went to a division and was negatived by 19 to 5 showing that whatever their views might be they would even sacrifice this favourite scheme for the sake of accomplishing a greater good in the attainment of a uniform tariff and he believed it would be found that for the common good South Australia would forego any predilection of the kind. [279] No doubt in a conference of this kind one common purpose could not be arrived at except by the mutual concessions of all parties interested. He believed that each felt the evil of the present system so acutely that they would go into the conference with a determination to arrive at a resolution to accomplish what all must desire a uniform tariff.  POEMS AND SONGS  THE MUSE OF AUSTRALIA  WHERE the pines with the eagles are nestled in rifts  And the torrent leaps down to the surges  I have followed her clambering over the clifts  By the chasms and moon-haunted verges.  I know she is fair as the angels are fair  For have I not caught a faint glimpse of her there;  A glimpse of her face and her glittering hair  And a hand with the Harp of Australia?  I never can reach you to hear the sweet voice  So full with the music of fountains!  Oh! when will you meet with that soul of your choice  Who will lead you down here from the mountains?  A lyre-bird lit on a shimmering space;  It dazzled mine eyes and I turned from the place  And wept in the dark for a glorious face  And a hand with the Harp of Australia!    MOUNTAINS  RIFTED mountains clad with forests girded round by gleaming pines  Where the morning like an angel robed in golden splendour shines;  Shimmering mountains throwing downward on the slopes a mazy glare  Where the noonday glory sails through gulfs of calm and glittering air;  Stately mountains high and hoary piled with blocks of amber cloud  Where the fading twilight lingers when the winds are wailing loud;  Grand old mountains overbeetling brawling brooks and deep ravines  Where the moonshine pale and mournful flows on rocks and evergreens. [4]   Underneath these regal ridges - underneath the gnarly trees  I am sitting lonely-hearted listening to a lonely breeze!  Sitting by an ancient casement casting many a longing look  Out across the hazy gloaming - out beyond the brawling brook!  Over pathways leading skyward - over crag and swelling cone  Past long hillocks looking like to waves of ocean turned to stone;  Yearning for a bliss unworldly yearning for a brighter change  Yearning for the mystic Aidenn built beyond this mountain range.  Happy years amongst these valleys happy years have come and gone  And my youthful hopes and friendships withered with them one by one;  Days and moments bearing onward many a bright and beauteous dream  All have passed me like to sunstreaks flying down a distant stream.  Oh the love returned by loved ones! Oh the faces that I knew!  Oh the wrecks of fond affection! Oh the hearts so warm and true!  But their voices I remember and a something lingers still  Like a dying echo roaming sadly round a far off hill.  I would sojourn here contented tranquil as I was of yore  And would never wish to clamber seeking for an unknown shore;  I have dwelt within this cottage twenty summers and mine eyes  Never wandered erewhile round in search of undiscovered skies;  But a spirit sits beside me veiled in robes of dazzling white  And a dear one's whisper wakens with the symphonies of night;  And a low sad music cometh borne along on windy wings  Like a strain familiar rising from a maze of slumbering springs.  And the Spirit by my window speaketh to my restless soul  Telling of the clime she came from where the silent moments roll;  Telling of the bourne mysterious where the sunny summers flee  Cliffs and coasts by man untrodden ridging round a shipless sea.  [5] There the years of yore are blooming - there departed life-dreams dwell  There the faces beam with gladness that I loved in youth so well;  There the songs of childhood travel over wave-worn steep and strand -  Over dale and upland stretching out behind this mountain land.  "Lovely Being can a mortal weary of this changeless scene  Cross these cloudy summits to the land where man hath never been?  Can he find a pathway leading through that wildering mass of pines  So that he shall reach the country where ethereal glory shines;  So that he may glance at waters never dark with coming ships;  Hearing round him gentle language floating from angelic lips;  Casting off his earthly fetters living there for evermore;  All the blooms of Beauty near him gleaming on that quiet shore?  "Ere you quit this ancient casement tell me is it well to yearn  For the evanescent visions vanished never to return?  Is it well that I should with to leave this dreary world behind  Seeking for your fair Utopia which perchance I may not find?  Passing through a gloomy forest scaling steeps like prison walls  Where the scanty sunshine wavers and the moonlight seldom falls?  Oh the feelings re-awakened! Oh the hopes of loftier range!  Is it well thou friendly Being well to wish for such a change?"  But the Spirit answers nothing! and the dazzling mantle fades;  And a wailing whisper wanders out from dismal seaside shades!  "Lo the trees are moaning loudly underneath their hood-like shrouds  And the arch above us darkens scarred with ragged thunder clouds!"  But the spirit answers nothing and I linger all alone  Gazing through the moony vapours where the lovely Dream has flown;  And my heart is beating sadly and the music waxeth faint  Sailing up to holy Heaven like the anthems of a Saint.     [6] KIAMA   TOWARDS the hills of Jamberoo  Some few fantastic shadows haste  Uplit with fires  Like castle spires  Outshining through a mirage waste.  Behold a mournful glory sits  On feathered ferns and woven brakes  Where sobbing wild like restless child  The gusty breeze of evening wakes!  Methinks I hear on every breath  A lofty tone go passing by  That whispers - "Weave  Though wood winds grieve  The fadeless blooms of Poesy!"  A spirit hand has been abroad -  An evil hand to pluck the flowers -  A world of wealth  And blooming health  Has gone from fragrant seaside bowers.  The twilight waxeth dim and dark  The sad waves mutter sounds of woe  But the evergreen retains its sheen  And happy hearts exist below;  But pleasure sparkles on the sward  And voices utter words of bliss  And while my bride  Sits by my side  Oh where's the scene surpassing this?  Kiama slumbers robed with mist  All glittering in the dewy light  That brooding o'er  The shingly shore  Lies resting in the arms of Night;  And foam-flecked crags with surges chill  And rocks embraced of cold-lipped spray  Are moaning loud where billows crowd  In angry numbers up the bay.  [7] The holy stars come looking down  On windy heights and swarthy strand  And Life and Love -  The cliffs above -  Are sitting fondly hand in hand.  I hear a music inwardly  That floods my soul with thoughts of joy;  Within my heart  Emotions start  That Time may still but ne'er destroy.  An ancient Spring revives itself  And days which made the past divine;  And rich warm gleams from golden dreams  All glorious in their summer shine;  And songs of half forgotten hours  And many a sweet melodious strain  Which still shall rise  Beneath the skies  When all things else have died again.  A white sail glimmers out at sea -  A vessel walking in her sleep;  Some Power goes past  That bends the mast  While frighted waves to leeward leap.  The moonshine veils the naked sand  And ripples upward with the tide  As underground there rolls a sound  From where the caverned waters glide.  A face that bears affection's glow  The soul that speaks from gentle eyes  And joy which slips  From loving lips  Have made this spot my Paradise!     ETHELINE   The heart that once was rich with light  And happy in your grace  Now lieth cold beneath the scorn  That gathers on your face;  [8] And every joy it knew before  And every templed dream  Is paler than the dying flash  On yonder mountain stream.  The soul regretting foundered bliss  Amid the wreck of years  Hath mourned it with intensity  Too deep for human tears!  The forest fadeth underneath  The blast that rushes by -  The dripping leaves are white with death  But Love will never die!  We both have seen the starry moss  That clings where Ruin reigns  And one must know his lonely breast  Affection still retains;  Through all the sweetest hopes of life  That clustered round and round  Are lying now like withered things  Forsaken - on the ground.  'Tis hard to think of what we were  And what we might have been  Had not an evil spirit crept  Across the tranquil scene:  Had fervent feelings in your soul  Not failed nor ceased to shine  As pure as those existing on  And burning still in mine.  Had every treasure at your feet  That I was wont to pour  Been never thrown like worthless weeds  Upon a barren shore!  The bitter edge of grief has passed  I would not now upbraid;  Or count to you the broken vows  So often idly made!  I would not cross your path to chase  The falsehood from your brow -  I know with all that borrowed light  You are not happy now:  [9] Since those that once have trampled down  Affection's early claim  Have lost a peace they need not hope  To find on earth again.     AILEEN   A SPLENDID sun betwixt the trees  Long spikes of flame did shoot  When turning to the fragrant South  With longing eyes and burning mouth  I stretched a hand athwart the drouth  And plucked at cooling fruit.  So thirst was quenched and hastening on  With strength returned to me  I set my face against the noon  And reached a denser forest soon;  Which dipped into a still lagoon  Hard by the sooming sea.  All day the ocean beat on bar  And bank of gleaming sand;  Yet that lone pool was always mild  It never moved when waves were wild  But slumbered like a quiet child  Upon the lap of land.  And when I rested on the brink  Amongst the fallen flowers  I lay in calm; no leaves were stirred  By breath of wind or wing of bird;  It was so still you might have heard  The footfalls of the hours.  Faint slumbrous scents of roses filled  The air which covered me:  My words were low - "she loved them so  In Eden vales such odours blow:  How strange it is that roses grow  So near the shores of Sea!" [10]   A sweeter fragrance never came  Across the Fields of Yore!  And when I said - "we here would dwell" -  A low voice on the silence fell -  "Ah! if you loved the roses well  You loved Aileen the more."  "Ay that I did and now would turn  And fall and worship her!  But Oh you dwell so far - so high!  One cannot reach though he may try  The Morning land and Jasper sky -  The balmy hills of Myrrh.  "Why vex me with delicious hints  Of fairest face and rarest blooms;  You Spirit of a darling Dream  Which links itself with every theme  And thought of mine by surf or stream  In glens - or caverned glooms?"  She said "thy wishes led me down  From amaranthine bowers:  And since my face was haunting thee  With roses (dear which used to be)  They all have hither followed me  The scents and shapes of flowers."  "Then stay mine own evangel stay!  Or going take me too;  But let me sojourn by your side  If here we dwell or there abide  It matters not!" I madly cried -  "I only care for you."  Oh glittering Form that would not stay! -  Oh sudden sighing breeze!  A fainting rainbow dropped below  Far gleaming peaks and walls of snow  And there a weary way I go  Towards the Sunrise seas.     [11] KOOROORA   THE gums in the gully stand gloomy and stark  A torrent beneath them is leaping  And the wind goes about like a ghost in the dark  Where a chief of Wahibbi lies sleeping!  He dreams of a battle - of foes of the past  But he hears not the whooping abroad on the blast  Nor the fall of the feet that are travelling fast.  Oh why dost thou slumber Kooroora?  They come o'er the hills in their terrible ire  And speed by the woodlands and water;  They look down the hills at the flickering fire  All eager and thirsty for slaughter.  Lo! the stormy moon glares like a torch from the vale  And a voice in the belah grows wild in its wail  As the cries of the Wanneroos swell with the gale -  Oh! rouse thee and meet them Kooroora!  LABOUR FOR FAMILY - TO THE EDITOR OF THE ARGUS.  Sir. - In your issue of the 8th inst. I find the first of an intended series of articles upon labour remuneration &c. Taking as granted you are sincere in your profession of good will and wish only fair statements to be made I beg to offer a few remarks and respectfully request space for them. You say in 1863 a workman obtains about £2 14s. in wages weekly and that himself wife and three children can live upon £1 18s. 7d. the same time. Now allowing some of the items of food to be charged full and others under I think it a fair statement upon the whole as far as it goes (except rent); but you have not made any reference to several expenses not altogether unworthy of your kind remembrance. No provision is made for the education of his children or for their attendance at any public place of worship or instruction. No sum set apart for the sundries which a good mother can so justifiably fill up; no provision for increase of family or for sickness for loss of work or subscription to benefit or building society - not even for green vegetables or fruits which they say are necessary for health here. I do not mention beer or wine though "a little wine for stomach's sake and often infirmity" is not an infidel recommendation. Then again I question whether the decorum of a well-regulated family can be carried out in nine cases out of ten in dwellings at 6s. per week so that a larger sum would have to be put down to rent. I have merely stated a few facts feeling personally their importance and leave to abler hands the bearing it has upon the character and conduct of the rising generation who are to take the place sometime their parents now occupy; and believing injustice or ungenerousness will never raise or maintain anything like a desirable state of things I hope for the working-man as well as for the man of capital you will raise your voice against the selfishness of mammon.  Yours M.  N.B. The foregoing remarks are against the presumption he can save 15s. 6d. per week.  (It will readily be seen that our correspondent's remarks do not affect the validity of our comparison between the working man's receipts and expenditure of the two periods in question.)  STRIKE ON THE RAILWAY. - A disturbance took place on the railway line yesterday which but for the prompt manner in which it was met by the authorities might have resulted in serious consequences. From time to time since the commencement of the line to Echuca attempts have been made by the workmen engaged on the line to obtain a rise of wages from 7s. per diem the rate now paid by the contractors to 8s. per diem which the workmen think a more reasonable payment for their labour. Hitherto the efforts of the workmen have been unsuccessful the demand for labour in the district having been of late comparatively slack. The opening up of a new field at the Raywood rush has been the cause of renewed dissatisfaction among the workmen and seems to have induced a belief amongst them that an attempt to obtain a rise would at the present time prove successful. Under these circumstances but little was required at any moment to cause a strike on the line. Nothing however appears to have been formally done for the purpose and the present strike seems to have been more the result of accident than design. Yesterday morning about half past nine o'clock a labourer named John Dynan said to have been just discharged from the Sandhurst lockup applied at the works near Back Creek to be taken on again but at 8s. per diem. Being refused he went to the men at the cutting and said to them "Come out of that; I'll knock off your - heads if you work for 7s. a day." He was at once given into custody for interfering with the men. The result was much disturbance; several men got out of the cutting and refused to go on working under 8s. per diem; and finally the whole of the men at work about 100 in number knocked off and went down the line calling upon others to join them. At the Back Creek-bridge in M'Ivorstreet one of the men engaged at the crane refused to turn out and offered to fight any man that would stand up to him. A rush was made at him from the bank by one of the mob he was knocked down before he could put himself on his guard and either before or after he fell struck between the eyes without however receiving any serious injury. Information of the proceedings was brought to the Town hall. The mayor adjourned the Police Court to twelve noon and accompanied by Mr. Cholmley the inspector of police and as many foot and mounted constables (eighteen of the foot-police...) as could be got together started for the Back Creek bridge. Meantime the men continued their progress along the line. At the Crooked Billet near Bridge-street they found a body of masons at work; but seeing a strong body of police coming they passed on and the masons continued their work. At the back of the White Hills a gang of labourers at work there laid down their tools as they saw the mob approaching notwithstanding the presence of the police who had orders to arrest any man who should interfere to prevent others working. Reinforced to about double their first number the men on strike continued their progress as far as the commencement of Collier and Barry's sub contract about the middle of the White Hills Hamlet a distance of nearly three miles from the beginning of the line where the strike commenced. On the police reaching this point inquiries were made of the contractors whether their men were being interfered with by the men on strike and a reply being given that their presence interfered with the proper execution of the work orders were given to clear the line. [173] Several of the men were taken into custody for abusive and threatening language to the ganger and with some little difficulty the others were compelled to leave the neighbourhood of the works. The men engaged on them continued their labour and the police remained on the spot to protect them from further interference. At this spot Mr. Higgins the contractor pointed out to the police a man who had been active in inducing others to commence the strike who had threatened "to knock the legs from under him" and had said that he had "buried many a better man than him in Bruce's contract." He was at once taken into custody and secured in the White Hills lock-up close by. The man who committed the assault at the Back Creek-bridge was not to be found. He is said to have slipped out of the mob immediately after committing the assault. The names of the men already arrested are John Dynan Charles Crosby Martin Macmahon and John Nash.  The repetition of different beautiful views seen under bright blue sunny skies renders a coasting trip under steam in smooth water delightful.  Melbourne (Queen of the Gold Fields) is beautifully situated about 38° South on hilly ground three miles from the Northern shore of what may not improperly be termed an inland sea the entrance to which from Bass' Strait is formed by a narrow opening in the coast forty miles from the harbour. Between the shipping and the town traffic is carried on in trips of five or six minutes by a short railroad. A city already far surpassing Sydney in the style of its buildings and amount of population has sprung up as if by magic in ten short years. The climate too is somewhat cooler than that of New South Wales the land much less rugged more fertile and abounding in open plains. The Yarra-Yarra though deep and navigable for or small craft i.e. of 300 tons up to the town is so narrow and tideless as to resemble a canal until the bridge is passed then it meanders through a rich and picturesque country. The broad and noble streets intersected at right angles are like those of Hobart Town and Sydney lit up with gas and are much more thronged with cabs and omnibuses; but a suitable residence comfortable and not expensive was difficult to find. For some hours I hunted about among people whose activity betokened a stirring commerce and at length discovered a boarding and lodging-house kept by two decent Scotch sisters named Sime paying five pounds a week for their small six-roomed tenement in Upper Lonsdale-street. My board and bed in a chamber occupied by two other persons cost thirty shillings a week. Of the ten or eleven lodgers three were respectable printers each earning £16 per month in the neighbouring government office and the remainder all engaged in some industrious employment. An Act having passed making it penal for any one not free three years from Tasmania to be found in Victoria I felt uneasy when the water police boarded the steamer although the chief mate a good fellow named Chapman an acquaintance of some standing promised if needful to represent me as his friend. [166] They allowed me to pass unchallenged - yet I was never free from disquietude knowing that more than one respectable inhabitant of Tasmania had been apprehended by a petty constable greedy for a bribe and incarcerated for days in a state of terrible annoyance and suffering. Thus quiet men following an honest calling are frightened from a visit the danger of which does not deter ruffians with evil designs. I made myself acquainted with the town and much admired the suburbs particularly that of St. Kilda on the sea shore. The splendid and elegant public library open to everybody must not be forgotten - an institution hardly to be surpassed for convenience comfort and even magnificence by any in the mother country. For this the colony is indebted to a judge Sir Redmond Barry. The Governor Sir Charles Hotham looking harassed and careworn attended divine service at the cathedral a small but neat church; a brain fever brought on by excessive political worry soon after carried him off. I did not hear the Bishop Dr. Perry (formerly a Fellow of Trinity Cambridge) then absent in Europe. His income was represented to be only £1000 per annum a sum ridiculously small in such an expensive colony where good servants male or female will not tarry long with employers for any wages. What sober industrious man may reasonably be expected to remain in service when he can find so many ways of gaining an independence and becoming his own master? And as young bachelors able to support a family are an important item in the population a high premium is attached to women who need not remain spinsters one moment longer than they choose; - does not appear an excessive stipend. Victoria resembles an American State more than an important British dependency therefore it should have a ruler sagacious and able; the present Governor Sir Henry Berkly will most probably be popular and successful. Legislative enactments must receive his sanction a Constitution similar to that of England having lately been granted but attended with these improvements. [167]  Be it remembered that as a pedlar is not the only person who thinks it quite right to sell what he has bought Australian constituencies do not barter the suffrage an Englishman's most valuable privilege for money and drink; so that Members are returned to the Lower House not as Whigs Tories or Radicals but as able and willing to vote for any measure likely to be beneficial to the Colony without reference to the party by whom it is introduced and to reject a Bill not conscientiously approved although brought in by their dearest friend; besides the Upper Chamber is elective.  In England possibly at some future period a peerage descending from an ancestor will cease to be regarded as the sole necessary qualification for such all important functions. Possibly the English Upper Chamber will then also consist of Members chosen for their wisdom and integrity from those rendered by nature and education fittest for the duty; hereditary rank being no disqualification for we need not abolish titles in order to secure a competent Upper House. Possibly in days to come "honours" will be definitely conferred (say for three lives or generations) in order that a race perchance meanly gifted the remote posterity of an eminent person may not enjoy an artificial superiority over their more talented fellow citizens unable to boast of a celebrated forefather. For while the existence of a class distinguished by honours is essential to our admirable social pyramid it certainly does appear most strange that for legislative functions birth should be the principal qualification-birth too in a class whose very elevation has a natural and certain tendency to cause the degeneracy of its members. How many of our Peers would sit where they do were they not the sons of Peers? There exists a ready mode of exalting superior persons but we have no method of letting down to their natural places inferior ones. Nor although it may be proper with affluence to sustain family dignity is the succession of one child to the whole of his father's property thought in the Colonies to be either just or prudent. Why should a Colonial Upper House be deprived of the counsels of bishops; men elevated for ability and learning not by an accident? These seem to be the very persons qualified for legislation. Surely every bishop enjoying experience resulting from a kind of transportation is entitled by his office to a voice in the Colony where he officiates. The Melbourne Council Chamber is much grander than the Sydney one which however being neat and elegant possesses better accommodation for strangers. [168]  I made an excursion for a few days by way of Geelong (a handsome town on Corio "inside" Bay forty miles to the South-West) towards the gold fields of Ballarat but some heavy rain followed by great heat in combination with my uneasy feelings and a desire once more to see Tasmania induced me to return to Launceston by a steamer which on the 31st of October carried us across the Strait in twenty-four hours from Heads to Heads. Having for the present resigned my intention of going to Europe I procured another licence and in my former humble occupation again continued to traverse the island trade being not so brisk. Transportation having ceased every individual in the Colony felt the loss of £400000 flowing annually for convict expenditure from the Imperial Treasury. The demand from Victoria for our timber had also fallen; my accumulations therefore could not fairly be expected to proceed at their former rate purchases by people with empty pockets being out of the question so I patiently toiled on content with smaller gains. One sultry afternoon in November 1856 having painfully climbed a steep range (towards the north side of the island) called the "Hummock Hills" whose summit overlooks an expanse of a hundred miles in circumference I gladly threw down my burden and became absorbed in the beautiful extensive prospect when a ferocious looking man without either coat or vest suddenly appeared from behind some rocks not ten yards off pointing his gun at me-mine having been relinquished for a telescope lay behind him. In his rear two more seeming like him to have sprung out of the earth also with savage eyes silently levelled at me. Perceiving their pieces to be full cocked and their fingers on the triggers I expected for a minute or so to fall riddled with balls but experienced relief from the sight of handcuffs suspended at the belt of one which told me what they were. "Well" said I very politely "are you going to shoot me? Why you are constables "not moving hand or foot because if they had killed me they could have left my body there for the birds and animals or easily have represented it as a "mistake" "an untoward event" like the battle of Navarino. Fortunately they knew nothing of thirty sovereigns stowed away in my belt. At last the tallest inquired "who are you?" "Look at my licence and you will see" I quietly answered and after a little more parley having become satisfied that I was not one of the bushrangers (absconded since I left headquarters) whom they were in pursuit of they gratified me by lowering their muskets. [169]   On their departure I of course kept on the "qui vive" that evening and the two following days until I reached Launceston; there having known an honest worthy pair named Fenton I always found their house a comfortable home. On my return to Hobart some weeks subsequently the whole community was in a state of excitement caused by the imposition of higher taxes upon articles of daily consumption (namely-sugar tea tobacco and rum) having been proposed by the first "Chancellor of the Exchequer" or Colonial Treasurer under the new Constitution who found it absolutely necessary to raise a large sum of money for the public service. John Bull whether home-bred or Colonial always kicks at this which the peculiar state of the island rendered more inopportune. It affected my interests; - hawkers were to pay £10 per annum instead of £1 for the licence at a time when half of them could no longer make a living. Writing to the Editor of a daily paper I endeavoured to show that the aristocratic members of the profession rejoicing in the dignity of a horse and cart might in flourishing times perhaps afford to pay five or six pounds but that the whole capital of many humble pedlars often did not amount to more than a few shillings and that it was better for a woman or elderly man thus to gain an honest livelihood than to be maintained by charity in a colony with a population and resources so inferior to those of its sisters. A meeting having been convened (the chair at which I declined to take) it was resolved nem con to draw up a petition setting forth our grievances and praying for re-consideration of the matter. Thereupon a Mr. Moriarty apparently inclined to befriend our ancient and honourable body indirect a document describing us as public benefactors especially to good ladies in the bush inasmuch as without our aid they would be at a loss for tape bobbins laces and such like gear &c. That gentleman learned in the law is responsible for the wording of the petition kindly presented at my request by Mr. Douglas Member for Launceston to the House of Assembly where it was read and ordered to be printed. Being seated in the gallery I could with difficulty repress an indecorous smile at hearing the "bobbins and laces" mentioned. [...] [170] [171] [172]  With my acquired trading knowledge £500 now would be worth twice or thrice that sum ten years hence. A judicious investment of this small capital in particular English manufacturers would return cent. per cent. at the Antipodes within twelve or eighteen months; the amount of profits upon each transaction depending of course upon the time expended in realising.  [58] [V.iii] Chapter IV. Miss Phillips Meets With A Congenial Spirit In Victoria  As Mr Dempster had reported there had been a division in the family of the Phillipses shortly after they landed. Mrs. Phillips wished to remain in Melbourne for a month or two as she did not feel able to stand the long land journey at this particular time. Neither her husband nor herself had much confidence in Dr. Grant's skill and she could have better attendance in town. Mr. Phillips having ascertained that Mrs. Peck was in Adelaide and having through Mr. Talbot sent a request that she should remain there which her own interest was likely to make her attend to had less objection to her staying in [59] Melbourne than he ever had before; so he took a suite of furnished apartments for her and those of the family who remained in town.   Jane Melville went at once to Wiriwilta with the children who all longed to be there and who disliked Melbourne more than London. Miss Phillips had her choice to remain in town or to go up to the station and she decided on the former alternative for she began to fear the station would be very dull and would contrast unfavourably with the voyage which had been lively and pleasant. There were some of her fellow-passengers whom she was unwilling to lose sight of; and Mr. Brandon was not at Barragong but in Adelaide so on the whole she thought it would be preferable to stay. She gave as her ostensible reason for the choice her wish to be with Mrs. Phillips during her brother's necessary absence. Mr. Phillips stayed with his wife till she presented him with a second son and then as she was doing very well he left her in the care of his sister and Elsie.   He had been rather annoyed to find that [60] Brandon had been amusing himself by taking a journey to Adelaide so soon after coming out to the colony again. Dr. Grant came down to meet Phillips and represented that a great deal had gone amiss at Wiriwilta since he (Dr. Grant) had been supplanted in the charge of the stations; so that he thought it indispensable to go up with the least possible delay to look to all the flocks and the out-stations.   "It was the wildest thing in Brandon to start off in that way" said Grant "with a poor lad of a nephew who did not know a wattle from a gum-tree when he came and scarcely a sheep from a cow. I never would have done such a thing."   "But he has gone to buy some new sheep I hear" said Phillips. "Have they been delivered at Wiriwilta?"   "No not yet" said Grant; "and I think that was the most insane part of the business. I am sure our Victorian flock-masters have always kept ahead of the Adelaide lot; and to go to the Adelaide side for sheep would be the last speculation I should care to enter into for [61] myself not to speak of implicating you in such a thing. The long overland journey will pull them down so much that you are likely to lose a third of them on the road and what you do save will be in wretched order. Brandon was fairly ruined by going home to England."   "Ruined!" said Harriett Phillips. "He said he was ruined or something like it before he left. Are his affairs really in such a bad state?"   "Oh it's not exactly his affairs but he got unsettled and would not work as he used to do. He overturned most of my arrangements at Wiriwilta; and I am sure Mr. Phillips will not find himself any the better for his alterations. He is so foolishly confiding. Now I like to look sharply after my people and then I see what work I get out of them."   "I think you are quite right Dr. Grant. I have remarked the want of that prudence in both Mr. Brandon and my brother. They think it proceeds from benevolence but I attribute it more to indolence and the dislike to give themselves [62] any trouble they can avoid" said Harriett.   Dr. Grant was piqued at being deprived of Mr. Phillips's agency for though he had protested against taking it he had found it very lucrative; he was also piqued at Mrs. Phillips staying in town for her confinement though he always declared that he detested practising and only did it as an accommodation to his neighbours; but both things had added alike to his emolument and his importance and he was extremely jealous of any slight being cast either on his business knowledge or his professional skill.   On this occasion he offered to stay in Melbourne for a week or so after Phillips left merely as a friend to see how Mrs. Phillips was going on and to take up a full and satisfactory account to the station. Though he was not her medical attendant he was as much in the house and far more than he had ever been before. When the week was over he appeared to be in no hurry to go away but wrote to Phillips instead; and hung about the house went errands for her or [63] her sister-in-law took Harriett out for walks and drives brought all his Melbourne acquaintances to call on her and to inquire for Mrs. Phillips and the baby and was himself engaged for several hours of every day in conversation with Harriett.   He had come to Melbourne determined to fall in love with Miss Phillips whose likeness he had seen and admired at Wiriwilta years ago and whose face and figure when seen in reality quite came up to his expectations while her air and manners were exactly suited to his taste. He knew that she had a fortune - not large certainly but tempting to a man who was not exactly poor but always more or less embarrassed. Her perfect self-possession her good education her musical talents her excellent connections her stylish way of dressing her very egotism were all charming to a man who wanted a wife who would do him credit.   His Scotch family was a good one; he was connected with many noble houses; he could tell long traditional stories of the feats of [64] the Grants and the Gillespies his father's and mother's ancestors; and it was wonderful how much the history of Scotland and indeed that of the world generally seemed to hang on the exploits of those ancient clans. Though Harriett was not a Scotchwoman (it was the only drawback to their perfect suitability) she appreciated these anecdotes wonderfully well. Dr. Grant laid himself out to please her in a much more marked manner than Brandon had ever done and his success was much greater. He had a subdued feeling that his neighbour at Barragong was his rival as he had seen so much of Harriett in England so he lost no opportunity of mentioning anything that would tell against him.   Then he was of the same profession as her father and brother Vivian and liked to hear her talk of them. Indeed provided he got time and opportunity to speak about his own relations connections and friends - to give anecdotes of his schoolboy and college days more interesting to his mother than to any one else heretofore - to describe how he had felt the colonial hardships [65] at first and how he had gradually made himself very comfortable at Ben More (which was the name he had given to his station so much more suitable for a Scottish squatter than such native names as Brandon and Phillips had retained for theirs); - he would allow Harriett to give her school and society reminiscences too to describe her home in Derbyshire - the furniture the ornaments the lawn and the greenhouse - the county Stanleys and the county balls. As they were generally tête-à-tête four or five hours a day they had ample time for descanting on all these interesting topics. Any visitors who might drop in or any visit that they might pay together only gave fresh food for further comparison of their own personal tastes and predilections. Miss Phillips's avowed contemptuous compassion for everything colonial did not at all offend Dr. Grant. He had never been thoroughly acclimatized himself and he had vowed never to marry any of the second-rate colonial girls who as he thought had no manner and no style. It was surprising how well these two [66] new friends agreed about everything and everybody.   Dr. Grant from his education and his habits considered himself a reading man and a very well informed one. Miss Phillips too had thought Brandon greatly her inferior in literary acquirements as in all other things; but it was singular to observe how little these two people who were so congenial to each other and who enjoyed each other's company so much and had so much of it talked about the many books they must have read. As for religion politics or any other of the great concerns of life they never seemed to rise even on the surface of conversation; and when a book happened to be mentioned it was dismissed with a casual remark such as "I read it" or "I did not read it" or "I liked it" or "I thought it stupid" and then they turned to things which more nearly interested them and these were things in which they themselves or some one related to them made some figure. If any of Miss Phillips's or any of Dr. Grant's relations had published a [67] book that would have been mentioned and extolled but they had not. Vivian's scientific attainments which Harriett had thought rather a bore at home were however something to boast of here; and Dr. Grant had an uncle who had made some improvements in agriculture in the north of Scotland of whom he was never tired of talking.   Miss Phillips had remained in Melbourne to be with her sister-in-law but she was very little beside her. Besides Dr. Grant there were fellow-passengers who visited at the house and whose visits Miss Phillips was bound to return and there were also public places to go to with them; for she wished to see all that was to be seen in Melbourne while she was there; and though she generally criticised all the Melbourne concerts and theatres and balls and private parties very severely she accepted every invitation and joined every party that was made up for the theatre.   Elsie and the nurse had the care of Mrs. Phillips and the baby though Elsie would have [68] preferred being at Wiriwilta with Jane and the elder children for she missed their cheerful society but she could not be spared. Miss Phillips was in exceedingly good-humour at this time and did not exact so much from Elsie as she had expected; but Mrs. Phillips missed her husband and was rather petulant and capricious. She had been considerably kinder to Elsie since the death of her little girl. This first sorrow had done her good; but now in her husband's absence a good deal of the old spirit returned particularly as she was much offended at the little attention which Harriett paid to her. Elsie was the real housekeeper though Miss Phillips had the credit of it and she was delighted to find how well she could manage. Her old experiences at Cross Hall had not been altogether thrown away; she had grown more thoughtful and she felt she must depend on herself for there was no Jane now to fall back upon.   Elsie was apprehensive that the coolness between the sisters-in-law would lead to an open [69] rupture for Mrs. Phillips had not been accustomed to be considered as nobody in her own house; but there appeared hope for peace in the fact that Dr. Grant must leave Melbourne; and then those long conversations must have an end and at least three-fourths of the rides and gaieties which served as an excuse for her neglect. During the short absences from day to day which necessarily took place and during the few angel's visits 'short and far between' which were paid to her sister-in-law's sick room Dr. Grant's sayings and doings his compliments to herself and his criticisms of other people were the staple of Harriett's conversation to the invalid. If the absence of the one and the visits to the other were prolonged it was just possible that Mrs. Phillips might be more fatigued; but she could not be so much ignored as she was at present.     [70] [V.iii] Chapter V. Dr. Grant Prosecutes His Suit With Caution And Success And Brandon Finds His Love-Making All To Do Over Again  Harriett Phillips could not come out quite so strong in her contempt for colonial ways and colonial people arriving when she did as if she had landed ten or a dozen years before but still there was a great deal that was open to criticism. Mr. Phillips and Mr. Brandon thought the colony had made rapid strides towards civilization and comfort since the great influx of wealth consequent on the gold discoveries had attracted to Victoria much that was unattainable before. Even during their absence in England there had been a great deal of building going on in Melbourne [71] and many other improvements had been introduced. The houses were better and better furnished; the shops seemed to contain everything that enterprise could import or money procure; the ladies were handsomely and expensively dressed and there were public amusements such as were never heard of in the early colonial days.   But still there was much even in Melbourne that was un-English and strange to a new comer.   Melbourne did not at all come up to Harriett's expectations though what she had expected it would have been difficult to tell. She had wished to go to Victoria because it would be a novelty to her - it would be so different from England that it would be amusing - but every difference that she observed and she was very quick in observing such things was always for the worse. There was of course the difference of climate which led to many alterations in dress and manner of living and which would reasonably lead to more if the English colonist was not so much wedded to old customs and costumes. The heat [72] and dust Harriett found to be insupportable and the dress which was most suited to it was so unbecoming particularly the gentlemen's dress with the endless variety of hats for head-covering. Dr. Grant who stood a good deal on the dignity of his profession when in Melbourne wore dark clothes and a black hat even in the heat of summer and that weighed in his favour with Harriett. The noise and bustle of Melbourne was so different from what she had been accustomed to in Derbyshire - indeed it was more like Liverpool than any part of London she had seen - a poor edition of Liverpool; and that was the city of which the Victorians were so proud. She could not enter into the natural liking of a people for a town that they have seen with their own eyes grow from a mere hamlet of rude huts to a handsome paved lighted commercial city like Melbourne - who identify themselves with its progress having watched the growth of every improvement. They wonder that it does not strike strangers as being as astonishing as it appears to be to themselves.   [74] Mrs. Phillips had no acquaintances in Melbourne; but Mr. Phillips and Dr. Grant knew a good many people who were disposed to be very friendly to Harriett but she did not feel very grateful for such kindness. She fancied that her position and education and her being recently out from England ought to give her an overpowering prestige in these half-savage lands and though she lost no chance of laughing or censuring anything which she thought colonial she could not bear being talked of as a new chum whose opinions should be kept for two years at least before they were worth anything and whose advice was probably worth nothing at any time.   Amongst other subjects for censure the great freedom of manners particularly amongst young people of different sexes towards each other struck Miss Phillips forcibly. She had observed at evening parties at picnics and at places of public amusement the very unrestrained way in which they talked and behaved and she thought the colonial girls were badly trained and that they ought to be more carefully watched by [74] mothers and chaperones. At the same time she took full latitude herself and did many things on the strength of her being in Australia where people might do as they liked that surprised even the colonial girls themselves.   If she remarked on their flirtations with their old friends they could not help observing Miss Phillips's prepossession towards her new acquaintance and laughing at the manner in which the two seemed wrapped up in each other. How could she endure his returning to Ben More and leaving her perhaps for another month in Melbourne without his society was a question which they frequently put to each other; but she solved that difficulty to her own satisfaction and as much to their amusement.   "I am very sorry to leave you" said Dr. Grant one day to the object of his attentions "but I must go. Business must not be neglected. I cannot be flying about like Brandon letting my affairs go to ruin. I hope you will not be long in coming to Wiriwilta Miss Phillips."   "Not very long I suppose" said Harriett. [75] "Indeed I think there is nothing to prevent Mrs. Phillips from going home now if she would only believe so."   "Nothing whatever" said Grant.   "I am quite wearying to see Wiriwilta" said Harriett: "the children's letters are quite rapturous about its beauties and Miss Melville too seems very much pleased. You will like Miss Melville I am sure. You like Scotch people I know."   "If I do not like Miss Melville better than her sister my liking will not go very far" said Grant.   "Do you know Stanley thought Alice quite pretty at first - I don't see it. Miss Melville is what people call plain but I prefer her appearance to Alice's and she is very clever and strong-minded. I quite expect you to fall in love with Miss Melville" said Harriett with a little laugh.   "No fear of that. I have no fancy for strong-minded women. Not but what I like a good understanding and good sense in a lady but let each sex keep to its own department. But [76] Miss Phillips if you really want to go to Wiriwilta I can drive you up - or better still you could ride. You are an admirable horsewoman as I know and I have an excellent horse in town that would carry you easily that distance without fatiguing you. It would be a beautiful ride. You would see the country so well as you go along."   "I should like to go of all things" said Harriett; "but what would Stanley say?"   "Oh I will tell him it was quite unnecessary for you to stay with Mrs. Phillips and it will be the easier for his horses to bring up the rest of them if you have gone before" said Grant.   "Well I am really tired of Melbourne; I think I have seen all that is to be seen and I dare say there are some preparations and arrangements I could make before Mrs. Phillips comes up so as to make her more comfortable though I dare say Miss Melville has done her best. Still there are things that one of the family can do which strangers cannot be expected to attend to."   [77] "Certainly" said Dr. Grant; "I can imagine your presence at Wiriwilta will make things more comfortable for all parties."   "And by-the-by Emily and Harriett will be neglecting their music and I engaged to see to that so long as I remained in Victoria as Miss Melville knows no music."   "No music!" said Dr. Grant; "that is a singular sort of governess to engage for young ladies up the country."   "She is wonderfully clever about other things and brings on the children very nicely. When I compare them with the girls of their own age whom I have seen in Melbourne I cannot help congratulating my brother on having brought out a governess with him. It would have been better of course if she had been English but Miss Melville is not painfully Scotch."   "I hope you have no dislike to Scotch people" said Grant. "I myself glory in my country."   "Oh I quite understand your feelings. If I had been born in Scotland I should have felt the same I dare say" said Harriett.   [78] "But with regard to this drive or ride to Wiriwilta?" said Grant.   "How long should we be on the road?" asked Harriett.   "Two days I think. We would stay all night at Mrs. Ballantyne's a very old friend of mine and an acquaintance of your brother. Ballantyne and I were fellow-passengers when we first came out. They will receive you with bush hospitality. I should like to introduce you to Scotch bush hospitality and it is a pretty place too; rather romantically situated."   "I should really like to see it for I want to study Australian scenery and Australian manners during my short stay in the colony to see as much as I can while I am among you savages."   "Then shall it be a ride or a drive?" asked Dr. Grant.   "I think I should prefer driving" said Harriett; "but I must first consult Mrs. Phillips. I do not suppose that she can enlighten me much but as Stanley's wife I owe her that courtesy." [79] So Harriett with a condescending smile took leave of her admirer.   Mrs. Phillips was in an exceedingly bad humour but she made no objection to Harriett's going away. She did not quite believe in the zeal for the children's music or for her comfort which Miss Phillips professed but she was tired of having the name of her society without the reality of it. As for the impropriety of her sister-in-law's travelling all that distance with a single gentleman either riding or driving Mrs. Phillips had never decided any question of the kind for herself or others since she had been married. She had always acted as her husband thought proper that is to say she might often have made mistakes or done wrong if he had not prevented her and the proposition did not strike her as at all objectionable. Elsie wondered if there was an engagement between her and Dr. Grant when a young lady of such strict principles proposed so singular an expedition. Harriett was not at all quick at reading countenances and was particularly dull in the interpretation of [80] Elsie's; but as some idea of the kind had dimly occurred to herself she gave it voice and explained her views on the subject in Elsie's hearing to Mrs. Phillips.   "Of course I should never think of such an adventurous journey in England but here it seems the fashion to do just as is most convenient to ourselves; and for your sake and that of the children I think it is better that I should go first. Dr. Grant being a professional man and such an old friend of my brother's will be an excellent escort and I am really desirous of seeing a little of the roughness of colonial life. We will stay all night at Mr. Ballantyne's and reach Wiriwilta in good time the second day. I will see to have everything comfortable for you Lily my dear before you come up. I wish you could accompany me. Dr. Grant says you could go up now if you were disposed."   "I am not going to Wiriwilta till Stanley comes himself to fetch me for I am so timid with any one else driving on these dreadful roads; and as for what Dr. Grant says about my being [81] fit for the journey he is not my medical man this time so I won't go by his advice. Besides he don't understand my constitution as Dr. M---- does" said Mrs. Phillips.   "I feel very sorry to leave you Lily" said Harriett.   "Oh I dare say I'll get on very well even without you. Alice and nurse will do for me until Stanley comes. Tell him how I weary to see him the very first thing you say when you see him. Whenever he's done with going over the stations beg him to come down. Alice has written for me to tell him to make haste. I am not strong enough yet to sit up to write."   The idea that Harriett might hasten her husband's return to her helped to reconcile Mrs. Phillips to the very cavalier treatment she received from that young lady.   Harriett enjoyed her drive exceedingly. Dr. Grant knew who lived in a great many houses that they passed and they carried with them the great subject of agreeable conversation in themselves. The Derbyshire country and the Highland [82] scenery was compared and contrasted with the Victorian very much to the disadvantage of the latter which indeed did not look its best but its very worst at this time. Mr. Ballantyne's station Harriett confessed to be rather prettily situated; but things in the house were much rougher than she had expected and the house itself was of a very irregular and primitive style of architecture - the slab hut enlarged so as to be tolerably commodious; yet still the very house that the squatter had built partly with his own hands in the early days of the colony. He had not been a fortunate man but he had got his head above water since the gold discoveries; and he was not so imprudent as to involve himself again by building a handsome house so long as the old one would do. Mrs. Ballantyne had an overweening opinion of the advantages of English society and English education and received Miss Phillips with an amount of adulation quite beyond anything she had ever met with in her life; which was all the more effective from its being perfectly sincere. Her own children [83] were but half educated and very deficient in acquired manner; and they too looked with awe on Mr. Phillips's English sister who was so self-possessed and so fashionably dressed. To a person less conscious of her own superiority Mrs. Ballantyne's profuse apologies for everything and everybody would have been rather painful; but Harriett received them graciously and told Dr. Grant that she felt quite delighted with this first specimen of bush hospitality and with his Scotch friends.   Dr. Grant on his side was exceedingly proud of his companion and felt quite sure of his success with her; he never had been so agreeable as during this long drive and when they appeared at Wiriwilta on the second day in time for an early tea both travellers were full of spirits and not at all tired. Mr. Phillips was not at home and not expected for some days. Jane was somewhat surprised by the appearance of Miss Phillips under such care but received her politely and kindly.   Dr. Grant had to go home to attend to business [84] but promised to ride across to Wiriwilta as soon as possible to see if Miss Phillips had not suffered any fatigue from the long journey over such rough roads.   It was rather flat at the station for Harriett on the following day. She was disappointed with the house for though it was a great deal better than Mrs. Ballantyne's it was not so large or so convenient as she had expected. She could not take any interest in the many things which the children showed her which they thought so beautiful - their pet animals the few wild flowers they could find at this season of the year their. dear old trees their pretty walks the native boy Jim Mrs. Bennett's baby and the curious windmill that Mr. Tuck had made for them with his clasp knife and some twigs. She could not be troubled with such childish talk; she wanted rational conversation; but when Jane Melville sat beside her and conversed in her own quiet sensible way she felt even that to be unsatisfactory.   A new element had entered into Miss Phillips's [85] life. She was after her fashion in love; and she was restless and dissatisfied without the presence of the beloved object. Dr. Grant was just long enough away to be very welcome when he came; and Jane was a little amused at the manner in which Harriett threw off her languid air of indifference and talked to this (to Jane) most uninteresting Scotchman who was so full of national pride and personal vanity. Jane was very cosmopolitan in her ideas both by nature and by education. Her uncle had always had more pride in being a Briton than a North Briton and never had fired up with indignation at Scotland being included or merged in England. She did not think Scotchmen intrinsically more capable than English; there was a greater diffusion of elementary knowledge in the northern part of the island but she thought that in society Englishmen were more agreeable than Scotch as a general rule because they were more certain of their own position. Scotch and Irish people are apt to be afraid that they are looked down upon and are too often on the look-out for slights [86] to be resented whereas Englishmen who do not know much of continental feelings and habits of thought have a comfortable conviction that the greatest country in the world belongs to them and that nobody can dispute it. Dr. Grant was surprised at Jane's want of nationality and confided to Harriett that he was greatly disappointed in her; and in spite of Harriett's professed regard for Jane she could not help seeing the faults which this keen-sighted observer pointed our.   One day when Dr. Grant and Harriett were in the enjoyment of each other's company and flirting in their own interesting manner and Jane was sitting beside them with the children Mr. Brandon and Edgar made their appearance. Emily and little Harriett met Brandon with acclamations and the little ones rejoiced over him in a very noisy manner too. Jane gave him a hearty welcome for she was really delighted to see his face again but Miss Phillips and Dr. Grant were scarcely so affectionate.   "Well here comes the recreant knight" said [87] Miss Phillips. "What have you got to say for yourself Mr. Brandon?"   "To say for myself! Oh! I have a great deal to say for myself. I have seen a great deal since we parted in London."   "But why have you left your own business and my brother's and gone wool-gathering in South Australia?"   "I have just gone wool-gathering and that must be my excuse. Phillips will admire the sheep I am sure. They have just got home in first-rate condition; easy travelling and plenty of time. But where is Mr. Phillips and Mrs. Phillips?"   "Oh mamma is in Melbourne and we have got a new little brother and his name is to be Vivian after uncle Vivian you know; and papa is out over the runs and will be back on Saturday; and I am sure he will be very glad to see you and Edgar too I dare say" said Emily.   "And where is your sister Miss Melville? Has she come out to Australia with you? Is she quite well?" asked Brandon.   [88] "Quite well" said Harriett; "she is in Melbourne with Mrs. Phillips. We expect them out in a week or two or perhaps as much as three weeks for Mrs. Phillips fancies she cannot stand the journey for some time."   "Alice has not seen Wiriwilta yet" said Emily. "I know she will think it very pretty; Miss Melville likes it very much."   "And you have got quite strong Emily?" said Brandon.   "Quite strong again. I can walk to the water-holes near the grove of young gum-trees and back again without being a hit tired. We have such lovely walks every day with Miss Melville. And do you know Mr. Brandon my dear old Cockey died just after you and Edgar went away to Adelaide; but I have got another - such a beauty - and two such lovely parrots. Jim got them for me. You can't think how glad Harriett and I were to see Jim. And Mrs. Bennett has got another baby and I'm to be godmother and it's to be called Emily; and Mrs. Tuck has got another too ever so fat. [89] We have not seen our own baby brother yet."   "But how does it happen that you did not write to me? I got one letter telling me little Eva was dead and that you were getting better; but next month I did not hear a syllable good or bad from any of you."   "Because we were on board ship by that time before the mail from Australia came in. Papa thought we would be all here sooner than we were - but it was a delightful voyage. We had Mr. Dempster - you know Mr. Dempster - and such a lot of nice Adelaide children. I was so sorry to bid good-bye to Rose; she was my friend all the voyage; and there were some very nice gentlemen too. It was quite as nice a voyage as the last only that Miss Melville made us do lessons all the time; and perhaps after all it was as well that she did."   "I never heard such a chatterbox as you are Emily" said her aunt.   "Did you find the voyage pleasant Miss Phillips?" asked Brandon.   [90] "Oh yes very pleasant indeed."   "I did not think you would condescend to visit our rude latitudes" said Brandon.   "Oh I am really quite enjoying my visit. Stanley was greatly pleased at my proposal to come out for he thought it such an excellent thing for the family. I am only on a visit you know. I cannot say how I should like Victoria for a permanence but I like the novelty for the present."   "And your cousin is in Parliament I hear and likely to distinguish himself Miss Melville" said Brandon. "I hope that you and your sister do not despise us poor colonial people."   "Certainly not" said Jane; "indeed Francis says that he got most of his best ideas from Mr. Sinclair who had been in Canada and the United States and from a conversation between you and Mr. Phillips and Mr. Dempster the first day he dined with us in London. He says nothing sharpens an Englishman up like intercourse with such pushing energetic straightforward people as colonists."   [91] "That is high praise from a British member of Parliament. I owe him something for that. But did you see Peggy before you left?"   "Yes; we went up to bid her good-bye. I think she will not be long in joining us" said Jane.   "Well" said Grant who as well as Harriett felt that Miss Melville was receiving more than her fair share of Brandon's conversation "you have not given at all a satisfactory account of yourself. You have been figuring away in Adelaide I suppose and enjoying yourself and leaving your own affairs and Mr. Phillips's affairs to mind themselves."   "And you have been figuring away in Melbourne Dr. Grant" said Emily - she could not bear any aspersion to be cast on her friend Brandon - "and then you brought Aunt Harriett away; so you leave no one with poor mamma but Alice. I am wearying so to see mamma and the baby boy."   "Suppose you go with me" said Brandon; "for I am going to Melbourne to-morrow to [92] see them and I have some business there besides."   "Oh! that would be delightful. Miss Melville may I go?"   "I think not Emily" said Jane. "Your mamma will be soon here and your papa will be disappointed to find you gone when he comes here. I should not wonder that he will take you with him when he goes himself and that would be better I think."   "Much better" said Miss Phillips. "I wonder that you could think of such a thing as troubling Mr. Brandon to take care of you all that long way."   Emily made rather a pertinent remark as to her aunt showing her the example at which Miss Phillips blushed and Grant looked conscious but delighted. He could not conceive what was taking Brandon to Melbourne immediately on his return from Adelaide; he did not believe his assertion that he had business to attend to there. It was another sign of his being spoiled by his visit to England - it had completely unsettled him.   [93] Now that Brandon had heard that his letter had never reached Elsie and consequently that he had not been treated by her with discourtesy or unkindness he felt relieved; but at the same time a little sorry that all his trouble had been wasted and that it was all to do over again. A few months ago he had lamented that he could not have it out by word of mouth; but now he regretted this letter had not at least broken the ice and inclined her to listen to his suit. However things had come to such a pass that he could not wait an indefinite time; he must go to Melbourne and learn his fate without delay. He left Edgar at Wiriwilta where Emily thought him very much improved and where the boy was exceedingly happy. He took a great fancy to Miss Melville who was very different from the fond anxious women who had brought him up but whose experiences with the Lowries had given her great interest in boys of that age and who knew so much on all subjects that she never failed to win upon them if they were tolerably intelligent and well disposed.     [94] [V.iii] Chapter VI. Mrs. Peck's Progress  All things continued favourable to Mrs. Peck's plans - she met with no disaster by sea in her voyage from Adelaide to Melbourne; the 'Havilah' brought her to her destination in three days and she landed on the familiar shores with a light and hopeful heart. She was not long in discovering where Mrs. Phillips lived which was in East Melbourne; and as no time was to be lost she repaired to the house on the very day on which she landed dressed decently and respectably like the wife of an artisan or perhaps with more of the appearance of a monthly nurse.   The girl who opened the door asked her name [95] when she requested to see Mrs. Phillips and she announced herself not as Mrs. Peck but as Mrs. Mahoney under which name she had taken out her passage and begged to see the missis by herself for a few minutes. Mrs. Phillips was then sitting in an easy-chair in the drawing-room the nurse was engaged with the baby and Elsie busy in Mrs. Phillips's room; so the stranger was introduced to have a quiet interview with her daughter.   "Well Betsy do you not recollect me?" said Mrs. Peck in a subdued but intensely earnest voice whenever the girl was out of hearing. "Have you forgotten your own mother?"   Mrs. Phillips grew deadly pale and was about to scream.   "Hush! Betsy be quiet" said her mother. "I've only come to pay you a friendly visit. I've longed so to see you again all these years and now I heard you was by yourself I thought I must run all risks to get a look at you. Why how handsome you've grown and everything handsome about you too;" and Mrs. Peck [96] gazed with wondering admiration at the beautiful well-dressed queen-like woman whom she had parted with when a mere girl and had never seen since her marriage. "Rings on your fingers and a gold chain round your neck and everything you can wish for. Oh Betsy I made your fortune and you never take a thought for me. I might be dead and buried and you'd never care a straw. I have had a hard life a very hard life - tossed about from place to place and often in want of many things that at my time of life I need to get - and you in such luxury. My pretty girl my beautiful daughter!"   Whatever might have been the resemblance between mother and daughter there were but slight traces of it now. Mrs. Peck might have been beautiful at sixteen but her life had not been so conservative of her charms as Mrs. Phillips's was; besides Mrs. Phillips resembled her father much more than her mother and he had been of a much more lymphatic temperament and was at the same time a remarkably [97] handsome man. Mrs. Peck was not yet sixty but she looked old for her years and more like the grandmother than the mother of Mrs. Phillips whose easy circumstances indulgent husband and indolent self-regarding life with no emotion and little excitement had kept her face free from a single line of care or anxiety. Her mother's face was ploughed up with innumerable lines and her features seemed to work with every varying passion while her expression was hungry eager and wolf-like without showing anything more intellectual than cunning even in its calmest moments.   "Oh!" said Mrs. Phillips "if Stanley was to find you here he would never forgive me."   "Is it your fault that I could not rest till I saw you again? I never thought he'd be so cruel and unreasonable as to blame you for what I'd do."   "But I heard you was in Adelaide and Mr. Phillips says that as long as you stay in Adelaide he will see that you know no want. [98] Oh mother you had better go back to Adelaide!" said Mrs. Phillips.   "Is that my girl as is talking?" said Mrs. Peck disdainfully - "my girl as I loved so dear and was so proud of - that now when I've come all the way from Adelaide and risked all I've got to depend upon just to please my old eyes with the sight of her handsome face and my poor old ears with the sound of her voice would banish me the minute I come! That's a pretty husband you've got - that you're so afeard of him. You deserve that your children should turn against you when they grow up. Oh Betsy how can you talk so cruel?" and the old woman caught her daughter's hand and kissed it with much apparent and no doubt some real feeling. "You're not expecting of him home for a while; let me come and let me go while he is away - my name is Mrs. Mahoney. Say as how I am an old servant of your mother's or an old servant you had at Wiriwilta or the mother of some one you know - call me what you like but let me just have the liberty to come [99] and see you and the baby and then I will go back to Adelaide and Mr. Phillips need never know nothing about it?"   Invention was not one of Mrs. Phillips's talents but her mother revelled in it as I have said before. She delighted to go amongst people who did not know her where she could give out an entirely fictitious history of herself quite new. Even to her intimate acquaintances her narrations were singularly inconsistent. When her interest demanded that she should speak the truth she did so but it was with an effort; when the balance lay the other way she had no hesitation and no scruple.   "I ain't good at these stories mother" said Mrs. Phillips "and I don't just see what good it will do me to get into trouble with Stanley on your account. It is just the one thing he is unreasonable about. When he married me he said he made only one stipulation and that was that I should have nothing to do with you or with Peck and I said I wouldn't."   Mrs. Peck here began to sob and Elsie [100] who was sewing in the next room hearing a little noise and afraid that Mrs. Phillips was not well came in at this moment. Mrs. Phillips was quite at a loss to account for the emotion of her visitor but her mother was equal to the emergency.   "I am sure Mrs. Phillips I cannot say what I feel" said she "but your goodness really overpowers me. To think as the little girl as I knowed when she played with my poor Susan as is now no more should recollect me now she's growed up so beautiful and had such a fine house of her own and should help me in my troubles! It is quite too much for me. But all I want is just a little to start me in a way of business and I'll be sure to pay it back again if I get on - and I have got a good connection a capital connection - your liberality I can never forget;" and Mrs. Peck fumbled with her purse and looked very hard at Elsie. This was the person whom she wished to see even more than her ungrateful daughter from whom she had expected a kinder reception. Elsie looked simple- [101] minded enough - there was no doubt she would be easily dealt with and much better by speech than by letter.   "This is your maid I suppose?"   Mrs. Phillips assented.   Mrs. Peck turned to Elsie and said "I think as how the missis wants some sal volatile; she looks a bit faint - she don't seem to be strong yet."   Elsie fetched the sal volatile and gave Mrs. Phillips a little of it and then returned to her work. She was puzzled at the stranger's speaking of Mrs. Phillips's liberality - for she was not generally liberal - and at her fumbling at her purse as if she had received money for she knew that Mrs. Phillips had left her purse in her bedroom.   "You must let me come and go for the few days I am to stay in Melbourne Betsy" said her mother.   "Oh I'd rather give you money if you need it - at least all I've got."   "I fear I will need money to take me back [102] for I made such an effort to get across but I could not help it. But I won't hurt you Betsy and I may do you good. What sort of girl is it that you've got?"   "Oh a very clever milliner and a handy girl enough. Stanley says he thinks her pretty but I don't see it. He makes a great fuss over both her and her sister but Jane is plain."   "If he says he thinks her pretty I'd not keep her in the house if I was you. I know what men are" said Mrs. Peck.   "I don't think you know what Stanley is" said Mrs. Phillips with some dignity. "I did not like it at first but I ain't frightened now; and besides they are both so badly off it's quite a charity to keep them."   "If she is a milliner I know of a capital situation" said Mrs. Peck.   "Stanley would be in a pretty state if I let her go to a situation of your recommending" said Mrs. Phillips.   "Oh I don't mean to meddle with your affairs; but young people are very unwary. [103] You think as how you're too handsome for your husband to think of looking at another woman; but I know the world better nor that. Howsomever that is neither here nor there. But you know I am risking my annuity from Mr. Phillips by coming here to see you; but I heard in Adelaide that for the first time since you was married I might have the chance of seeing you without making dispeace which is the last thing I would wish to do. So Betsy if you will be reasonable and let me come again as Mrs. Mahoney (an old neighbour in New South Wales) and help me as you say with money to take me away I will be as quiet as a mouse. It is a pleasure to see you and to speak to you. Give me a little needlework and let me sit with your maid and just have a look at you now and then and at the baby. I ain't seen none of your children Betsy. Because you've been so well off and had no cares you shouldn't turn off your mother in that unfeeling way."   [104] "Oh I wish I dare do it. But if Stanley was to come - he may come suddenly. I've sent him a message to hurry home. You can't think what a good kind husband he is to me mother. But he'd be furious if he found you here."   "Oh if he comes home you do not need me to work any longer; and you can give the girl that message; and you can drop me a hint if I happen to be in the house. Even if he was to see me here I know I could find some reason. I am never without an excuse."   Mrs. Phillips was not particularly fond of her mother who had been very harsh and violent-tempered to her in her childish days while she was as fond of her husband as she could be of any one but herself and she knew with what abhorrence he regarded this fierce cunning old woman. She wished Mrs. Peck to be satisfied with this one visit and to come back no more for she feared that Alice and the other servants might suspect something and she had no confidence in her own powers of concealment. But Mrs. Peck had more ammunition in her chest; she again began to sob and showed symptoms of going into violent hysterics and bewailed her own hard lot and the cruelty of her ungrateful daughter so loudly that she was glad to agree to her demands to make her keep quiet for the present.   [105] Mrs. Peck then saw the baby which she admired exceedingly and accepted of some refreshments. Mrs. Phillips got her purse and really gave her some money; and shortly after her mother took leave engaging to come back on the following morning to do some needlework and uttering many blessings on Mrs. Phillips for her kindness and generosity in Alice's hearing. Mrs. Phillips looked greatly relieved when she was out of the house but the apprehension of her return weighed considerably on her mind.     [106] [V.iii] Chapter VII. Business Interrupted By Love  Mrs. Peck appeared on the following day according to promise carrying a little black bag containing scissors yard-measure and a few other implements of needlework all perfectly new; and after a short conversation with Mrs. Phillips and a little refreshment she sat down beside Elsie to ingratiate herself with that young lady. Elsie thought she had never seen any one so ignorant of the work she had set about as Mrs. Mahoney appeared to be. She confessed that she was not skilful and it showed all the more kindness in Mrs. Phillips to give her work when she had had so little practice and did it so badly. She had been accustomed to go out as a nurse [107] she said; but she had got too old for that and could not stand the sitting up of nights; and then she branched off into accounts of dreadful experiences in nursing and deathbeds and awful operations that were enough to make Elsie's hair stand on end. She found fault with Mrs. Phillips's nurse as being too much of the fine lady and told Elsie what she considered to be a nurse's duties which she would like to do if she was only fit for it. Then she threw herself on Elsie's good nature for a little lesson in needlework admired her quickness and taste and skill wished she could do anything half as well and asked her to be good enough to cut out and place her work for her and to lend her patterns and altogether behaved with the most insinuating affability.   Although Elsie Melville looked simple-minded she was by no means wanting in observation and her situation with Mrs. Phillips and her sister-in-law had taught her a wonderful amount of prudence. She thought there was some inconsistency in Mrs. Mahoney's fluent narratives [108] and something very peculiar in her relations with Mrs. Phillips who appeared to be restless and uncomfortable whenever she was in the house. Elsie was however good-natured enough to give her some instruction for which great gratitude was expressed. On the third day of her visits when apparently occupied in learning how to do featherstitch for trimming baby's pinafores Mrs. Peck looked up from her work and asked Elsie if she did not come from ----shire.   "That was my native county" said Elsie.   "Do you know Cross Hall at all?" asked Mrs. Peck.   "I was brought up there" said Elsie.   "I come from that county too" said Mrs. Peck.   "I did not think you had been Scotch" said Elsie.   "I have been in these colonies for thirty-four years and seen but few of my own country folks; but the English say they'd know me to be Scotch by my accent."   "Well perhaps your accent is a little like [109] that of ----shire when I come to think of it; but the turn of your expressions is not Scotch at all" said Elsie. "Thirty-four years is a long time however; I may perhaps get rid of some of my own Scotticisms by that time."   "I knew Hogarth of Cross Hall very well when I was young" said Mrs. Peck. "Do you mean to say you was brought up there?"   "Mr. Hogarth was my uncle" said Elsie.   "Oh you must be a daughter of his sister Mary's; I fancy there was only the one daughter that lived to grow up. But if Cross Hall was your uncle how came you to be in this situation?" said Mrs. Peck with feigned astonishment.   "My sister and I were educated by him; he was exceedingly kind to us as long as he lived."   "But his property did not come to you; - the heir-at-law swallowed up all" said Mrs. Peck with a fierce glare in her eyes that she could not quite subdue. "It is very hard on you."   "We have felt it rather hard" said Elsie; "but still things have been worse for us at one [110] time than they are now. Jane and I can earn our own living and that is the position of most people in the world."   "What would you give now" said Mrs. Peck "if you could get back to Cross Hall and be just as you used to be?"   "I cannot say what I would give" said Elsie. "But it is impossible. Unless we could restore my poor uncle to life things could never be again as they used to be."   "And the new man might have helped you and not have driven you to seek service at the ends of the earth. Would you not like to serve him out?" said Mrs. Peck with the same subdued fierceness as before.   Elsie's instinctive sincerity would have led her to justify Francis by explaining about the will but she felt reluctant to say anything to this strange woman that she could help. Besides though she knew nothing of the letter that had been sent by Mrs. Peck to her cousin and left unanswered at Mr. Phillips's earnest request she was beginning to suspect something of the truth. [111] Mrs. Peck's courting her so assiduously had puzzled her; and now the interest she felt in this story which was all the more apparent to a keen observer from the efforts she made to conceal it showed that she knew more about the matter than she liked at once to disclose.   Elsie had a good eye for likenesses and could see family resemblances where no one else could; and it had always struck her as very remarkable that there was not the slightest resemblance between Francis and her uncle nor between him and any other member of the family whom she had seen or whose portraits had been preserved. Not merely were the features and complexion unlike but there was not a trick of the countenance or of the gait reproduced as is generally the case with the sons of fathers who had such marked characteristics as Henry Hogarth. Though she had not heard of Mrs. Peck's letter Jane had told her about Madame de Véricourt's to her uncle and in her own heart she had fancied that the reason why he had been so cold to Francis was that he had been doubtful of the [112] paternity; the very indifferent character of the woman he had married was not calculated to inspire him with confidence and the absolute absence of all family likeness was an additional cause of distrust. He must have been satisfied on that point however in later years or he would not have been so strong in his prohibition of his marriage with Jane or Elsie on account of his cousinship; but in early life he must in Elsie's opinion have had grave doubts on the subject.   She looked again more careful than before at Mrs. Peck. She was of the age to be Francis's mother but otherwise she was quite at fault; there was not any likeness there either. A conformation of the little finger was rather peculiar but it was an exaggeration of a little defect on Mrs. Phillips's otherwise very handsome hand but not of Francis Hogarth's.   "If Francis has no right to the property and we have of course we should like to have our rights" said Elsie.   "It was a Scotch marriage you know" said Mrs. Peck.   [113] "Yes but a binding one; he is received everywhere as my uncle's lawful son."   "Yes as his lawful son no doubt. Do you know if he has brought forward his mother at all?" said Mrs. Peck.   "No; I suppose she is dead or we should certainly have heard of her."   "Dead you suppose!" said Mrs. Peck indignantly; "that is the easy way of getting quit of relations that has got claims on you - just Suppose them dead?"   "I do not know anything of the matter except that she has not been heard of. If she were alive and heard of his inheriting this property she would be sure to write claiming him and probably asking for assistance which I have no doubt she would at once receive for he has ample means and has the character of being both just and liberal."   "And you think she would apply; and you have no doubt that she ought to have got it? Any one would have thought that" said Mrs. Peck between her set teeth.   [114] "Yes certainly" said Elsie; "but perhaps she did not go the right way to work?"   "She did" said Mrs. Peck indignantly. "I knowed her well and heard all about it."   This was to throw Elsie off her guard for she did not wish to be identified at once; but it had not the effect desired for Elsie felt convinced that this was the person who claimed to be Francis's mother.   Mrs. Phillips came in at this interesting poise in the conversation and began to give Elsie directions as to some alterations in a dress.   "There's some buttons and trimmings to get to make it up with. Alice you had better go to town and get them for me. You need a walk at any rate; I do not think you've had your walk at all regularly of late" said Mrs. Phillips.   Mamba  Canto I  I.  The day declined the sun had set  For orb and ocean more than met;  And forth from boughs that heav'nward sprang  Grotesque and mocking laughter rang.  Grim scaur and scalp and mountain side  To laughing hill and vale replied;  The distant wood that fring'd the plain  With fainter echoes laughed again;  And cool night-breeze that stirred the reeds  And all the dancing water-weeds  Bore softer sounds; and on the tide  The giant halcyon's laughter died.  II.  This night twelve moons had passed away  Seven times since 'neath the parting ray  That kissed the murmuring river's breast  Young Mamba's mother found her rest.  She died but dying left a life  In pledge for her's amid the strife  [2] That closes days and opens years  With all their future hopes and fears.  But Mamba's father ne'er was known  And no man claimed him for his own.  Seven summer suns had clothed his head  With darkly clustering curls that shed  A softness o'er the beaming face  That bore of pride an early trace.  Young Borote who for these short years  Had kept the pledge that came in tears  Nursed with a mourning mother's care  The offspring of another fair  And saw in every grace it wore  The semblance of one lost before;  And thus the childless found a child  A mother on the orphan smiled  And buried babe and mother fond  Faded in mist the world beyond.  Thus ever may the ending be  When our last sun sets gloomily  And some yet brighter image spring  From out our dust that bard may sing  Whose deeds shall fire the group around  As ears entranced drink in the sound.  *  *  * * *  III.  Her warmest robe became his nest  He slept upon her heaving breast  Or lay beside the little fire  Nor never dreamt he lacked a sire.  'Twas thus at eve and so at night  When flames made dark young eyes grow bright;  And when at dawn she rose in bliss  To wake him with a fondling kiss -   Oh! who could paint the tender joy  Of Borote as she clasp'd the boy  [3] Impetuous pressing 'gainst her breast  At once caressing and caress'd?  She gazed into his eyes and there  Two Borotes bright a mirror'd pair  Smiled from each dark delicious well  O'er which the silken eyelash fell -   Two pictured loves in love enshrined  Before the portal of the mind.  IV.  She bore him to the river banks  Where 'mid the rushes swaying ranks  Lay Nerinella's long canoe  Floating impearl'd with glist'ning dew;  And where the weed of green and red  It's floating carpet gaily spread  Whereon the emerald frog reclined  Fanned by the fragrance of the wind;  And all was darkened by the shade  The water-weeping branches made  Save where a paler tend'rer green  Made bright the beauty of the scene.  The morn was gay ere yet the sun  His heav'nward journey had begun;  And flow'rs their spicy odours shed  From drooping branches over-head  Whilst those around his tender feet  Smiled upward from their grassy seat.  The birds flashed down to drink or lave  With varied note and joyous stave  And plunging sidelong from the reeds.  That waver'd 'mid the water-weeds  Plashed in the stream so cool and calm  O'erhung by many a fern-tree palm;  And bell-bird peals whose silvery chimes  Found in the rippled water rhymes  [4] Throughout the perfumed thicket rang  Whence the tall-headed bulrush sprang.  The waking river's dimpled face  Bore on its waning smile the trace  Where bird had kissed the brimming tide  That tiptoe with its lip replied.  She paused. Her robe she cast aside  And stood in all her naked pride  With youthful limbs and queenly grace  And more a girl's than woman's face.  The glorious braids of raven black  That rippled down her hollow back -   The planted foot - the bosom large  That heaved and fell like river marge -   And all her fair proportions round  Some sisters in the water found:  'Twas thus she seem'd 'twas thus she stood  In all her beauty by the flood.  *  *  * * *  V.  Taking young Mamba by the hand  She led him to a pebbly strand;  And raising up with gentle might  The boy who danced with wild delight  She flung him flying from the brink  And watched the wayward urchin sink.  The waters closed - the circles flew  With widening stretch the shore to woo  And foam and bursting bells of light  Rose from the depths with bubbles bright  And soon the reappearing head  Sprang up and little palms outspread;  Then flinging wide her rounded arms  She vouchsafed all her bosom's charms  And tossing back the raven hair  That hid her shapely temples fair  [5] Allured the gently-swimming boy  Who cleaved the wave with cries of joy.  VI.  The boy with mischief-loving eye  Gained the firm ground and stood breast-high  Where the white pebbles gleamed and danced  By murmuring water-music tranced.  He stooped to lift the lily fair  And wreathe with stolen flowers the hair  That curled about his dripping brow  Like ripples shot from rushing prow  As Nerinella northwards flew  On fishing bent with light canoe.  The boy splashed on with quick'ning pace  The pearl-drops raining down his face  Bright o'er his breast they trickling sped  From sidelong-shaken dripping head;  And many a patch of bubbling foam  Marked yet another step towards home.  VII.  Borote the gentle one - the fair -   Stood in her brightness waiting there;  Beguiled the boy beside the brink -   Not far from whence she saw him sink -   One foot advanced the river kissed  Whilst she took Mamba by the wrist  And all the tide that met the green  Like Mamba seemed to own a queen.  She laid her in the feathery shade  That 'neath a dark mimosa played  And clasp'd the child still feigning coy  With all a second mother's joy.  There on the green turf starr'd with flowers  Where branches rained their golden showers  [6] They lay in joy with brows unbent  In one sweet dark confusion blent.  She rose and high the radiant-faced  Upon her rounded shoulder placed;  And took the path embower'd with bloom  Whose matted masses 'mid the broom  Stared out and mocked the burning skies  With azure and cerulean dyes;  The path - by maiden footsteps worn  In water quest at early morn -   Whose arching canopy of green  Shivered with ever-changing sheen -   Whose every twig and tiny tree  Seemed vocal with bird melody.  Thus through the perfumed air they pass'd  And reached their happy bower at last.  VIII.  Young Mamba with the early day  Arose and joined his peers at play;  In wandering through the sighing wood  Or fording streamlets' mimic flood.  The robin like a living coal  Fired the young sportsman in his soul  And soon by well-directed blow  His missile laid the scarlet low.  He tried his easy aim again  An azure warbler kissed the plain;  Nor spared he sitting on a spray  The laughing usher of the day.  The wood the plain the river side  The pebbly treasures of the tide -   All all were ransacked by the boy  Who brought his motley hoard with joy  Back to the beauteous Borote's feet  His young companions following fleet.  [7] He spread before her amber gum  A bounteous store but lately come  From dark mimosa's wounded side  That bleeding poured a golden tide;  The robin red the warbler blue  With wings and back of sable hue  And bird that laughed his last "good day"  From white and nodding leafless spray;  A nest of withered twisted grass  And hair and twigs - one felted mass  With moss and fibres intertwined  And red and yellow feathers lined;  The beetle's mail of brilliant sheen  One glorious blaze of gold and green  He placed 'mid speckled eggs of blue  Of russet brown and crimson hue  That nestled 'mid the whiter ones  Like pebbles where the current runs  Silent and still - together pressed  Beneath the brooding water's breast.  IX.  And Mamba ever would beguile  The time with mirth-provoking smile  And tale that brought to Borote bliss.  One I remember; it was this:-  Two birds were fighting furiously  A bird looked down and laughed to see.  I threw but missed the fighting pair;  Then he looked down and laughed at me.  For this I took a steadier aim  And hurled in stick at higher game.  He wildly laughed and quivering fell -   'Twas his last laugh - I laughed as well."  Short were the tales and soft the clime -   The summer in its early prime;  [8] So passed the days so fled the hours  Amid the wealth of birds and flowers.  But Mamba could not always be  A child among the children. He -   Fired with the stories of the chase  That lent new brightness to his face -   Resolved Nernepten-like to stand  A hero-hunter 'mid the band.  X.  Nernepten was a warrior bold  Though grey of head yet scarcely old  Who bore from all the palm away  In fishing chase in fight or fray.  He lived apart - a silent man  A worker - wonder of the clan;  And brave must that bold spirit be  That dared to keep him company.  The old he loved - his ready spear  Oft furnish'd forth their festive cheer;  But for the well-grown stalwart ones  He looked on these as younger sons  And bade them exercise in chase  By his example in the race.  From blatant youth he turned away  Finding but folly in their say;  But take to him the bright-eyed child  You found him as a woman mild.  There were no scions of his stock;  He stood alone - a towering rock  O'ershadowing with his mightiness  The weak ones in life's wilderness.  XI.  Nernepten naked to the waist  Sate 'mid the wood himself had placed  [9] That angled portion soon to be  A wangiem whirling rapidly.  Stripped of its bark the ruddy pride  Blushed deeply through the wounded side  And painted with prophetic might  Blood to be spilt in future fight.  The long leangle's nascent form  Forespoke the distant battle-storm;  And club and malka's embryo shape  Seem'd longing for red wounds to gape.  The lance of wood the spear of reed  Stood symbols there of warlike deed.  Ah! well said Uimba sage of old  That each tall tree its story told.  The myrtle green to wild korang   Its bloody fate prophetic sang;  And wind-shook tchyrels as they moaned  The hunted emeu's end intoned.  And so the wangiem-yielding tree   That sighs at sunset mournfully  Sings to the wind - whose latest breath  Stirs its lank leaves - the song of death;  And vows the vengeance man must wreak  Where sounds the wangiem's battle-shriek.  *  *  * * *  XII.  The boy delighted marked the man  At work; and as he still began  Another and another task  Drew nearer yet as if to ask  [10] Some question with inquiring eye  That watched the worker curiously.  Nernepten bade the boy advance  Whilst he was fashioning a lance  And showed him how the crooked wood  Became the straightest shaft that stood  When bent on turf o'erheaped with coals  That slacked the fibres' rebel souls;  Taught him to hew the wangiem long  And sing the wangiem-maker's song;  To mould the malka or the mace  Arm and defence for danger's place.  In short his brain the man imbued  Well with this maiden lesson rude.  XIII.  Mamba returned each day to view  The axe that fell the wood that flew  The fragrant curls and splinters red  The green-stone mogo round it shed.  His wonder wild would never flag  Searching the magic mocre-bag -   The bunch of brown-barked willoo pins  That stretched the quaintly-figured skins -   The ball of blended gum and clay -   The roll of sinew-thread that lay  Next to the ochred forehead-band  Wrought of the slend'rest sinew-strand  'Mid flinty fragments from the ford  The busy workman's varied hoard;  The bath at dawn the chase at noon  By night the dance beneath the moon  [11] The feast around the blazing fires  Behind the snowy-beaded sires  And then the ballad or the tale  Tow'rds morn until the stars grew pale  And Borote watched with fearful joy  The man-like bearing of the boy.  *  *  * * *  XIV.  He came one evening from the chase  With joy upon his wearied face  And threw in silence on the ground  A korang never more to bound.  Borote with all a mother's pride  Sprang to the victor-hunter's side  Admired the spoil and praised the spear  And paused the hunting-tale to hear.  His maiden prize - his first success  Both brought the boy some blessedness;  And bright as sun that cleaves the cloud  The saddened mother still looked proud.  Too well she saw the sand nigh run  The foster-mother's duty done  The coming day the missing face  The fireside with an empty place;  Herself again without a mate  Her bower - her bosom - desolate.  She clasped the boy until her breast  Yielding received the head she press'd.  *  *  * * *  XV.  Mamba! Thou learn'st these ways too fast  The man arrives ere youth is past;  And thou - too soon - must take thy place  Among the elders of the race.  [12] I bore thee not - but oh forgive  The heart that asks thee still to live  A while beside the little fire  That warmed 'the son without a sire'  For years whilst thou without a peer  Hast reigned in this fond bosom here.  I bore thee not. Thy mother fled  That thou might'st live - she sought the dead;  And I had lost (methought) my life  When little Tono ended strife  And turned upon his leafy bed  Whereon I deemed my hopes lay dead.  XVI.  "No sire had I - my husband lost -   My only bud the cruel frost  Nipp'd ere it bloomed a beauteous flower -   Vain was the mother's tear-drop shower.  I thought ('twas ere these lids were dry)  That life was learning but to die;  And then thy mother's hope ('twas said)  Hung by a tiny treacherous thread.  Alas! she went - and I in grief  Sought by her corpse the strange relief  That woe to woe vouchsafes alway  By night and hope with dawning day:  'Twas then I first beheld in thee  A Tono sent mysteriously.  'Tis wrong that we aloud should name  The lost when life's extinguished flame  No longer warms the curdled red  That chokes the pulse's silent bed.  I chose a flower - the first I found  Upon the green and blessed ground  [13] Where new-born Mamba sighed and smiled  And Borote gained a second child.  'Tis thine for life; it bloomed for thee  It smiled thy welcome pensively.  Long may it glad the much-loved plain  And speak thy birth for years again.  And aye where'er I build my bower  Joy to greet the Mamba flower."  XVII.  Mamba replied with speaking eye  That beamed with love despairingly.  It told her more than tongue could tell -   How Mamba tho' he loved her well  Had cast his lot among the bold  That ruled the tribe since times of old.  She sighed and said - "My life my joy  My cherished too-ambitious boy -   The wise men soon shall call thee hence  Despite a mother's eloquence.  But thou from her hast nought to fear -   From her no sigh no falling tear  Shall come to mar the fatal plan  That makes her Mamba yet a man."  Then Mamba softening as he spoke  Whispered the fearful Ghimbo-boke;   But Borote smiling shook her head  And her voice shook as thus she said -   "Ne'er ask of me - I know it not  What mystery marks the manly rite;  The hour the day the secret spot  The words of wisdom or of might.  But this is mine - I know it well -   Our fathers all have passed the same;  [14] The secret man may never tell  Till youth assumes the manly name.  And thou art brave and bold as they  Who faced the doubtful rite before  And rose amid the sages grey  A man among the men of yore.  But this is why I chiefly grieve:  To think a mother's care is o'er;  A mother's words can ne'er deceive -   Thou ne'er shalt own a mother more."  XVIII.  The tale went round the gibe and song  Amid the young the tall the strong;  And many a bright and merry eye  Flashed with a pent-up mystery.  At length young Pahmeel laughed aloud.  And Ninghim too until he bowed  Across the broken spear he mended  That shook until his laughter ended  And long deep-drawn escaping sighs  Relieved the breast and filled the eyes.  "Ninghim!" he faltered - (and he laughed  To Pahmeel who had only quaffed  One mouthful from his calabash   And set it down lest drinking rash  Should choke him as he rocked in glee  With hands upon his up-drawn knee) -   "They say young Mamba's found a sire.  (Beware!) The water's in the fire!  This crystal seems bewitched I think  And laughs at him who fain would drink."  "A sire indeed!" quoth Burtalcaang  Belov'd as story-tellers sang  [15] Of old when boys forsooth had rather  Lose aught in life except a father;  "But what's a sire to him or thee  That loves to rove the forest free?  His mother - she is not his own  His father like the summer's flown;  Say who shall lift the Borote-yoke  And lead him to the Ghim-boboke?  A father and a comrade too  A choice let's hope he'll never rue."  XIX.  To him Pahmeel a merry wight  Whose large dark eyes were wild and bright -   "Borote supplies his mother's place;  Nernepten takes him to the chase -   Teaches him weapon-maker's art  The warrior's and the hunter's part;  To wield the malka stalk the game  And burn the cover out with flame.  Methinks there's more in this than we  In all our wisdom seem to see;  Except myself and Ninghim wild  That deem the boy Nernepten's child."  A laugh went round - "And Mamba's mother!"  Cried Bangan. "Yes! he had another;  But even Borote vows that she  Ne'er pierced that father mystery.  Borote's a foster-mother only -   A woman by herself and lonely  But for the boy that shares her bower;  The name-son of a silly flower.  And brave Nernepten - for he's brave -   Would sooner hide in mountain cave  Than where the clack of woman's tongue  Thro' all the forest mazes rung.  [16] If he did wed we knew it not  Nor in what wild secluded spot  He kept the wife he woo'd or stole -   The solace of his secret soul."  XX.  "Shame on you all!" a voice exclaimed  "Shame!" flashed a pair of eyes that flamed  And grey Terillin turned his beard  Tow'rds the wild group whose tongues were feared  But most of all by youths and maids  That sighed o'er eyes or glossy braids;  Or chanted love-lays to the morn  In murmurs as the day was born.  "Nernepten's brave - 'tis truly said  And brave Nernepten wears a head  Where one a water-drinker rash  Wears nothing but a calabash."  With this he glanced at young Pahmeel  From heel to head from head to heel;  And looked the cowering stripling down  With snowy shaggy eyebrows' frown.  "You Ninghim too - and Bangan bold  Sly and deceitful yet not old;  And Burtalcaang - that wear no yoke  Yet never knew the Ghim-boboke -   Shame on ye all! Ye cannot see  A woman succour misery -   A childless man take up a child  And train its aspirations wild -   But ye must turn and twist the tale  To laughter's ends with words that rail.  Mark me again ye talkers rash:  If aught can one of you abash  It should be this - an old man's word.  That else for long had been deferred  [17] To future time and wilder scene -   The night of Ghim-boboke Yapeen."   XXI.  Nernepten never raised his head  But hewed amain the wangiem red;  Nor turned with eagle eye askance  Upon the group an angry glance.  Borote heard frequent tales that flew  Around the camp: each breeze that blew  Bore in its murmur many a gibe  Against the sireless of the tribe.  But Borote listening only smiled  And loved the more the changeling child  That heaven conferred when she to earth  Consigned the infant of her birth.  XXII.  Borote with heavy heart and sad  Traversed the wood where birdlings glad  Mocked with their wildest warbling song  Her thoughts of woe - her dream of wrong.  The day had come the morn had broke  That ushered in the "Ghim-boboke."  From woman's eye that rite is bid  To woman is the thought forbid  To pierce the cloud that veils the light  Of manhood merging into might.  Alas! 'Tis sad to grieve alone -   To know one's chiefest joy is flown;  But doubly sad to see the sun  Of woe's first day but just begun  Smile on the face bedewed with tears  And laughing dart a ray that sears  [18] The heart that aches in deep'ning sorrow  Expectant of a dark to-morrow.  XXIII.  Mamba remote and silent sate  Secluded like the youths who wait  The bidding of the tribal sires  To join them by the myst'ry fires  Not ours the wisdom nor the light  To shadow forth that solemn rite;  Nor what the word nor what the way  That moulds a man from boyish clay.  *  *  * * *  XXIV.  Let it suffice - the rite was o'er;  They led him to the river shore  Whose grassy curves wound in and out  Between the tree-trunks tall and stout.  Headlong he plunged came out again  Shook from his locks the river rain  And stood between his guard and guide  A new-made man in all his pride  Flowers on his brow a golden wreath  They placed: his bright eyes beamed beneath;  And thus with nodding blossoms crowned  They homewards led the "newly-found."  XXV.  Terillin rose - the grave the grey -   And met the comers on their way;  Advancing took the crown'd one's hand  And led him tow'rds the snow-capped band  "Fathers!" he cried "I bring with me  One pass'd the ancient mystery  That ye and I and all the old  Have known but ne'er to stranger told.  [19] He comes a man amongst our men -   Heaven send us such a one again!  What though no father's name he bears  Nor badge of father's bravery wears  Shall he be less among his peers  Because as yet unfleshed his spears?  Did Burtalcaang who bears no yoke  E'er face the dreaded Ghim-boboke?  Or Pahmeel whose wild laughter rings  Through all the camp e'er trim the wings  Of flying foes that fell before  His spear-shaft stained with traitor's gore?  Ninghim or Bangan can they say  Mamba's without a sire to-day?  His sire behold! Am I not he -   His father in the mystery?  XXVI.  Nameless should be the silent dead   (And here Terillin bowed his head);  But though all nameless in the dust  To nameless memory be just.  His father was the gallant son  Whom glory from affection won.  When waking once from dreams of joy  They told me I had lost my boy  Red was my spear and red my hand -   I raised the camp with fiery brand;  But all the blood was spilt in vain  I could not bring him back again.  Childless for long I see my son  His life as 'twere again begun.  But I am old unnerved and grey  And half my strength is snatched away.  [20] Thus to Nernepten I bequeath  The boy who wears the golden wreath.  Behold in me thy sires proud sire;  Embrace me boy! join fire to fire."  This to young Mamba as he flew  Into the arms of grandsire true.  Pahmeel and Ninghim hung the head;  The history round the camp-fire spread  And Bangan bold and Burtalcaang  Each felt of burning shame the pang.  XXVII.  "'Twas glorious - yes! but was it well  (Cried Taalar) of the dead to tell?  To raise again from where it rests  The secret buried in our breasts -   The woe felt when our hero slain  Victorious fell on Ryndia's plain?  Oh! Death may chance to be forespoke  E'en at our solemn Ghim-boboke.  And though methink a brave grandsire  Sits next him by the mystery fire;  And though his sire at last is known -   Albeit his burning soul is flown -   Mamba may never live to mourn  Terillin from his children torn."  This hoarsely whispered by Taalar  All silent else both near and far;  And Mamba 'mid the elders placed  Sate while his face with lines they traced.  XXVIII.  The day had fled the moon arose  Night straight began with evening's close -   A night whose calm and silvery sheen  Befitted well the wild yapeen.  [21] Within the circle of the camp  Blazed the clear fire while measured tramp  Of dancing warriors shook the ground  To song and time-sticks' throbbing sound.  There twice two hundred feet advanced  There twice a hundred malkas glanced  Bright in the moon that silvered o'er  The arms that all those malkas bore.  Wild the device and strange the sign  That stared in many a snowy line  From beaming face and heaving breast  And limbs that seldom paused to rest;  Whilst all the rib-like lines laid on  Made each man seem a skeleton.  Nodded the feathers from the red  And netted band that bound each head  And hoarsely rustling leaves of trees  Shook round dark ankles in the breeze.  The singers with their time-sticks rang  The cadence of the song they sang;  And every face and limb below  And tree above them caught the glow  That spread from camp-fire's rising blaze  Lighting the yapeen's wond'rous maze  Of feet and ankles in the dance  With fitful gleam or twinkling glance.  XXIX.  Conspicuous 'mid the dancing crowd  Whose ranks alternate swayed and bowed  Shone Mamba tricked with wild design  And symbol traced in waving line.  No limbs more active wore the green  At yon great Ghim-boboke yapeen;  And no two arms more graceful there  In circling motion cleft the air  [22] Than his - and his the eagle-eye  Inspiring all the minstrelsy.  The young and old in groups around  Drank in the sight the joy the sound;  And Mamba's form throughout the dance  Attracted every wondering glance.  Borote! She viewed him and she wept -   Proud of her son; and then she crept  Alone into the darkness wild  And there bewailed her sundered child.  Out far beyond the camp leant she  Her aching head against a tree;  The fires behind her brightly burned  The turf the dancers lightly spurned;  And thro' the forest laughter rang  As all the sitting matrons sang  To "time-stick" cadence by the fire  The joy of him "that lacked a sire."  "Ah me!" groaned Borote "is it well  That I should live the tale to tell  Of love bestowed and love returned  Love lost again or all unlearned?  That I - the only joy he knew -   False to myself to him still true  Should here alone with salt tears flow  Weep o'er his joy and call it woe?"  She sobbed; the tears ran down apace -   Blent in each other on her face  Like sorrows such as seldom come  Alone - but join and make the sum  Of one vast melting burning grief  That ever brings its own relief  She wept and found her heart's distress  Worthless and worse than nothingness;  Reproached herself and yet she sighed  As her sweet streaming face she dried;  [23] And passing to her bower alone  With dragging foot and fitful moan  Paused sadly by the ashes there  For the dark hearth was cold and bare;  Then laid her down all lost in woe.  Her lullaby the river's flow.  Grief brought it's balm - now past the worst  And all the river-murmurs nurst  Her soul to sleep nor sent a dream  Nor yet of joy nor hope a gleam.  *  *  * * *  Suns set and many a changing moon  Shone on the sad one all too soon;  Tho' Mamba still increased in grace  Whilst the bright radiance of his face  Was foremost theme with young and old -   His port the envy of the bold;  A mighty stalwart hunter he  Fit hero for camp minstrelsy.  XXX.  The bright-eyed Mamba on the trail  Followed his quarry 'gainst the gale;  Outstripped in flight the swift korang  His dogs with late ensanguined fang;  And every breeze that eastward blew  Bore on its wings the boy's halloo  As crying eager to his hounds  The hills sent back the cheery sounds;  The shout the barking chorus rang  Till all the grim grey forest sang  And rustling leaves and boughs that bent  Joined in the airy merriment.  The youth was not unseen. His track  For miles for leagues behind his back  [24] Hard followed by an anxious few  Gave hopes of victim soon in view.  Mamba with hunter's practised ear  Caught the first sounds as man drew near  And standing motionless and still  He silent scanned the glade and hill  Revolving in his mind what chance  Might next require his spear or lance.  XXXI.  Scarce out of sight with heads to wind  With listening ears to turf inclined  There crouched a mute and murderous band  That Mamba's swift destruction plann'd.  They rose by turns on hands and knees  Peered through the brushwood and the trees  Saw the tall plume on Mamba's head  But heard no more his springy tread;  For Mamba warned by air-borne sound  And pointed ear of whining hound  Stood like a statue black as night  Relieved against a flood of light.  The broad sun smiled on bad and good  On swift pursuer and pursued;  One golden gleam the follower caught  The followed seeker and the sought.  *  *  * * *  XXXII.  Sudden before young Mamba stood  With green branch riven from the wood  A figure tall athletic dark  All knotted sinewy stout and stark -   Advancing waved the peaceful green  That emblem'd friendship might be seen  But Mamba still uncertain gazed  Upon the flutt'ring symbol raised  [25] Yet dropped his stout death-dealing spear  As scorning to acknowledge fear.  The foe (for foe it was) drew nigh  With strangely wild uncertain eye;  Him followed - crawling on the ground  Like snakes and with as little sound -   The other ruffians - Wamthalar  And Yal-yal Yarat Mambanar.  Each in his crookt foot-fingers brought  A something for the life he sought:  One trailed a black and long-barb'd spear  With all a murderer's covert fear;  And one a club a nerum-noose   That o'er the arm hung long and loose.  With noiseless foot and curving frame  One onwards then another came.  Neuarpur - Apsley  Victoria  19th February 1867   My dear Miss Lewin   On arriving at Melbourne I sent you an Argus containing an account of the voyage made by the Swiftside which was a very pleasant & favourable one though a little longer than was expected being exactly 12 weeks. I hope you received the Argus else you will think it very strange never having heard anything of me. We only remained in Melbourne from Friday to Tuesday. My brother was there waiting for me. On Christmas Day we began our journey up the Country - went by rail to Ballarat. There Mr Hines' brother-in-law met us we made all one party & were 12 in number. We drove up about 260 miles - used to start very early in the morning rest in the heat of the day & make another start in the evening - the weather was very hot more so than has been felt for the last 4 years. We had all kinds of adventures in the shape of kicking horses & broken poles but we reached Benyeo (the residence of Mr McLeod - brother-in-law to Mr Hines) on the following Sunday. [191] [192]  It is 14 miles distant from this place - Mrs Hines & I were over here for a day or two - made all right for the children to come - but when we returned to Benyeo for them Mrs Hines took measles & from that day which was not a week after we reached Benyeo up to the present there has been nothing but sickness. Just as Mrs H. was over the worst of measles the eldest girl was taken ill the day after her 12th birthday. She was affected very strangely & tho' a Doctor was sent for at once it was 48 hours before one arrived. Then Bessie was dangerously ill with inflammation of the lungs - about 10 days after she was first attacked measles came out on her slightly - the Doctors (for now there were two) thought she might now get better but her strength was all gone & she gradually sank & died at Benyeo last Saturday exactly the day month of her birthday when she appeared in her usual health.  Her death has cast a great gloom on everything. She was a gentle companionable intellectual child liked by everyone who knew her - the second girl misses her sadly - Bessie was laid beside a brother in a small burying place adjoining the garden on Sunday & on Monday we all came over here for good - Every one at Benyeo who had not had measles before had them during the six weeks we were there - 15 cases in all. Fortunately I had had them & was able to look after some of the invalids.  I like the people I have met in Australia much better than I like what I have yet seen of the country but it is too soon to judge - I have experienced nothing but kindness from Mr & Mrs H. all through but particularly lately. We have done nothing yet with lessons - they brought out a beautiful piano the only thing poor Mrs Hines now cares about - she idolized her eldest child. As soon as I receive any money I will remit it to you. Please give my kind compliments to Miss Rye  hoping she & you are well I remain dear Miss Lewin Very truly yours  L. Geoghegan  Neuarpur - Apsley  Victoria  18th October 1867  My dear Miss Lewin  I am very glad I came to Australia but I cannot say I like it very much. It is such an out of the world place and so monotonous but as far as kind treatment goes I could not meet with nor desire kinder - with no one in this neighbourhood have I seen the social distinctions made with Governesses that there is at home - I have very little work here in comparison with London - I do not think £80 per annum here as much as £60 at home dress is very expensive and the people are dressy - You will be glad to hear that my pupil has made great progress in all her studies but particularly in music which pleases Mrs Hines very much. They brought out a very nice piano. [193]  In fact 'Bush life' is a strange mixture of roughing and refinement. In this district are two distinct sets one gentry and one would-be gentry - there are more of the latter. In the former I think an unfinished unladylike Governess would be unwelcome. Literature is much more brought forward here in the general way than at home because there are no new daily topics - the standing one is sheep - in which ladies take no part - of course.  Accept my kind regards  and believe me truly yours  Louisa Agnes Geoghegan  DE QUINCEY'S style is I think the most organically the most essentially metaphoric in any literature. I mean metaphorical in a deep and broad sense reaching to the innermost machinery by which all thinking processes are carried on and to every verbal revelation made of the results. Metaphor not always immediately perceptible delicately defined at times as the serrations in the moonlight shadows of a leaf pervades the Opium Eater's style with the ubiquity of an electric principle. De Quincey not only thinks but expresses himself in and by things. To use a word he himself once applied to Burke he is the most schematising of prose writers.   I think Heinrich Heine of whom you speak so unkindly Olga had not only wit humour and intellectual power of rare order but far more of the poetic faculty than all the later German poets Uhland Freiligrath Schwab et ces garçons là put together. Can you a woman and an accomplished Teutonic scholar forget all the love-lays fresh and delicate as the pearls fashioned on the leaves of that myrtle by the shower which has just passed away into the dim purple depths stretching within the arch of yonder rainbow - brief but wild and sweet as the call of a bird in summer from the green vestibule of the woods - to be found in the Buch der Lieder particularly in the Lyrische Intermezzo Du bliebest mir treu am längsten Wenn ich in deine augen seh Die lotosblume ängstigt and scores of others? His satire had the subtle edge and the nimble strength of flame. There was somewhat of Thackeray's man-of-the-world sense and judgment about him but it flowed through an artistic temperament as beautiful and as fantastic as the scenery of a midsummer night's dream. Then Olga his criticism "into the sap of his subject" in a few sentences.   I met these critical passages only yesterday; the translation is not mine but that of a Mr. John Stous Smith an accomplished man who took it into his head some time ago to write a book in Carlylese called "Mirabeau : A Life History":- "The rose-tint in the poems of Novalis is not the hue of health but [166] the hectic of consumption; and the purple glow of Hoffman's phantasies is not the fire of genius but the flame of fever." And here is Heine piercing into the central idea of Cervantes in "Don Quixote" with the same subtlety and the same result as Coleridge:- "Has he in his tall lean knight represented Ideal Spirituality and in the squat esquire parodied Common Sense? Everywhere the latter cuts the more sorry figure; for Common Sense with all its horde of thrifty proverbs after all quietly fags along on its steady-going donkey in the rear of Spirituality; in spite of its clearer sight must it and the ass share all the mishaps that so often befell the noble knight. Yes Idea Spirituality is of such a potent dynamic nature that Common Sense with all its asses must ever follow in its wake." And the Reisebilder the finest perhaps of his prose writings is full of profound observation and beauty the style everywhere of as finished grace as the group on a Roman cameo. It is often alive with a humour that has that terrible motif of cynical pathos about it which trickles through Hamlet's talk to the skull of Yorick.   Some of the best prose descriptions of forest scenery in our literature are poor Charles Reece Pemberton's sketches of Sherwood. Ladies draw woodland effects beautifully. There are delicious glimpses of landscape in the "Francesca Carrara" of poor Letitia Landon ("L. E. L.'s" prose had a hundred times over finer imaginative beauty than her poems); in Mrs. Howitt's prose fictions; and if I recollect rightly in Lady Fullerton's "Grantly Manor." But irrespective of the results of exquisite observation there is in Pemberton's vigorous descriptions the moral element. You have the wild abounding sense of freedom and of joy of a great athletic spirit who loved nature as the child its mother (always kind when everything else was cold) let loose in the woods among the silvery lady-birches and the cool brown onyx lustre of the shadowed streams and the aroma of the heather. Once in among the patriarchal trees to quote his own words "in twenty steps the world is quite shut out; you are in a strange solemn and old universe."   Whately and Gilpin and Sir Uvedale Price work you in the [167] effects of a landscape elaborately. They describe with the minuteness of Van Huysum painting a bouquet. The poor way-worn wanderer gigantic of soul without neglecting essential detail dashes you off his sketches with the sprezzatura careless but consummate of the master's hand. The genius loci is caught and bound for you in the croquis while he remains unknown in the highly finished and gem-like miniature. "Walk down that sweep of undulation" says Charles "like the mighty magnificent curve of a vast and green Atlantic billow which by some omnipotent some invisible hand has been suspended in its rolling and fixed thus as we see it." What a grand and free what an honest robust nature poor Pemberton's was. With its gigantic strength the sad yearning character of the man had a mighty shaft of tenderness loving tenderness surpassing that of woman always pouring through its recesses like some shy lonely waterfall of the hills fed by thunderstorms and through gates of savage shattered pines throwing its columns of iridescent glory and its music into the gloom of the ravines unheard and unseen for ever! He loved children with a feminine love and that man never lived that he feared. A thorough man he was like Burns and my own dear friend Harpur. These are some stray verses of Pemberton's more like the carol of a bird than anything that has been written since the matchless snatches of song in Shakespeare.   Political verse is seldom likely to yield essentially poetic results. What can for the most part alone be expected from it is terse vigorous and memorable expression of passing opinion-felicitous condensation of the dogma and argument of the day from one point of view. Only where a broad lurid colouring is furnished by historical struggles or the bitterness of the passion which clothes lyrical denunciations of national wrong will political rhymes ever ascend into any region of the poetic. Then they appeal to feelings and imaginative sympathies common to all mankind. Herein lay and will live for centuries the verve and power of the Irish songs and ballads of the Nation - the best political poetry in the language. And [168] from kindred though not strictly identical sources Béranger drew that fusion so fascinating of patriot wrath and passion. (the sacra indignatio of Swift's epitaph) with his own ineffable graces of lyrical vogue la galère gaiety. The party politics of the hour can scarcely ever ascend above the temperature of the "squib." There is everywhere a narrowness as well as a practical hardness a character of business warfare and business tactics about actual politics which keep them within the domain of the understanding. When not attacked by argument they are only assailable by ridicule clothed as that ridicule may be with the sparkling opulence of a fancy like Winthrop Praed's or Moore's in The Twopenny Post-Bag.   De Stendhal (Henri Beyle's) book De L'Amour is intended to be an exhaustive treatise on Love. The diagnosis of the passion in its earlier stages though elaborate is perhaps of necessity incomplete. One undescribed symptom of a nascent tendre occurs to me which many will possibly out of the fulness of their own experiences recognise as worthy of tabulation in the schedules of Beyle's gaie science. When a glance a tone a gesture or any little peculiarity of gait or bearing in a woman for whom you have no special regard or perhaps casually meet pleases because it recalls something not dissimilar in another depend upon it that other is already on the marches of what is in old English termed your "fancy."   Milton you will perhaps recollect in the Eikonoklastes sarcastically quotes from the Eikon Basilike the words "As the mice and rats overtook a German bishop." I am astonished to find so great a scholar as Mr. J. A. St. John remark of this in a foot-note "I have been unable to discover the story here alluded to which no doubt would have proved of a laughable character." And as a parallel he writes from Herodotus the Egyptian account of the destruction of Sennacherib's army by field-mice. The story alluded to is no laughing matter at all. The tradition is that Hatto Archbishop of Mentz was devoured by rats at the beginning of the tenth century. According to some accounts the catastrophe was [169] brought about by mice. The legend sets forth that at a time of great famine Hatto shut up in a barn a number of poor people who had come to beg grain and then set fire to the building burning to death all within. His grace of Mentz was pleased to remark after this intrepid experiment in political economy that "poor people were like rats - good for nothing but to eat corn." "But God the just avenger of the poor" says the pious legend "did not long let this iniquity go unpunished!" Rats were sent who at all times and in all places attended the most reverend prelate with a pertinacity as dread and as dogged as that with which the same members of the domestic fauna favoured the Flemings of Hamelin in Robert Browning's ballad. The archbishop at length retired to a tower on an island in the Rhine as an asylum. But his enemies followed him thither swimming the river and scaling and entering his harbour of refuge and eventually devoured him piecemeal.   Southey has a ballad on the subject.   Notwithstanding the wilderness of verse on Eastern themes in English and the languages of Continental Europe I know of only two instances where the patriarchal grandeur simple but massive and the wild pathos of the finer Oriental poems have been rendered. In Matthew Arnold's noble "Sohrab and Rustum" you have the first of the two qualities. In Les Orientales of Victor Hugo the lonesome primitive poetry of desert life alternately wrestles and weeps like the imprisoned night wind in the melancholy palm.   What a tract of imaginative grandeur lying away dim sublime and gloomy like the isle Hy Brasail of popular legend Irish writers of poetry have left untouched in portions of the early religious history of Ireland; Lough Dearg with so much of what is mightiest and most lasting in relation to the heart and soul floating dimly about it is an instance. Calderon the Catholic saw into this region for the poetic; but the Purgatoria del San Patricio though Shelley dug the finest image in the Cenci from it is only a scratch on the surface of an auriferous soil.   [170] What a royal movement there is in Bossuet's sentences! Only a hand clothed with an episcopal glove flashing with embroidery of jewels could give gesture in keeping with the stately sweep and the aulic magnificence of his periods. He seemed born to preach only to congresses of princes. With the elegiac grandeurs of the funeral oration of Henrietta Maria of England still dimly floating about one's mind as the echoes of the dying organ notes of some vesper miserere wander through the aisles of a darkening cathedral how like the finger of Mephistopheles is History's as she points to a picture (hung in an obscure corner of her gallery) of the widow of King Charles the Martyr beaten by her degraded paramour Jermyn. She suffers and history (with almost the fiend's chuckle) whispers "Avec quelle grace vous le savez messieurs" from that sentence of Bossuet's sermon engraved upon every educated Frenchman's memory as one of the most exquisite in his country's language.   The amount in literature as well as life of respectable learned lying - lying with "a position" as the social phrase of the day goes is positively frightful. You must get an idea of it when Lingard opens English history for you; or Dr. Maitland gives you across whole mountain ranges and gullies of erudite falsehood a glimpse of the actual state of mediaeval religion; when De Maistre calmly walks down and unlocks for the historical student the portals of the Spanish Inquisition or Mr. Addison takes one into the torture-chamber of the hapless Templars "the poor fellow-soldiers of Jesus Christ" and of the Temple of Solomon.   SHEARING IN THE RIVERINA NEW SOUTH WALES.  "SHEARING commences to-morrow!" These apparently simple words were spoken by Hugh Gordon the manager of Anabanco station in the district of Riverina in the colony of New South Wales one Monday morning in the month of August. The utterance had its importance to every member of a rather extensive "corps dramatique" awaiting the industrial drama about to be performed.   A low sand-hill a few years since had looked out over a sea of grey plains covered partly with grass partly with salsiferous bushes and herbs. Two or three huts built of the trunks of the pine and roofed with the bark of the box-tree and a skeleton-looking cattle-yard with its high "gallows" (a rude timber stage whereon to hang slaughtered cattle) alone broke the monotony of the plain-ocean. A comparatively small herd of cattle 2000 or 3000 found more than sufficient pasturage during the short winter and spring but were always compelled to migrate to mountain pastures when the swamps which alone in those days formed the water-stores of the run were dried up. But two or three or at most half-a-dozen stockmen were ever needed for the purpose of managing the herd so inadequate in number and profitable occupation to this vast tract of grazing country.   But a little later one of the great chiefs of the wool-producing interest - a shepherd-king so to speak of shrewdness energy and capital - had seen approved and purchased the lease of this waste kingdom. Almost at once as if by magic the scene changed. Great gangs of navvies appeared wending their way across the silent plain. Dams were made wells were dug. Tons of fencing wire were dropped on the sand by the long line of teams which seemed never tired of arriving. Sheep by thousands and tens of thousands began to come grazing and cropping up to the lonely sandhill - now swarming with blacksmiths carpenters engineers fencers shepherds bullock-drivers - till the place looked like a fair on the borders of Tartary.   Meanwhile everything was moving with calculated force and cost under the "reign of law". The seeming expense was merely the economic truth of doing all the necessary work at once rather than by instalments. One hundred men for one day rather than one man for one hundred days. Results soon began to demonstrate themselves. In twelve months the dams were full the wells sending up their far-fetched priceless water the wire fences erected the shepherds gone and 17000 sheep cropping the herbage of Anabanco. Tuesday was the day fixed for the actual commencement of the momentous almost solemn transaction - the pastoral Hegira so to speak as the time of most station events is calculated with reference to it as happening before or after shearing. But before the first shot is fired which tells of the battle begun what raids and skirmishes what reconnoitring and vedette duty must take place! [73]  First arrives the cook-in-chief to the shearers with two assistants to lay in a few provisions for the week's consumption of 70 able-bodied men. I must here explain that the cook of a large shearing-shed is a highly paid and tolerably irresponsible official. He is paid and provided by the shearers. Payment is generally arranged on the scale of half-a-crown a head weekly from each shearer. For this sum he must provide punctual and effective cooking paying out of his own pocket as many "marmitons" as may be needful for that end and to satisfy his tolerably exacting and fastidious employers.   In the present case he confers with the storekeeper Mr de Vere a young gentleman of aristocratic connexions who is thus gaining an excellent practical knowledge of the working of a large station and to this end has the store-keeping department entrusted to him during shearing.   He does not perhaps look quite fit for a croquet party as he stands now with a flour-scoop in one hand and a pound of tobacco in the other. But he looks like a man at work and also like a gentleman as he is. "Jack the Cook" thus addresses him:   "Now Mr de Vere I hope there's not going to be any humbugging about my rations and things! The men are all up in their quarters and as hungry as free selectors. They've been a-payin' for their rations for ever so long and of course now shearing's on they're good for a little extra!"   "All right Jack" returns de Vere good-temperedly "all your lot was weighed out and sent away before breakfast. You must have missed the cart. Here's the list. I'll read it out to you: three bags flour half a bullock two bags sugar a chest of tea four dozen of pickles four dozen of jam two gallons of vinegar five pounds pepper a bag of salt plates knives forks ovens frying-pans saucepans iron pots and about a hundred other things. Now mind you return all the cooking things safe or pay for them - that's the order! You don't want anything more do you? You've got enough for a regiment of cavalry I should think."   "Well I don't know. There won't be much left in a week if the weather holds good" makes answer the chef as one who thought nothing too stupendous to be accomplished by shearers "but I knew I'd forgot something. As I'm here I'll take a few dozen boxes of sardines and a case of pickled salmon. The boys likes 'em and murder alive! haven't we forgot the plums and currants? A hundredweight of each Mr de Vere! They'll be crying out for plum-duff and currant buns for the afternoon; and bullying the life out of me if I haven't a few trifles like. It's a hard life surely a shearers' cook. Well good-bye sir you have 'em all down in the book."   [74] Lest the reader should imagine that the role of Mr Gordon at Anabanco was a reign of luxury and that waste which tendeth to penury let him be aware that all shearers in Riverina are paid at a certain rate usually that of one pound per hundred sheep shorn. They agree on the other hand to pay for all supplies consumed by them at certain prices fixed before the shearing agreement is signed. Hence it is entirely their own affair whether their mess bills are extravagant or economical. They can have anything within the rather wide range of the station store. Pâtés de foie gras ortolans roast ostrich novels top-boots double-barrelled guns if they like to pay for them - with one exception. No wine no spirits! Neither are they permitted to bring these stimulants "on to the grounds" for their private use. Grog at shearing? Matches in a powder-mill! It's very sad and bad; but our Anglo-Saxon industrial or defensive champion cannot be trusted with the fire-water. Navvies men-of-war's men soldiers and shearers - fine fellows all. But though the younger men might only drink in moderation the majority and the older men are utterly without self-control once in the front of temptation. And wars 'wounds without cause' hot heads shaking hands delay and bad shearing would be the inevitable results of spirits à la discrétion. So much is this a matter of certainty from experience that a clause is inserted and cheerfully signed in most shearing agreements "that any man getting drunk or bringing spirits on to the station during shearing loses the whole of the money earned by him." The men know that the restriction is for their benefit as well as for the interest of the master and join in the prohibition heartily.   Let us give a glance at the small army of working-men assembled at Anabanco - one out of hundreds of stations in the colony of New South Wales ranging from 100000 sheep downwards. There are seventy shearers; about fifty washers including the men connected with the steam-engine boilers bricklayers and the like; ten or twelve boundary-riders whose duty it is to ride round the large paddocks seeing that the fences are all intact and keeping a general look-out over the condition of the sheep; three or four overseers; half-a-dozen young gentlemen acquiring a practical knowledge of sheep-farming or as it is generally phrased "colonial experience" - a comprehensive expression enough; a score or two of teamsters with a couple of hundred horses or bullocks waiting for the high-piled wool bales which are loaded up and sent away almost as soon as shorn; wool-sorters pickers-up pressers yardsmen extra shepherds. It may easily be gathered from this outline what an 'army with banners' is arrayed at Anabanco. While statistically inclined it may be added that the cash due for the shearing alone (less the mess bill) amounts to £1700; for the washing (roughly) £400 exclusive of provisions consumed hutting wood water cooking. Carriage of wool £1500. Other hands from £30 to £40 per week. All of which disbursements take place within from eight to twelve weeks after the shears are in the first sheep.   [75] Tuesday comes "big with fate." As the sun tinges the far skyline the shearers are taking a slight refection of coffee and currant buns to enable them to withstand the exhausting interval between six and eight o'clock when the serious breakfast occurs. Shearers always diet themselves on the principle that the more they eat the stronger they must be. Digestion as preliminary to muscular development is left to take its chance. They certainly do get through a tremendous amount of work. The whole frame is at its utmost tension early and late. But the preservation of health is due to their natural strength of constitution rather than to their profuse and unscientific diet. Half-an-hour after sunrise Mr Gordon walks quietly into the vast building which contains the sheep and their shearers - called "the shed" par excellence. Everything is in perfect cleanliness and order - the floor swept and smooth with its carefully planed boards of pale yellow aromatic pine. Small tramways with baskets for the fleeces run the wool up to the wool tables superseding the more general plan of hand picking. At each side of the shed floor are certain small areas four or five feet square such space being found by experience to be sufficient for the postures and gymnastics practised during the shearing of a sheep. Opposite to each square is an aperture communicating with a long narrow paled yard outside of the shed. Through this each man pops his sheep when shorn where he remains in company with the others shorn by the same hand until counted out. This being done by the overseer or manager supplies a check upon hasty or unskilful work. The body of the woolshed floored with battens placed half an inch apart is filled with the woolly victims. This enclosure is subdivided into minor pens of which each fronts the place of two shearers who catch from it until the pen is empty. When this takes place a man for the purpose refills its. As there are local advantages an equitable distribution of places for shearing has to be made by lot.   On every subdivision stands a shearer as Mr Gordon walks with an air of calm authority down the long aisle. Seventy men chiefly in their prime the flower of the working-men of the colony they are variously gathered. England Ireland and Scotland are represented in the proportion of one half of the number; the other half is composed of native-born Australians.   Among these last - of pure Anglo-Saxon or Anglo-Celtic descent - are to be seen some of the finest men physically considered the race is capable of producing. Taller than their British-born brethren with softer voices and more regular features they inherit the powerful frames and unequalled muscular development of the breed. Leading lives chiefly devoted to agricultural labour they enjoy larger intervals of leisure than is permissible to the labouring classes of Europe. The climate is mild and favourable to health. They have been accustomed from childhood to abundance of the best food; opportunities of intercolonial travel are frequent and common. Hence the Anglo-Australian labourer without on the one hand the sharpened eagerness which marks his Transatlantic cousin has yet an air of independence and intelligence combined with a natural grace of movement unknown to the peasantry of Britain. [76]  An idea is prevalent that the Australians are as a race physically inferior to the British. It is asserted that they grow too fast tend to height and slenderness and do not possess adequate stamina and muscle. The idea is erroneous. The men reared in the cities on the seaboard living sedentary lives in shops banks or counting-houses are doubtless more or less pale and slight of form. So are they who live under such conditions all over the world. But those youngsters who have followed the plough on the upland farms or lived a wilder life on the stations of the far interior who have had their fill of wheaten bread and beefsteaks since they could walk and snuffed up the free bush breezes from infancy they are men. -   Stout of heart and ready of hand  As e'er drove prey from Cumberland;  - a business I may remark at which many of them would have distinguished themselves.   Take Abraham Lawson as he stands there in a natural and unstudied attitude 6 feet 4 inches in his stockings wide-chested stalwart with a face like that of a Greek statue. Take Billy May fair-haired mild insouciant almost languid till you see him at work. Then again Jack Windsor handsome saucy and wiry as a bull-terrier and like him with strong natural inclination for the combat; good for any man of his weight or a trifle over with the gloves or without.   It is curious to note how the old English practice of settling disputes with nature's weapons has taken root in Australia. It would 'gladden the sullen souls' of the defunct gladiators to watch two lads whose fathers had never trodden England's soil pull off their jackets and go to work "hammer and tongs" with all the savage silence of the true island type.   It is now about seven o'clock. Mr Gordon moves forward. As he does so every man leans towards the open door of the pen in front of which he stands. The bell sounds! With the first stroke each one of the seventy men has sprung upon a sheep - has drawn it out - placed its head across his knee - and is working his shears as if the "last man out" was to be flogged or tarred and feathered at the least. Four minutes - James Steadman who learned last year has shorn down one side of his sheep; Jack Holmes and Gundagai Bill are well down the other sides of theirs; when Billy May raises himself with a jerking sigh and releases his sheep perfectly clean-shorn from the nose to the heels through the aperture of his separate enclosure. With the same effort apparently he calls out 'Wool!' and darts upon another sheep. Drawing this second victim across his knee he buries his shear-points in the long wool of its neck. A moment after a lithe and eager boy has gathered up fleece number one and tossed it into the train-basket the shearer is halfway down the sheep's side the wool hanging in one fleece like a great glossy mat before you have done wondering whether he did really shear the first sheep or whether he had not a ready-shorn one in his coat-sleeve - like a conjuror. [77]  By this time Jack Holmes and Gundagai Bill are 'out' or finished; and the cry of "Wool!' Wool!" seems to run continuously up and down the long aisles of the shed like a single note upon some rude instrument. Now and then the "refrain" is varied by "Tar!" being shouted instead when a piece of skin is snipped off as well as the wool. Great healing properties are attributed to this extract in the shed. And if a shearer slice off a piece of flesh from his own person as occasionally happens he gravely anoints it with the universal remedy and considers that the onus then lies with Providence there being no more that man can do. Though little time is lost the men are by no means up to the speed which they will attain in a few days when in full practice and training. Their nerve muscle eye endurance will be all at so to speak concert-pitch and sheep after sheep will be shorn with a precision and celerity even awful to the unprofessional observer.   The unpastoral reader may be informed that speed and completeness of denudation are the grand desiderata in shearing; the employer thinks principally of the latter the shearer principally of the former. To adjust equitably the proportion is one of those incomplete aspirations which torment humanity. Hence the contest - old as human society - between labour and capital.   This is the first day. According to old-established custom a kind of truce obtains. It is before the battle the "salut" when no hasty word or too demonstrative action can be suffered by the canons of good taste. Red Bill Flash Jack Jem the Scooper and other roaring blades more famous for expedition than faithful manipulation are shearing today with a painstaking precision as of men to whom character is everything.   Mr Gordon marches softly up and down regarding the shearers with a paternal and gratified expression occasionally hinting at slight improvements of style or expressing unqualified approval as a sheep is turned out shaven rather than shorn. All goes on well. Nothing is heard but expressions of goodwill and enthusiasm for the general welfare. It is a triumph of the dignity of labour.   One o'clock. Mr Gordon moved on to the bell and sounded it. At the first stroke several men on their way to the pens stopped abruptly and began to put on their coats. One fellow of an alert nature (Master Jack Windsor) had just finished his sheep and was sharpening his shears when his eye caught Mr Gordon's form in proximity to the final bell. With a bound like a wild cat he reached the pen and drew out his sheep a bare second before the first stroke amidst the laughter and congratulations of his comrades. Another man had his hand on the pen-gate at the same instant but by the Median law was compelled to return sheepless. He was cheered but ironically. Those whose sheep were in an unfinished stage quietly completed them; the others moving off to their huts where their board literally smoked with abundance. [78]  An hour passed. The meal was concluded; the smoke was over; and the more careful men were back in the shed sharpening their shears by two o'clock. Punctually at that hour the bell repeated its summons de capo. The warm afternoon gradually lengthened its shadows; the shears clicked in tireless monotone; the pens filled and became empty. The wool-presses yawned for the mountain of fleeces which filled the bins in front of them divided into various grades of excellence and continuously disgorged them neatly and cubically packed and branded.   At six o'clock the bell brought the day's work to a close. The sheep of each man were counted in his presence and noted down with scrupulous care the record being written out in full and hung up for public inspection in the shed next day. This important ceremony over master and men manager labourers and supernumeraries betook themselves to their separate abodes with such keen avoidance of delay that in five minutes not a soul was left in or near the great building lately so busy and populous except the boys who were sweeping up the floor. The silence of ages seems to fall and settle upon it.   Next morning at a rather earlier hour every man is at his post. Business is meant decidedly. Now commences the delicate and difficult part of the superintendence which keeps Mr Gordon at his post in the shed nearly from daylight till dark for from eight to ten weeks. During the first day he has formed a sort of gauge of each man's temper and workmanship. For now and henceforth the natural bias of each shearer will appear. Some try to shear too fast and in their haste shear badly. Some are rough and savage with the sheep which do occasionally kick and become unquiet at critical times; and it must be confessed are provoking enough. Some shear very fairly and handsomely to a superficial eye but commit the unpardonable offence of "leaving wool on." Some are deceitful shearing carefully when overlooked but "racing" and otherwise misbehaving directly the eye of authority is diverted. These and many other tricks and defects require to be noted and abated quietly but firmly by the manager of the shed - firmly because evil would develop and spread ruinously if not checked; quietly because immense loss might be incurred by a strike. Shearing differs from other work in this wise: it is work against time more especially in Riverina. If the wool be not off the backs of the sheep before November all sorts of draw-backs and destructions supervene. The spear-shaped grass-seeds specially formed as if in special collusion with the Evil One hasten to bury themselves in the wool and even in the flesh of the tender victims. Dust rises in red clouds from the unmoistened betrampled meadows so lately verdurous and flower-spangled. From snowy white to an unlovely dark brown turn the carefully washed fleeces causing anathema from overseers and depreciation from brokers. All these losses of temper trouble and money become inevitable if shearing be protracted it may be beyond a given week.   [79] Hence as in harvest with a short allowance of fair weather discipline must be tempered with diplomacy. Lose your temper and be over particular: off go Billy May Abraham Lawson and half-a-dozen of your best men making a weekly difference of perhaps two or three thousand sheep for the remainder of the shearing. Can you not replace them? Not so! Every shed in Riverina will be hard at work during this present month of September and for every hour of October. Till that time not a shearer will come to your gate except perhaps one or two useless characterless men. Are you to tolerate bad workmanship? Not that either. But try all other means with your men before you resort to harshness; and be quite certain that your sentence is just and that you can afford the defection.   So our friend Mr Gordon wise from many tens of thousands of shorn sheep that have been counted out past his steady eye criticises temperately but watchfully. He reproves sufficiently and no more any glaring fault; makes his calculation as to who are really bad shearers and can be discharged without loss to the commonwealth or who can shear fairly and can be coached up to a decent average. One division slow and good only when slow have to be watched lest they emulate "the talent" and so come to grief. Then "the talent" has to be mildly admonished from time to time lest they force the pace set a bad example and lure the other men on to "racing." This last leads to slovenly shearing ill-usage of the sheep and general dissatisfaction.   Tact temper patience and firmness are each and all necessary in that Captain of Industry who has the very delicate and important task of superintending a large woolshed. Hugh Gordon had shown all in such proportion as would have made a distinguished man anywhere had fortune not adjusted for him this particular profession. Calm with the consciousness of strength he was kind and considerate in manner as in nature until provoked by glaring dishonesty or incivility. Then the lion part of his nature woke up so that it commonly went ill with the aggressor. As this was matter of public report he had little occasion to spoil the repose of his bearing. Day succeeds day and for a fortnight the machinery goes on smoothly and successfully. The sheep arrive at an appointed day and hour by detachments and regiments at the washpen. They depart thence like good boys on Saturday night redolent of soap and water and clean to a fault. They enter the shed white and flossy as newly combed poodles to emerge on the way back to their pasturage slim delicate agile with a bright black A legibly branded with tar on their paper-white skins.   The Anabanco world - stiffish but undaunted - is turning out of bed one morning. Ha! what sounds are these? And why does the room look so dark? Rain as I'm alive. "Hurrah!" says Master Jack Bowles one of the young gentlemen. He is learning (more or less) practical sheep-farming preparatory to having (one of these days) an Anabanco of his own. "Well this is a change and I'm not sorry for one" quoth Mr. Jack "I'm stiff all over. No one can stand such work long. Won't the shearers growl! No shearing to-day and perhaps none tomorrow either." Truth to tell Mr Bowles' sentiments are not confined to his ingenuous bosom. Some of the shearers grumble at being stopped "just as a man was earning a few shillings." Those who are in top pace and condition don't like it. But to many of the rank and file - working up to and a little beyond their strength - with whom swelled wrists and other protests of nature are becoming apparent it is a relief and they are glad of the respite. So at dinner-time all the sheep in the sheds put in overnight in anticipation of such a contingency are reported shorn. All hands are then idle for the rest of the day. The shearers dress and avail themselves of various resources. Some go to look at their horses now in clover or its equivalent in the Riverina graminetum. Some play cards others wash or mend their clothes. A large proportion of the Australians having armed themselves with paper envelopes and a shilling's worth of stamps from the store bethink themselves of neglected or desirable correspondents. Many a letter for Mrs Leftalone Wallaroo Creek or Miss Jane Sweetapple Honeysuckle Flat as the case may be will find its way into the post-bag tomorrow. A pair of youngsters are having a round or two with the gloves; while to complete the variety of recreations compatible with life at a woolshed a selected troupe are busy in the comparative solitude of that building at a rehearsal of a tragedy and a farce with which they intend the very next rainy day to astonish the population of Anabanco. [80]  At the home-station a truce to labour's "alarms" is proclaimed except in the case and person of Mr de Vere. So far is he from participation in the general holiday that he finds the store thronged with shearers washers and "knock-about men" who being let loose think it would be nice to go and buy something "pour passer le temps." He therefore grumbles slightly at having no rest like other people.   "That's all very fine" says Mr Jack Bowles who seated on a case is smoking a large meerschaum and mildly regarding all things "but what have you got to do when we're all hard at work at the shed?" He speaks with an air of great importance and responsibility.   "That's right Mr Bowles" chimes in one of the shearers "stand up for the shed. I never see a young gentleman work as hard as you do."   "Bosh!" growls de Vere "as if anybody couldn't gallop about from the shed to the washpen and carry messages and give half of them wrong! Why Mr Gordon said the other day he should have to take you off and put on a Chinaman - that he couldn't make more mistakes."   "All envy and malice and t'other thing de Vere because you think I'm rising in the profession" returns the good-natured Bowles "Mr Gordon's going to send 20000 sheep after shearing to the Lik Lak paddock and he said I should go in charge."   "Charge be hanged!" laughs de Vere with two very bright-patterned Crimean shirts one in each hand which he offers to a tall young shearer for inspection. "There's a well there and whenever either of the two men of whom you'll have charge gets sick or runs away you'll have to work the whim in his place till another man's sent out if it's a month." [81]  This appalling view of station promotion rather startles Mr Jack who applies himself to his meerschaum amid the ironical comments of the shearers. However not easily daunted or "shut up" according to the more familiar station phrase he rejoins after a brief interval of contemplation "that accidents will happen you know de Vere my boy - apropos of which moral sentiment I'll come and help you in your dry-goods business; and then look here if you get ill or run away I'll have a profession to fall back upon."   This is held to be a Roland of sufficient pungency for de Vere's Oliver. Everyone laughed. And then the two youngsters betook themselves to a humorous puffing of the miscellaneous contents of the store: tulip-beds of gorgeous Crimean shirts boots books tobacco canvas slippers pocket-knives Epsom salts pipes pickles painkillers pocket handkerchiefs pills sardines saddles shears and sauces: in fact everything which every kind of man might want and which apparently every man did want for large and various were the purchases and great the flow of conversation. Finally everything was severely and accurately debited to the purchasers and the store was cleared and locked up. A large store is a necessity of a large station; not by any means because of the profit upon goods sold but it obviously would be bad economy for old Bill the shepherd or Barney the bullock-driver to visit the next township from ten to thirty miles distant as the case may be every time the former wanted a pound of tobacco or the latter a pair of boots. They might possibly obtain these necessary articles as good in quality as cheap in price. But there are wolves in that wood oh my weak brothers! In all towns dwells one of the 'sons of the Giant' - the Giant Grog - red-eyed with steel muscles and iron claws; once in these which have held many and better men to the death neither Barney nor Bill emerges save pale fevered nerveless and impecunious. So arose the station store. Barney befits himself with boots without losing his feet; Bill fills his pocket with match-boxes and smokes the pipe of sobriety virtuous perforce till his carnival after shearing.   The next day was wet and threatened further broken weather. Matters were not too placid with the shearers. A day or two for rest is very well but continuous wet weather means compulsory idleness and gloom succeeds repose; for not only are all hands losing time and earning no money but they are to use the language of the stable "eating their heads off" the while. The rather profuse mess and general expenditure which caused little reflection when they were earning at the rate of two or three hundred pounds a year became unpleasantly suggestive now that all is going out and nothing coming in. Hence loud and deep were the anathemas as the discontented men gazed sadly or wrathfully at the misty sky.   [82] A few days showery weather having therefore wellnigh driven our shearers to desperation out comes the sun in all his glory. He is never far away or very faint in Riverina. All the pens are filled for the morrow; very soon after the earliest sunbeams the bell sounds its welcome summons and the whole force tackles to the work with an ardour proportioned to the delay every man working as if for the ransom of his whole family from slavery. How men work spurred on by the double excitement of acquiring social reputation and making money rapidly! Not an instant is lost; not a nerve limb or muscle doing less than the hardest task-master could flog out of a slave. Occasionally you see a shearer after finishing his sheep walk quickly out and not appear for a couple of hours or perhaps not again during the day. Do not put him down as a sluggard; be assured that he has tasked nature dangerously hard and has only given in just before she does. Look at that silent slight youngster with a bandage round his swollen wrist. Every "blow" of the shears is agony to him yet he disdains to give in and has been working "in distress" for hours. The pain is great as you can see by the flush which occasionally surges across his brown face yet he goes on manfully to the last sheep and endures to the very verge of fainting.   There was now a change in the manner and tone of the shed especially towards the end of the day. It was now the ding of the desperate fray when the blood of the fierce animal man is up when mortal blows are exchanged and curses float upward with the smoke and dust. The ceaseless clicking of the shears - the stern earnestness of the men toiling with a feverish and tireless energy - the constant succession of sheep shorn and let go caught and commenced - the occasional savage oath or passionate gesture as a sheep kicked and struggled with perverse delaying obstinacy - the cuts and stabs with brief decided tones of Mr Gordon in repression or command - all told the spectator that tragic action was introduced into the performance. Indeed one of the minor excitements of shearing was then and there transacted. Mr Gordon had more than once warned a dark sullen-looking man that he did not approve of his style of shearing. He was temporarily absent and on his return found the same man about to let go a sheep whose appearance as a shorn wool-bearing quadruped was painful and discreditable in the extreme.   "Let your sheep go my man" said Gordon in a tone which somehow arrested the attention of nearly all the shearers "but don't trouble yourself to catch another!"   "Why not?" said the delinquent sulkily.   "You know very well why not!" replied Gordon walking closely up to him and looking straight at him with eyes that began to glitter "you've had fair warning. You've not chosen to take it. Now you can go!"   [83] "I suppose you'll pay a man for the sheep he's shorn?" growled out the ruffian.   "Not one shilling until after shearing. You can come then if you like" answered Gordon with perfect distinctness.   The cowed bully looked savagely at him; but the tall powerful frame and steady eye were not inviting for personal arbitration of the matter in hand. He put up his two pairs of shears put on his coat and walked out of the shed. The time was passed when Red Bill or Terrible Dick (ruffians whom a sparse labour-market rendered necessary evils) would have flung down his shears upon the floor and told the manager that if he didn't like that shearing he could shear his ---- sheep himself and be hanged to him; or on refusal of instant payment would have proposed to bury his shears in the intestines of his employer by way of adjusting the balance between Capital and Labour. Many wild tales are told of woolshed rows. I knew of one squatter stabbed mortally with that fatal and convenient weapon a shear-blade.   The man thus summarily dealt with could like most of his companions shear very well if he took pains. Keeping to a moderate number of sheep his workmanship could be good. But he must needs try and keep up with Billy May or Abraham Lawson who can shear from 100 to 130 sheep per day and do them beautifully. So in "racing" he works hastily and badly cuts the skin of his luckless sheep nearly as often as the wool and leaves wool here and there on them grievous and exasperating to behold. So sentence of expulsion goes forth fully against him. Having arrayed himself for the road he makes one more effort for a settlement and some money wherewith to pay for board and lodging on the road. Only to have a mad carouse at the nearest township however; after which he will tell a plausible story of his leaving the shed on account of Mr Gordon's temper and avail himself of the usual free hospitality of the bush to reach another shed. He addresses Mr Gordon with an attempt at conciliation and deference.   "It seems very 'ard sir as a man can't get the trifle of money coming to him which I've worked 'ard for."   "It's very hard you won't try and shear decently" retorts Mr Gordon by no means conciliated. "Leave the shed!"   Ill-conditioned rascal as the shearer is he has a mate or travelling-companion in whose breast exists some rough idea of fidelity. He now takes up the dialogue.   "I suppose if Jim's shearing don't suit mine won't either."   "I did not speak to you" answered Mr Gordon as calmly as if he had expected the speech "but of course you can go."   He said this with an air of studied unconcern as if he would rather like a dozen more men to knock off work. The two men walk out but the epidemic does not spread and several take the lesson home and mend their ways accordingly.   The weather now was splendid; not a cloud specked the bright blue sky. The shearers continue to work at the same express-train pace; fifty bales of wool roll every day from the wool-presses; as fast as they reach that number they are loaded upon the numerous drays and wagons which have been waiting for weeks. Tall brown men have been recklessly cutting up hides for the last fortnight wherewith to lash the bales securely. It is considered safer practice to load wool as soon as may be; fifty bales represent about a thousand pounds sterling. In a building however secure should a fire break out a few hundred bales are easily burned; but once on the dray this much-dreaded "edax rerum" in a dry country has little chance. The driver responsible to the extent of his freight generally sleeps under his dray; hence both watchman and insulation are provided. [84]  The unrelaxing energy with which the work was pushed at this stage was exciting and contagious; at or before daylight every soul in the great establishment was up. The boundary-riders were always starting off for a twenty or thirty mile ride and bringing tens of thousands of sheep to the wash-pen. At that huge lavatory there was splashing and soaking all day with an army of washers; not a moment is lost from daylight till dark or used for any purpose save the all-engrossing work and needful food. At nine o'clock p.m. luxurious dreamless sleep given only to those whose physical powers have been taxed to the utmost and who can bear without injury the daily tension.   Everything and everybody were in splendid working order nothing out of gear. Rapid and regular as a steam-engine the great host of toilers moved onward daily with a march which promised an unusually early completion. Mr Gordon was not in high spirits for so cautious and far-seeing a captain rarely felt himself so independent of circumstances as to indulge in that reckless mood - but much satisfied with the prospect. Whew! The afternoon darkens and the night is delivered over to water-spouts and hurricanes as it appears. Next day was raw gusty with chill heavy showers; drains had to be cut roofs to be seen to; shorn sheep were shivering washers all playing pitch-and-toss shearers sulky; everybody but the young gentlemen wearing a most injured expression of countenance. "Looks as if it would rain for a month" says Long Jack. "If we hadn't been delayed might have had the shearing over by this." Reminded that there are 50000 sheep yet remaining to be shorn and that by no possibility could they have been finished he answers "Suppose so always the same everything sure to go agin the poor man." The weather did not clear up. Winter seemed to have taken thought and determined to show even this land of eternal summer that he had his rights. The shed would be filled and before the sheep so kept dry were shorn down would come the rain again. Not a full day's shearing for ten days. Then the clouds disappeared as if the curtain of a stage had been rolled up and lo! the golden sun fervid and impatient to obliterate the track of winter.   The first day after the recommencement matters went much as usual. [85] Steady work and little talk as if everyone was anxious to make up for the lost time. But on the second morning after breakfast when the bell sounded instead of the usual cheerful dash at the sheep every man stood silent and motionless in his place. Someone uttered the words "roll up!". Then the seventy men converged and slowly but with one impulse walked up to the end of the shed where stood Mr Gordon.   The concerted action of any body of men bears with it an element of power which commands respect. The weapon of force is theirs; it is at their option to wield it with or without mercy. At one period of Australian colonisation a superintendent in Mr Gordon's position might have had good ground for uneasiness. Mr Jack Bowles saw in it an emeute of a democratic and sanguinary nature regretted deeply his absent revolver but drew up to his leader prepared to die by his side.That calm centurion felt no such serious misgivings. He knew that there had been dire grumbling among the shearers in consequence of the weather. He knew that there were malcontents among them. He was prepared for some sort of demand on their part and had concluded to make certain concessions of a moderate degree. So looking cheerfully at the men he quietly awaited the deputation. As they neared him there was a little hesitation and then three delegates came to the front. These were Old Ben Abraham Lawson and Billy May. Ben Thornton had been selected for his age and long experience of the rights and laws of the craft. He was a weather-beaten wiry old Englishman whose face and accent darkened as the former was by the Australian summers of half a century still retained the trace of his native Devonshire. It was his boast that he had shorn for forty years and as regularly "knocked-down" (or spent in a single debauch) his shearing money. Lawson represented the small free-holders being a steady shrewd fellow and one of the fastest shearers. Billy May stood for the fashion and "talent" being the "Ringer" or fastest shearer of the whole assembly and as such truly admirable and distinguished.   "Well now men" quoth Mr Gordon cheerily meeting matters half-way "what's it all about?" The younger delegate looked at Old Ben who now that it "was demanded of him to speak the truth" or such dilution thereof as might seem most favourable to the interests of the shed found a difficulty like many wiser men about his exordium.   "Well Muster Gordon" at length he broke forth "look'ee here sir. The weather's been awful bad and clean agin shearing. We've not been earning our grub and - "   "So it has" answered the manager "so it has. But can I help the weather? I'm as anxious as you are to have the shearing over quickly. We're both of one mind about that eh?"   "That's all right enough sir" struck in Abraham Lawson who felt that Ben was getting the worst of the argument and was moreover far less fluent than usual probably from being deprived of the aid of the customary expletives "but we're come to say this sir that the season's turned out very wet indeed. We've had a deal of broken time and the men feel it very hard to be paying for a lot of rations and hardly earning anything. We're shearing the sheep very close and clean. You won't have 'em done no otherways. Not like some sheds where a man can 'run' a bit and make up for lost time. Now we've all come to think this sir that if we're to go on shearing the sheep well and to stick to them and get them done before the dust and grass-seed come in that you ought to make us some allowance. We know we've agreed for so much a hundred and all that. Still as the season's turned so out-and-out bad we hope you'll consider it and make it up to us somehow." [86]  "Never knew a worse year" corroborated Billy May who thought it indispensable to say something. "Haven't made enough myself to pay the cook."   This was not strictly true at any rate as to Master Billy's own earnings; he being such a remarkably fast shearer (and good withal) that he had always a respectable sum credited to him for his days' work even when many of the slower men came off short enough.   However enough had been said to make Mr Gordon fully comprehend the case. The men were dissatisfied. They had come in a roundabout way to the conclusion that some pecuniary concession not mentioned in their bond should come from the side of capital to that of labour. Whether wages interest of capital share of profits reserve fund they knew not nor cared. This was their stand. And being Englishmen they intended to abide by it.   The manager had considered the situation before it actually arose. He now rapidly took in the remaining points of debate. The shearers had signed a specific agreement for a stipulated rate of payment irrespective of the weather. By the letter of the law they had no case. Whether they made little or much profit was not his affair. But he was a just and kindly man as well as reasonably politic. They had shorn well and the weather had been discouraging. He knew too that an abrupt denial might cause a passive mutiny if not a strike. If they set themselves to thwart him it was in their power to shear badly to shear slowly and to force him to discharge many of them. He might have them fined perhaps imprisoned by the police-court. Meanwhile how could shearing go on? Dust and grass-seeds would soon be upon them. He resolved on a compromise and spoke out at once in a firm and decided tone as the men gathered up yet more closely around him.   "Look here all of you! You know very well that I'm not bound to find you in fine weather. Still I am aware that the season has been against you. You have shorn pretty well so far though I've had to make examples and am quite ready to make more. What I am willing to do is this: to every man who works on till the finish and shears to my satisfaction I will make a fair allowance in the ration account. That is I will make no charge for the beef. Does that suit you?" There was a chorus of "All right sir we're satisfied. Mr Gordon always does the fair thing." &c. And work was immediately resumed with alacrity. [87]  The clerk of the weather too gracious even in these regions as far as the absence of rain is concerned was steadily propitious. Cloudless skies and a gradually ascending thermometer alone were the signs that spring was changing into summer. The splendid herbage ripened and dried; patches of bare earth began to be discernible amid the late thick-swarded pastures dust to rise and cloud-pillars of sand to float and eddy - the desert genii of the Arab. But the work went on at a high rate of speed outpacing the fast-coming summer; and before any serious disasters arose the last flock was "on the battens" and amid ironical congratulations the "cobbler" or last sheep was seized and stripped of his rather dense and difficult fleece. In ten minutes the vast woolshed lately echoing with the ceaseless click of the shears the jests the songs the oaths of the rude congregation was silent and deserted. The floors were swept the pens closed the sheep on their way to a distant paddock. Not a soul remains about the building but the pressers who stay to work at the rapidly lessening piles of fleeces in the bins or a meditative teamster who sits musing on a wool-bale absorbed in a calculation as to when his load will be made up.   It is sundown a rather later time of closing than usual but rendered necessary by the possibility of the "grand finale." The younger men troop over to the hut larking like schoolboys. Abraham Lawson throws a poncho over his broad shoulders lights his pipe and strides along towering above the rest erect and stately as a guardsman. Considerably more so than you or I reader would have been had we shorn 130 sheep as he has done to-day. Billy May has shorn 142 and he puts his hand on the five-foot paling fence of the yard and vaults over it like a deer preparatory to a swim in the creek. At dinner you will see them all with fresh Crimeans and Jerseys clean comfortable and in grand spirits. Next morning is settling-day. The book-keeping departments at Anabanco being severely correct all is in readiness. Each man's tally or number of sheep shorn has been entered daily to his credit. His private and personal investments at the store have been as duly debited. The shearers as a corporation have been charged with the multifarious items of their rather copious mess-bill. This sum total is divided by the number of the shearers the extract being the amount for which each man is liable. This sum varies in its weekly proportion at different sheds. With an extravagant cook or cooks the weekly bill is often alarming. When the men and their functionary study economy it may be kept very reasonably low.   The men have been sitting or standing about the office for half-an-hour when Mr Jack Bowles rushes out and shouts "William May!" That young person excessively clean attired in a quiet tweed suit with his hair cut very correctly short advances with an air of calm intrepidity and faces Mr Gordon. Gordon now seated at a long table wearing a judicial expression of countenance. [88]  "Well May here's your account": -   So many sheep at £1 per 100......... £----  Cook so many weeks............ £   Shearing store account......... £   Private store account.......... £   Total .. £----  "Is the tally of your sheep right?" "Oh! I daresay it's all right Mr Gordon I made it so and so; about ten less."   "Well well! Ours is correct no doubt. Now I want to make up a good subscription for the hospital this year. How much will you give? You've done pretty well I think."   "Put me down a pound sir."   "Very well that's fair enough. If every one gives what they can afford you men will always have a place to go to when you're hurt or laid up. So I put your name down and you'll see it in the published list. Now about the shearing. May I consider that you've done your work very well and behaved very well all through. You're a fast shearer but you shear closely and don't knock your sheep about. I therefore do not charge you for any part of your meat bill and I pay you at the rate of half-a-crown a hundred for all your sheep over and above your agreement. Will that do?"   "Very well indeed and I'm much obliged to you Mr Gordon."   "Well good-bye May! Always call when you're passing and if any work is going on you'll get your share. Here's your cheque. Send in Lawson!" Exit May in high spirits having cleared about three pounds per week during the whole term of shearing and having lived a far from unpleasant life indeed akin to that of a fighting cock from the commencement to the end of that period.   Lawson's interview may be described as having very similar results. He also was a first-class shearer though not so artistic as the gifted Billy. Jack Windsor's saucy blue eyes twinkled merrily as he returned to his companions and incontinently leaped on the back of his wild-eyed colt. After these three worthies came a shearer named Jackson; he belonged to quite a different class; he could shear very well if he pleased but had a rooted disbelief that honesty was the best policy and a fixed determination to shear as many sheep as he could get the manager to pass. By dint of close watching constant reprimand and occasional "raddling" (marking badly-shorn sheep and refusing to count them) Mr Gordon had managed to tone him down to average respectability of execution. Still he was always uneasily aware that whenever his eye was not upon him Jackson was doing what he ought not to do with might and main. Gordon had indeed kept him on from sheer necessity but he intended none the less to mark his opinion of him.   [89] "Come in Jackson! Your tally is so-and-so. Is that right?"   Jackson. - "I suppose so."   "Cook and store account so much; shearing account so much."   Jackson. - "And a good deal too."   "That is your affair" said Mr Gordon sternly enough. "Now look here! You're in my opinion a bad shearer and a bad man. You have given me a great deal of trouble and I should have kicked you out of the shed weeks ago if I had not been short of men. I shall make a difference between you and men who have tried to do their best. I make you no allowance of any sort I pay you by the strict agreement. There's your cheque. Go!"   Jackson goes out with a very black countenance. He mutters with a surly oath that if "he'd known how he was going to be served he'd ha' 'blocked' 'em a little more." He is pretty well believed to have been served right and he secures no sympathy whatever. Working-men of all classes are shrewd and fair judges generally. If an employer does his best to mete out justice he is always appreciated and supported by the majority. These few instances will serve as a description of the whole process of settling with the shearers. The horses have all been got in. Great catching and saddling-up has taken place all the morning. By the afternoon the whole party are dispersed to the four winds; some like Abraham Lawson and his friends to sheds "higher up" in a colder climate where shearing necessarily commences later. From these they will pass to others until the last sheep in the mountain runs are shorn. Then those who have not farms of their own betake themselves to reaping. Billy May and Jack Windsor are quite as ready to back themselves against time in the wheat-field as on the shearing-floor. Harvest over they find their pockets inconveniently full so they commence to visit their friends and repay themselves for their toils by a tolerably liberal allowance of rest and recreation.   Old Ben and a few choice specimens of the olden time get no further than the nearest public house. Their cheques are handed to the landlord and a "stupendous and terrible spree" sets in. At the end of a week he informs them that they have received liquor to the amount of their cheques - something over a hundred pounds - save the mark! They meekly acquiesce as is their custom. The landlord generously presents them with a glass of grog each and they take the road for the next woolshed.   The shearers being despatched the sheep-washers a smaller and less regarded force file up. They number some forty men. Nothing more than fair bodily strength willingness and obedience being required in their case they are more easy to get and to replace than shearers. They are a varied and motley lot. That powerful and rather handsome man is a New Yorker of Irish parentage. Next to him is a slight neat quiet individual. He was a lieutenant in a line regiment. The lad in the rear was a Sandhurst cadet. Then came two navvies and a New Zealander five Chinamen a Frenchman two Germans Tin Pot Jerry and Wallaby - three aboriginal blacks. There are no invidious distinctions as to caste colour or nationality. Every one is a man and a brother at sheep-washing. Wage one pound per week; wood water tents and food "à la discrétion." Their accounts are simple: so many weeks so many pounds; store account so much; hospital? well five shillings; cheque good-morning. [90]  The wool-pressers the fleece-rollers the fleece-pickers the yardsmen the washers' cooks the hut cooks the spare shepherds; all these and a few other supernumeraries inevitable at shearing-time having been paid off the snowstorm of cheques which has been fluttering all day comes to an end. Mr Gordon and the remaining "sous-officiers" go to rest that night with much of the mental strain removed which has been telling on every waking moment for the last two months.   The long train of drays and wagons with loads varying from twenty to forty-five bales has been moving off in detachments since the commencement. In a day or two the last of them will have rolled heavily away. The 1400 bales averaging three and a half hundredweight are distributed slow journeying along the road which they mark from afar standing huge and columnar like guide tumuli from Anabanco to the waters of the Murray. Between the two points there is neither a hill nor a stone. All is the vast monotonous sea of plain - at this season a prairie-meadow exuberant with vegetation; in the late summer or in the occasional and dreaded phenomenon of a dry winter dusty and herbless as a brickfield for hundreds of miles.   Silence falls on the plains and waters of Anabanco for the next six months. The woolshed the washpen and all the huts connected with them are lone and voiceless as caravanserais in a city of the plague.    The history of another accident was told me by the settler's wife to whom it had occurred. Whilst driving a light cart alone along a bush-track it was overturned by one of the wheels striking against a 'blackboy' stump her hip being dislocated by the fall. She yet contrived by crawling upon her hands and knees to loosen the horse from the shafts in the hope that his returning home without her would announce her disaster; but he disappointed her by stopping to feed and she continued to lie upon the ground in solitude and agony for many hours sadly aware also as the day sped on that her prolonged absence would excite neither surprise nor alarm amongst her own family since they knew that the had left home with the intention of visiting a married son and would presume that she had been persuaded to sleep at his house. [63] An old native woman a great-aunt of Binnahan accidentally discovered her before night in this miserable condition and treated her with the kindness that characterizes the behaviour of the aborigines in all similar circumstances who if they meet a white person lost in the bush will invariably do their utmost to assist him. [64]  Another lady told me that having once lost her way on horseback she tried a coo-ee on the chance of making herself heard by a fellow-creature when a native unseen by her previously appeared as suddenly as did Roderick Dhu's men at his call and not only guided her into the right track but also saw her safely to the end of her journey.  The convict depot from which our little town derived its chief importance was situated in the close vicinity of the pensioners' houses. At irregular intervals throughout the colony depots of this kind are scattered to which convicts are drafted after serving a portion of their sentence in the Fremantle gaol. [137] On being thus transferred from the gaol to the depot convicts who are then 'probation prisoners' are distributed in gangs to work upon the roads of the district in which the depot is situated. Beside furnishing menders of the highway the depots supply the place of 'mops' or 'statutes' for the hiring of farm labourers and also serve as register offices for servants and tutors according to the exigencies of the colonists and the professed capacity of those prisoners who are entitled to their ticket-of-leave.  No one would have supposed from the exterior of our convict depot at Barladong that its inmates were under any sort of restraint and contrary to ordinary precedent in Government work the architect appeared to have been strongly imbued with the idea of saving space and husbanding brick and mortar. Low white railings surrounded the enclosure instead of high spiked walls and an out-house that looked like a large lock-up coach-house and which stood open in the day was the convicts' common hall and dormitory. The warders' quarters were as miserably cramped as if the bit of desert on which they stood had been rated at a London ground-rent and the discovery that a district hospital was wanted had resulted in the appropriation for that purpose of an old kitchen its which apartment both bond and free alike received benefit but in less degree than would have been conferred on them by larger space and better ventilation. The depot bell however was a public boon without alloy It swung from a tall slender gallows in the middle of the white-railed yard and being rung several times a day at stated hours was as good as a church clock to those who heard it few of whom had any other way of reckoning time.  Camp on the Oakover lat. 21° 9'  December 13 1873.  DEAR Mr. Elder - We are all alive and that is all. We have lost everything and have only two camels left out of seventeen. Our journey has been difficult beyond all I had supposed possible. We are reduced to such a state by famine that we can scarcely crawl 100 yards and are quite incapable of hard work or indeed any work at all.  I send two men with two camels to try to get some help from the station on the Do Grey and this goes by them. I cannot now give you details not knowing who your agents in Perth are. I have written to the Governor of Western Australia to take steps through your agent to send a small craft to take us to Perth. This is the only way we can get there. We are unable to go by land. It would require an entire new fit out and would cost much.  I may safely say no exploring party ever endured such protracted suffering as we have done nor did any one ever cross with their lives so vast an extent of continuous bad country. A man gets great credit for exploring such a country as we are now in: it is mere child's play; whilst we unfortunates I suppose shall be called fools for fighting for months against misfortunes and difficulties which have turned back others in two or three days. [301]  I hope to be able when in Adelaide to satisfy you that I have done all that could be done to get across. We have succeeded and that is one consolation but our lives have been saved only by the mercy and goodness of God. Our own arm could not help us out of the shadow of death that has fallen darkly upon us on several occasions.  "We are gaunt pictures of suffering and have nothing but the few rags we stand up in.  The monsoon may delay me.  I shall of course hasten to Adelaide.  Ever yours faithfully  P. EGERTON WARBURTON.  The Hon. T. ELDER M.L.C. Adelaide."  CHAPTER XI. LEFT AT "HELL'S GATES."  THERE is no need to dwell upon the mental agonies of that miserable night. Perhaps of all the five the one least qualified to endure it realized the prospect of suffering most acutely. Mrs. Vickers - lay-figure and noodle as she was - had the keen instinct of approaching danger which is in her sex a sixth sense. She was a woman and a mother and owned a double capacity for suffering. Her feminine imagination pictured all the horrors of death by famine and having realized her own torments her maternal love forced her to live them over again in the person of her child. Rejecting Bates's offer of a pea-jacket and Frere's vague tenders of assistance the poor woman withdrew behind a rock that faced the sea and with her daughter in her arms resigned herself to her torturing thoughts. Sylvia recovered from her terror was almost content and curled in her mother's shawl slept. To her little soul this midnight mystery of boats and muskets had all the flavour of a romance. With Bates Frere and her mother so close to her it was impossible to be afraid; besides it was obvious that papa - the Supreme Being of the settlement - must at once return and severely punish the impertinent prisoners who had [136] dared to insult his wife and child and as Sylvia dropped off to sleep she caught herself with some indignation pitying the mutineers for the tremendous scrape they had got themselves into. How they would be flogged when papa came back! In the meantime this sleeping in the open air was novel and rather pleasant.   Honest Bates produced a piece of biscuit and with all the generosity of his nature suggested that this should be set aside for the sole use of the two females but Mrs. Vickers would not hear of it. "We must all share alike" said she with something of the spirit that she knew her husband would have displayed under like circumstance; and Frere wondered at her apparent strength of mind. Had he been gifted with more acuteness he would not have wondered; for when a crisis comes to one of two persons who have lived much together the influence of the nobler spirit makes itself felt. Frere had a tinder-box in his pocket and he made a fire with some dry leaves and sticks. Grimes fell asleep and the two men sitting at their fire discussed the chances of escape. Neither liked to openly broach the supposition that they had been finally deserted. It was concluded between them that unless the brig sailed in the night - and the now risen moon showed her yet lying at anchor - the convicts would return and bring them food. This supposition proved correct for about an hour after daylight they saw the whale-boat pulling towards them.   A discussion had arisen amongst the mutineers as to the propriety of at once making sail but Barker who had been one of the pilot-boat crew and knew the dangers of the Bar vowed that he would not undertake to steer the brig through the Gates until morning; and so the boats being secured astern a strict watch was set lest the helpless Bates should attempt to rescue the vessel. During the evening - the excitement attendant upon the outbreak having passed away and the magnitude of the task before them being more fully apparent to their minds - a feeling of pity for the unfortunate party on the mainland took possession of them. It was quite possible that the Osprey might be recaptured in which case five useless murders would have been committed; and however callous in bloodshed were the majority of the ten not one among them could contemplate in cold blood without a twinge of remorse the death of the harmless child of the Commandant.   John Rex seeing how matters were going made haste to take to himself the credit of mercy. [137] He ruled and had always ruled his ruffians not so much by suggesting to them the course they should take as by leading them on the way they had already chosen for themselves. "I propose" said he "that we divide the provisions. There are five of them and twelve of us. Then nobody can blame us."   "Ay" said Porter mindful of a similar exploit "and if we're taken they can tell what we have done. Don't let our affair be like that of the Cypress to leave them to starve." "Ay ay" says Barker "you're right! When Fergusson was topped at Hobart Town I heard old Troke say that if he'd not refused to set the tucker ashore he might ha' got off with a whole skin."   Thus urged by self-interest as well as sentiment to mercy the provision was got upon deck by daylight and a division was made. The soldiers with generosity born of remorse were for giving half to the marooned men but Barker exclaimed against this. "When the schooner finds they don't get to headquarters she's bound to come back and look for 'em" said he; "and we'll want all the tucker we can get maybe afore we sights land."   This reasoning was admitted and acted upon. There was in the harness-cask about fifty pounds of salt meat and a third of this quantity together with half a small sack of flour some tea and sugar mixed together in a bag and an iron kettle and pannikin was placed in the whale-boat. Rex fearful of excesses among his crew had also lowered down one of the two small puncheons of rum which the store-room contained. Cheshire disputed this and stumbling over a goat that had been taken on board from Philip's Island caught the creature by the leg and threw it into the sea bidding Rex take that with him also. Rex dragged the poor beast into the boat and with this miscellaneous cargo pushed off to the shore. The poor goat shivering began to bleat piteously and the men laughed. To a stranger it would have appeared that the boat contained a happy party of fishermen or coast settlers returning with the proceeds of a day's marketing.   Laying off as the water shallowed Rex called to Bates to come for the cargo and three men with muskets standing up as before ready to resist any attempt at capture the provisions goat and all were carried ashore. "There!" says Rex "you can't say we've used you badly for we've divided the provisions." [138] The sight of this almost unexpected succour revived the courage of the five and they felt grateful. After the horrible anxiety they had endured all that night they were prepared to look with kindly eyes upon the men who had come to their assistance.   "Man" said Bates with something like a sob in his voice "I didn't expect this. You are good fellows for there ain't much tucker aboard I know."   "Yes" affirmed Frere "you're good fellows."   Rex burst into a savage laugh. "Shut your mouth you tyrant" said he forgetting his dandyism in the recollection of his former suffering. "It ain't for your benefit. You may thank the lady and the child for it."   Julia Vickers hastened to propitiate the arbiter of her daughter's fate. "We are obliged to you" she said with a touch of quiet dignity resembling her husband's; "and if I ever get back safely I will take care that your kindness shall be known."   The swindler and forger took off his leather cap with quite an air. It was five years since a lady had spoken to him and the old time when he was Mr. Lionel Crofton a "gentleman sportsman" came back again for an instant. At that moment with liberty in his hand and fortune all before him he felt his self-respect return and he looked the lady in the face without flinching.   "I sincerely trust madam" said he "that you will get back safely. May I hope for your good wishes for myself and my companions?"   Listening Bates burst into a roar of astonished enthusiasm. "What a dog it is!" he cried. "John Rex John Rex you were never made to be a convict man!"   Rex smiled. "Good-bye Mr. Bates and God preserve you!"   "Good-bye" says Bates rubbing his hat off his face "and I -I - damme I hope you'll get safe off - there! for liberty's sweet to every man."   "Good-bye prisoners!" says Sylvia waving her handkerchief; "and I hope they won't catch you too."   So with cheers and waving of handkerchiefs the boat departed.   In the emotion which the apparently disinterested conduct of John Rex had occasioned the exiles all earnest thought of their [139] own position had vanished and strange to say the prevailing feeling was that of anxiety for the ultimate fate of the mutineers. But as the boat grew smaller and smaller in the distance so did their consciousness of their own situation grow more and more distinct; and when at last the boat had disappeared in the shadow of the brig all started as if from a dream to the wakeful contemplation of their own case.   A council of war was held with Mr. Frere at the head of it and the possessions of the little party were thrown into common stock. The salt meat flour and tea were placed in a hollow rock at some distance from the beach and Mr. Bates was appointed purser to apportion to each without fear or favour his stated allowance. The goat was tethered with a piece of fishing line sufficiently long to allow her to browse. The cask of rum by special agreement was placed in the innermost recess of the rock and it was resolved that its contents should not be touched except in case of sickness or in last extremity. There was no lack of water for a spring ran bubbling from the rocks within a hundred yards of the spot where the party had landed. They calculated that with prudence their provisions would last them for nearly four weeks.   It was found upon a review of their possessions that they had among them three pocket knives a ball of string two pipes matches and a fig of tobacco fishing lines with hooks and a big jack-knife which Frere had taken to gut the fish he had expected to catch. But they saw with dismay that there was nothing which could be used axe-wise among the party. Mrs. Vickers had her shawl and Bates a pea-jacket but Frere and Grimes were without extra clothing. It was agreed that each should retain his own property with the exception of the fishing lines which were confiscated to the commonwealth.   Having made these arrangements the kettle filled with water from the spring was slung from three green sticks over the fire and a pannikin of weak tea together with a biscuit served out to each of the party save Grimes who declared himself unable to eat. Breakfast over Bates made a damper which was cooked in the ashes and then another council was held as to future habitation.   It was clearly evident that they could not sleep in the open air. It was the middle of summer and though no annoyance from rain was apprehended the heat in the middle of the day [140] was most oppressive. Moreover it was absolutely necessary that Mrs. Vickers and the child should have some place to themselves. At a little distance from the beach was a sandy rise that led up to the face of the cliff and on the eastern side of this rise grew a forest of young trees. Frere proposed to cut down these trees and make a sort of hut with them. It was soon discovered however that the pocket knives were insufficient for this purpose but by dint of notching the young saplings and then breaking them down they succeeded in a couple of hours in collecting wood enough to roof over a space between the hollow rock which contained the provisions and another rock in shape like a hammer which jutted out within five yards of it. Mrs. Vickers and Sylvia were to have this hut as a sleeping-place and Frere and Bates lying at the mouth of the larder would at once act as a guard to it and them. Grimes was to make for himself another hut where the fire had been lighted on the previous night.   When they got back to dinner inspirited by this resolution they found poor Mrs. Vickers in great alarm. Grimes who by reason of the dint in his skull had been left behind was walking about the sea-beach talking mysteriously and shaking his fist at an imaginary foe. On going up to him they discovered that the blow had affected his brain for he was delirious. Frere endeavoured to soothe him without effect; and at last by Bates's advice the poor fellow was rolled in the sea. The cold bath quelled his violence and being laid beneath the shade of a rock hard by he fell into a condition of great muscular exhaustion and slept.   The damper was then portioned out by Bates and together with a small piece of meat it formed the dinner of the party. Mrs. Vickers reported that she had observed a great commotion on board the brig and thought that the prisoners must be throwing overboard such portions of the cargo as were not absolutely necessary to them in order to lighten her. This notion Bates declared to be correct and further pointed out that the mutineers had got out a kedge-anchor and by hauling on the kedge-line were gradually warping the brig down the harbour. Before dinner was over a light breeze sprang up and the Osprey running up the union-jack reversed fired a musket either in farewell or triumph and spreading her sails disappeared round the western horn of the harbour.   [141] Mrs. Vickers taking Sylvia with her went away a few paces and leaning against the rugged wall of her future home wept bitterly. Bates and Frere affected cheerfulness but each felt that he had hitherto regarded the presence of the brig as a sort of safeguard and had never fully realized his own loneliness until now.   The necessity for work however admitted of no indulgence of vain sorrow and Bates setting the example the pair worked so hard that by nightfall they had torn down and dragged together sufficient brushwood to complete Mrs. Vickers's hut. During the progress of this work they were often interrupted by Grimes who persisted in vague rushes at them exclaiming loudly against their supposed treachery in leaving him at the mercy of the mutineers. Bates also complained of the pain caused by the wound in his forehead and that he was afflicted with a giddiness which he knew not how to avert. By dint of frequently bathing his head at the spring however he succeeded in keeping on his legs until the work of dragging together the boughs was completed when he threw himself on the ground and declared that he could rise no more.   Frere applied to him the remedy that had been so successfully tried upon Grimes but the salt water inflamed his wound and rendered his condition worse. Mrs. Vickers recommended that a little spirit and water should be used to wash the cut and the cask was got out and broached for that purpose. Tea and damper formed their evening meal; and by the light of a blazing fire their condition looked less desperate. Mrs. Vickers had set the pannikin on a flat stone and dispensed the tea with an affectation of dignity which would have been absurd had it not been heart-rending. She had smoothed her hair and pinned the white shawl about her coquettishly; she even ventured to lament to Mr. Frere that she had not brought more clothes. Sylvia was in high spirits and scorned to confess hunger. When the tea had been drunk she fetched water from the spring in the kettle and bathed Bates's head with it. It was resolved that on the morrow a search should be made for some place from which to cast the fishing line and that one of the number should fish daily.   The condition of the unfortunate Grimes now gave cause for the greatest uneasiness. From maundering foolishly he had taken to absolute violence and had to be watched by Frere. [142] After much muttering and groaning the poor fellow at last dropped off to sleep and Frere having assisted Bates to his sleeping-place in front of the rock and laid him down on a heap of green brushwood prepared to snatch a few hours' slumber. Wearied by excitement and the labours of the day he slept heavily but towards morning was awakened by a strange noise.   Grimes whose delirium had apparently increased had succeeded in forcing his way through the rude fence of brushwood and had thrown himself upon Bates with the ferocity of insanity. Growling to himself he had seized the unfortunate pilot by the throat and the pair were struggling together. Bates weakened by the sickness that had followed upon his wound in the head was quite unable to cope with his desperate assailant but calling feebly upon Frere for help had made shift to lay hold upon the jack-knife of which we have before spoken. Frere starting to his feet rushed to the assistance of the pilot but was too late. Grimes enraged by the sight of the knife tore it from Bates's grasp and before Frere could catch his arm plunged it twice into the unfortunate man's breast.   "I'm a dead man!" cried Bates faintly.   The sight of the blood together with the exclamation of his victim recalled Grimes to consciousness. He looked in bewilderment at the bloody weapon and then flinging it from him rushed away towards the sea into which he plunged headlong.   Frere aghast at this sudden and terrible tragedy gazed after him and saw from out the placid water sparkling in the bright beams of morning a pair of arms with outstretched hands emerge; a black spot that was a head uprose between these stiffening arms and then with a horrible cry the whole disappeared and the bright water sparkled as placidly as before. The eyes of the terrified Frere travelling back to the wounded man saw midway between this sparkling water and the knife that lay on the sand an object that went far to explain the maniac's sudden burst of fury. The rum cask lay upon its side by the remnants of last night's fire and close to it was a clout with which the head of the wounded man had been bound. It was evident that the poor creature wandering in his delirium had come across the rum cask drunk a quantity of its contents and been maddened by the fiery spirit.   Frere hurried to the side of Bates and lifting him up strove [143] to staunch the blood that flowed from his chest. It would seem that he had been resting himself on his left elbow and that Grimes snatching the knife from his right hand had stabbed him twice in the right breast. He was pale and senseless and Frere feared that the wound was mortal. Tearing off his neck-handkerchief he endeavoured to bandage the wound but found that the strip of silk was insufficient for the purpose. The noise had roused Mrs. Vickers who stifling her terror made haste to tear off a portion of her dress and with this a bandage of sufficient width was made. Frere went to the cask to see if haply he could obtain from it a little spirit with which to moisten the lips of the dying man but it was empty. Grimes after drinking his fill had overturned the unheaded puncheon and the greedy sand had absorbed every drop of liquor. Sylvia brought some water from the spring and Mrs. Vickers bathing Bates's head with this he revived a little. By-and-by Mrs. Vickers milked the goat - she had never done such a thing before in all her life - and the milk being given to Bates in a pannikin he drank it eagerly but vomited it almost instantly. It was evident that he was sinking from some internal injury.   None of the party had much appetite for breakfast but Frere whose sensibilities were less acute than those of the others ate a piece of salt meat and damper. It struck him with a curious feeling of pleasant selfishness that now Grimes had gone the allowance of provisions would be increased and that if Bates went also it would be increased still further. He did not give utterance to his thoughts however but sat with the wounded man's head on his knees and brushed the settling flies from his face. He hoped after all that the pilot would not die for he should then be left alone to look after the women. Perhaps some such thought was agitating Mrs. Vickers also. As for Sylvia she made no secret of her anxiety.   "Don't die Mr. Bates - oh don't die!" she said standing piteously near but afraid to touch him. "Don't leave mamma and me alone in this dreadful place!"   Poor Bates of course said nothing but Frere frowned heavily and Mrs. Vickers said reprovingly "Sylvia!" just as if they had been in the old house on distant Sarah Island.   In the afternoon Frere went away to drag together some wood for the fire and when he returned he found the pilot near his end. Mrs. Vickers said that for an hour he had lain without [144] motion and almost without breath. The major's wife had seen more than one death-bed and was calm enough; but poor little Sylvia sitting on a stone hard by shook with terror. She had a dim notion that death must be accompanied by violence. As the sun sank Bates rallied; but the two watchers knew that it was but the final flicker of the expiring candle. "He's going!" said Frere at length under his breath as though fearful of awaking his half-slumbering soul. Mrs. Vickers her eyes streaming with silent tears lifted the honest head and moistened the parched lips with her soaked handkerchief. A tremor shook the once stalwart limbs and the dying man opened his eyes. For an instant he seemed bewildered and then looking from one to the other intelligence returned to his glance and it was evident that he remembered all. His gaze rested upon the pale face of the affrighted Sylvia and then turned to Frere. There could be no mistaking the mute appeal of those eloquent eyes.   "Yes I'll take care of her" said Frere.   Bates smiled and then observing that the blood from his wound had stained the white shawl of Mrs. Vickers he made an effort to move his head. It was not fitting that a lady's shawl should be stained with the blood of a poor fellow like himself. The fashionable fribble with quick instinct understood the gesture and gently drew the head back upon her bosom. In the presence of death the woman was womanly. For a moment all was silent and they thought he had gone; but all at once he opened his eyes and looked round for the sea   "Turn my face to it once more" he whispered; and as they raised him he inclined his ear to listen. "It's calm enough here God bless it" he said; "but I can hear the waves a-breaking hard upon the Bar!"   And so his head dropped and he died.   As Frere relieved Mrs. Vickers from the weight of the corpse Sylvia ran to her mother. "Oh mamma mamma" she cried "why did God let him die when we wanted him so much?"   Before it grew dark Frere made shift to carry the body to the shelter of some rocks at a little distance and spreading the jacket over the face he piled stones upon it to keep it steady. The march of events had been so rapid that he scarcely realized that since the previous evening two of the five human creatures left in this wilderness had escaped from it. As he did realize it he began to wonder whose turn it would be next.   [145] Mrs. Vickers worn out by the fatigue and excitement of the day retired to rest early; and Sylvia refusing to speak to Frere followed her mother. This manifestation of unaccountable dislike on the part of the child hurt Maurice more than he cared to own. He felt angry with her for not loving him and yet he took no pains to conciliate her. It was with a curious pleasure that he remembered how she must soon look up to him as her chief protector. Had Sylvia been just a few years older the young man would have thought himself in love with her.   The following day passed gloomily. It was hot and sultry and a dull haze hung over the mountains. Frere spent the morning in scooping a grave in the sand in which to inter poor Bates. Practically awake to his own necessities he removed such portions of clothing from the body as would be useful to him but hid them under a stone not liking to let Mrs. Vickers see what he had done. Having completed the grave by midday he placed the corpse therein and rolled as many stones as possible to the sides of the mound. In the afternoon he cast the fishing line from the point of a rock he had marked the day before but caught nothing. Passing by the grave on his return he noticed that Mrs. Vickers had placed at the head of it a rude cross formed by tying two pieces of stick together.   After supper - the usual salt meat and damper - he lit an economical pipe and tried to talk to Sylvia. "Why won't you be friends with me missy?" he asked.   "I don't like you" said Sylvia. "You frighten me."   "Why?"   "You are not kind. I don't mean that you do cruel things; but you are - oh I wish papa was here!" "Wishing won't bring him!" says Frere pressing his hoarded tobacco together with prudent forefinger.   "There! That's what I mean! Is that kind? 'Wishing won't bring him!' Oh if it only would!"   "I didn't mean it unkindly" says Frere. "What a strange child you are."   "There are persons" says Sylvia "who have no Affinity for each other. I read about it in a book papa had and I suppose that's what it is. I have no Affinity for you. I can't help it can I?"   "Rubbish!" Frere returned. "Come here and I'll tell you a story."   [146] Mrs. Vickers had gone back to her cave and the two were alone by the fire near which stood the kettle and the newly-made damper. The child with some show of hesitation came to him and he caught and placed her on his knee. The moon had not yet risen and the shadows cast by the flickering fire seemed weird and monstrous. The wicked wish to frighten this helpless creature came to Maurice Frere.   "There was once" said he "a Castle in an old wood and in this Castle there lived an Ogre with great goggle eyes."   "You silly man!" said Sylvia struggling to be free. "You are trying to frighten me!"   "And this Ogre lived on the bones of little girls. One day a little girl was travelling the wood and she heard the Ogre coming. 'Haw! haw! Haw! haw!'"   "Mr. Frere let me down!"   "She was terribly frightened and she ran and ran and ran until all of a sudden she saw - "   A piercing scream burst from his companion. "Oh! oh! What's that?" she cried and clung to her persecutor.   Beyond the fire stood the figure of a man. He staggered forward and then falling on his knees stretched out his hands and hoarsely articulated one word - "Food." It was Rufus Dawes.   The sound of a human voice broke the spell of terror that was on the child and as the glow from the fire fell upon the tattered yellow garments she guessed at once the whole story. Not so Maurice Frere. He saw before him a new danger a new mouth to share the scanty provision and snatching a brand from the fire he kept the convict at bay. But Rufus Dawes glaring round with wolfish eyes caught sight of the damper resting against the iron kettle and made a clutch at it Frere dashed the brand in his face. "Stand back!" he cried. "We have no food to spare!" The convict uttered a savage cry and raising the iron gad plunged forward desperately to attack this new enemy; but quick as thought the child glided past Frere and snatching the loaf placed it in the hands of the starving man with "Here poor prisoner eat!" and then turning to Frere she cast upon him a glance so full of horror indignation and surprise that the man blushed and threw down the brand.   As for Rufus Dawes the sudden apparition of this golden-haired [147] girl seemed to have transformed him. Allowing the loaf to slip through his fingers he gazed with haggard eyes at the retreating figure of the child and as it vanished into the darkness outside the circle of firelight the unhappy man sank his face upon his blackened horny hands and burst into tears.     CHAPTER XII. "MR." DAWES.  THE COARSE TONES of Maurice Frere roused him. "What do you want?" he asked. Rufus Dawes raising his head contemplated the figure before him and recognized it. "Is it you?" he said slowly.   "What do you mean? Do you know me?" asked Frere drawing back. But the convict did not reply. His momentary emotion passed away the pangs of hunger returned and greedily seizing upon the piece of damper he began to eat in silence.   "Do you hear man?" repeated Frere at length. "What are you?"   "An escaped prisoner. You can give me up in the morning. I've done my best and I'm beat."   The sentence struck Frere with dismay. The man did not know that the settlement had been abandoned!   "I cannot give you up. There is no one but myself and a woman and child on the settlement." Rufus Dawes pausing in his eating stared at him in amazement. "The prisoners have gone away in the schooner. If you choose to remain free you can do so as far as I am concerned. I am as helpless as you are."   "But how do you come here?"   Frere laughed bitterly. To give explanations to convicts was foreign to his experience and he did not relish the task. In this case however there was no help for it. "The prisoners mutinied and seized the brig."   "What brig?"   "The Osprey."   A terrible light broke upon Rufus Dawes and he began to [148] understand how he had again missed his chance. "Who took her?"   "That double-dyed villain John Rex" says Frere giving vent to his passion. "May she sink and burn and -"   "Have they gone then?" cried the miserable man clutching at his hair with a gesture of hopeless rage.   "Yes; two days ago and left us here to starve." Rufus Dawes burst into a laugh so discordant that it made the other shudder. "We'll starve together Maurice Frere" said he "for while you've a crust I'll share it. If I don't get liberty at least I'll have revenge!"   The sinister aspect of this famished savage sitting with his chin on his ragged knees rocking himself to and fro in the light of the fire gave Mr. Maurice Frere a new sensation. He felt as might have felt that African hunter who returning to his camp fire found a lion there. "Wretch!" said he shrinking from him "why should you wish to be revenged on me?"   The convict turned upon him with a snarl. "Take care what you say! I'll have no hard words. Wretch! If I am a wretch who made me one? If I hate you and myself and the world who made me hate it? I was born free - as free as you are. Why should I be sent to herd with beasts and condemned to this slavery worse than death? Tell me that Maurice Frere - tell me that!" "I didn't make the laws" says Frere "why do you attack me?"   "Because you are what I was. You are FREE! You can do as you please. You can love you can work you can think. I can only hate!" He paused as if astonished at himself and then continued with a low laugh. "Fine words for a convict eh! But never mind it's all right Mr. Frere; we're equal now and I sha'n't die an hour sooner than you though you are a 'free man'!"   Frere began to think that he was dealing with another madman.   "Die! There's no need to talk of dying" he said as soothingly as it was possible for him to say it. "Time enough for that by-and-by."   "There spoke the free man. We convicts have an advantage over you gentlemen. You are afraid of death; we pray for it. It is the best thing that can happen to us. Die! They were going to hang me once. I wish they had. My God I wish they had!"   [149] There was such a depth of agony in this terrible utterance that Maurice Frere was appalled at it. "There go and sleep my man" he said. "You are knocked up. We'll talk in the morning."   "Hold on a bit!" cried Rufus Dawes with a coarseness of manner altogether foreign to that he had just assumed. "Who's with ye?"   "The wife and daughter of the Commandant" replied Frere half afraid to refuse an answer to a question so fiercely put.   "No one else?"   "No." "Poor souls!" said the convict "I pity them." And then he stretched himself like a dog before the blaze and went to sleep instantly. Maurice Frere looking at the gaunt figure of this addition to the party was completely puzzled how to act. Such a character had never before come within the range of his experience. He knew not what to make of this fierce ragged desperate man who wept and threatened by turns - who was now snarling in the most repulsive bass of the convict gamut and now calling upon Heaven in tones which were little less than eloquent. At first he thought of precipitating himself upon the sleeping wretch and pinioning him but a second glance at the sinewy though wasted limbs forbade him to follow out the rash suggestion of his own fears. Then a horrible prompting - arising out of his former cowardice - made him feel for the jack-knife with which one murder had already been committed. Their stock of provisions was so scanty and after all the lives of the woman and child were worth more than that of this unknown desperado! But to do him justice the thought no sooner shaped itself than he crushed it out. "We'll wait till morning and see how he shapes" said Frere to himself; and pausing at the brushwood barricade behind which the mother and daughter were clinging to each other he whispered that he was on guard outside and that the absconder slept. But when morning dawned he found that there was no need for alarm. The convict was lying in almost the same position as that in which he had left him and his eyes were closed. His threatening outbreak of the previous night had been produced by the excitement of his sudden rescue and he was now incapable of violence. Frere advanced and shook him by the shoulder.   [150] "Not alive!" cried the poor wretch waking with a start and raising his arm to strike. "Keep off!"   "It's all right" said Frere. "No one is going to harm you. Wake up."   Rufus Dawes glanced around him stupidly and then remembering what had happened with a great effort he staggered to his feet. "I thought they'd got me!" he said "but it's the other way I see. Come let's have breakfast Mr. Frere. I'm hungry."   "You must wait" said Frere. "Do you think there is no one here but yourself?"   Rufus Dawes swaying to and fro from weakness passed his shred of a cuff over his eyes. "I don't know anything about it. I only know I'm hungry."   Frere stopped short. Now or never was the time to settle future relations. Lying awake in the night with the jack-knife ready to his hand he had decided on the course of action that must be adopted. The convict should share with the rest but no more. If he rebelled at that there must be a trial of strength between them. "Look you here" he said. "We have but barely enough food to serve us until help comes - if it does come. I have the care of that poor woman and child and I will see fair play for their sakes. You shall share with us to our last bit and drop but by Heaven you shall get no more."   The convict stretching out his wasted arms looked down upon them with the uncertain gaze of a drunken man. "I am weak now" he said. "You have the best of me"; and then he sank suddenly down upon the ground exhausted. "Give me a drink" he moaned feebly motioning with his hand. Frere got him water in the pannikin and having drunk it he smiled and lay down to sleep again. Mrs. Vickers and Sylvia coming out while he still slept recognized him as the desperado of the settlement.   "He was the most desperate man we had" said Mrs. Vickers identifying herself with her husband. "Oh what shall we do?"   "He won't do much harm" returned Frere looking down at the notorious ruffian with curiosity. "He's as near dead as can be."   Sylvia looked up at him with her clear child's glance. "We mustn't let him die" said she. "That would be murder." [151] "No no" returned Frere hastily "no one wants him to die. But what can we do?"   "I'll nurse him!" cried Sylvia.   Frere broke into one of his coarse laughs the first one that he had indulged in since the mutiny. "You nurse him! By George that's a good one!" The poor little child weak and excitable felt the contempt in the tone and burst into a passion of sobs. "Why do you insult me you wicked man? The poor fellow's ill and he'll - he'll die like Mr. Bates. Oh mamma mamma Let's go away by ourselves."   Frere swore a great oath and walked away. He went into the little wood under the cliff and sat down. He was full of strange thoughts which he could not express and which he had never owned before. The dislike the child bore to him made him miserable and yet he took delight in tormenting her. He was conscious that he had acted the part of a coward the night before in endeavouring to frighten her and that the detestation she bore him was well earned; but he had fully determined to stake his life in her defence should the savage who had thus come upon them out of the desert attempt violence and he was unreasonably angry at the pity she had shown. It was not fair to be thus misinterpreted. But he had done wrong to swear and more so in quitting them so abruptly. The consciousness of his wrong-doing however only made him more confirmed in it. His native obstinacy would not allow him to retract what he had said -even to himself. Walking along he came to Bates's grave and the cross upon it. Here was another evidence of ill-treatment. She had always preferred Bates. Now that Bates was gone she must needs transfer her childish affections to a convict. "Oh" said Frere to himself with pleasant recollections of many coarse triumphs in love-making "if you were a woman you little vixen I'd make you love me!" When he had said this he laughed at himself for his folly - he was turning romantic! When he got back he found Dawes stretched upon the brushwood with Sylvia sitting near him.   "He is better" said Mrs. Vickers disdaining to refer to the scene of the morning. "Sit down and have something to eat Mr. Frere."   "Are you better?" asked Frere abruptly.   To his surprise the convict answered quite civilly "I shall [152] be strong again in a day or two and then I can help you sir."   "Help me? How?" "To build a hut here for the ladies. And we'll live here all our lives and never go back to the sheds any more."   "He has been wandering a little" said Mrs. Vickers. "Poor fellow he seems quite well behaved."   The convict began to sing a little German song and to beat the refrain with his hand. Frere looked at him with curiosity. "I wonder what the story of that man's life has been" he said. "A queer one I'll be bound."   Sylvia looked up at him with a forgiving smile. "I'll ask him when he gets well" she said "and if you are good I'll tell you Mr. Frere."   Frere accepted the proffered friendship. "I am a great brute Sylvia sometimes ain't I?" he said "but I don't mean it."   "You are" returned Sylvia frankly "but let's shake hands and be friends. It's no use quarrelling when there are only four of us is it?" And in this way was Rufus Dawes admitted a member of the family circle.   Within a week from the night on which he had seen the smoke of Frere's fire the convict had recovered his strength and had become an important personage. The distrust with which he had been at first viewed had worn off and he was no longer an outcast to be shunned and pointed at or to be referred to in whispers. He had abandoned his rough manner and no longer threatened or complained and though at times a profound melancholy would oppress him his spirits were more even than those of Frere who was often moody sullen and overbearing. Rufus Dawes was no longer the brutalized wretch who had plunged into the dark waters of the bay to escape a life he loathed and had alternately cursed and wept in the solitudes of the forests. He was an active member of society - a society of four - and he began to regain an air of independence and authority. This change had been wrought by the influence of little Sylvia. Recovered from the weakness consequent upon this terrible journey Rufus Dawes had experienced for the first time in six years the soothing power of kindness. He had now an object to live for beyond himself. He was of use to somebody and had he died he would have been regretted. To us this means [153] little; to this unhappy man it meant everything. He found to his astonishment that he was not despised and that by the strange concurrence of circumstances he had been brought into a position in which his convict experiences gave him authority. He was skilled in all the mysteries of the prison sheds. He knew how to sustain life on as little food as possible. He could fell trees without an axe bake bread without an oven build a weatherproof hut without bricks or mortar. From the patient he became the adviser; and from the adviser the commander. In the semi-savage state to which these four human beings had been brought he found that savage accomplishments were of most value. Might was Right and Maurice Frere's authority of gentility soon succumbed to Rufus Dawes's authority of knowledge.   As the time wore on and the scanty stock of provisions decreased he found that his authority grew more and more powerful. Did a question arise as to the qualities of a strange plant it was Rufus Dawes who could pronounce upon it. Were fish to be caught it was Rufus Dawes who caught them. Did Mrs. Vickers complain of the instability of her brushwood hut it was Rufus Dawes who worked a wicker shield and plastering it with clay produced a wall that defied the keenest wind. He made cups out of pine-knots and plates out of bark-strips. He worked harder than any three men. Nothing daunted him nothing discouraged him. When Mrs. Vickers fell sick from anxiety and insufficient food it was Rufus Dawes who gathered fresh leaves for her couch who cheered her by hopeful words who voluntarily gave up half his own allowance of meat that she might grow stronger on it. The poor woman and her child called him "Mr." Dawes.   Frere watched all this with dissatisfaction that amounted at times to positive hatred. Yet he could say nothing for he could not but acknowledge that beside Dawes he was incapable. He even submitted to take orders from this escaped convict - it was so evident that the escaped convict knew better than he. Sylvia began to look upon Dawes as a second Bates. He was moreover all her own. She had an interest in him for she had nursed and protected him. If it had not been for her this prodigy would not have lived. He felt for her an absorbing affection that was almost a passion. She was his good angel his protectress his glimpse of Heaven. She had given him food [154] when he was starving and had believed in him when the world - the world of four - had looked coldly on him. He would have died for her and for love of her hoped for the vessel which should take her back to freedom and give him again into bondage.   But the days stole on and no vessel appeared. Each day they eagerly scanned the watery horizon; each day they longed to behold the bowsprit of the returning Ladybird glide past the jutting rock that shut out the view of the harbour - but in vain. Mrs. Vickers's illness increased and the stock of provisions began to run short. Dawes talked of putting himself and Frere on half allowance. It was evident that unless succour came in a few days they must starve.   Frere mooted all sorts of wild plans for obtaining food. He would make a journey to the settlement and swimming the estuary search if haply any casks of biscuit had been left behind in the hurry of departure. He would set springes for the seagulls and snare the pigeons at Liberty Point. But all these proved impracticable and with blank faces they watched their bag of flour grow smaller and smaller daily. Then the notion of escape was broached. Could they construct a raft? Impossible without nails or ropes. Could they build a boat? Equally impossible for the same reason. Could they raise a fire sufficient to signal a ship? Easily; but what ship would come within reach of that doubly-desolate spot? Nothing could be done but wait for a vessel which was sure to come for them sooner or later; and growing weaker day by day they waited.   One morning Sylvia was sitting in the sun reading the "English History" which by the accident of fright she had brought with her on the night of the mutiny. "Mr. Frere" said she suddenly "what is an alchemist?"   "A man who makes gold" was Frere's not very accurate definition.   "Do you know one?"   "No."   "Do you Mr. Dawes?"   "I knew a man once who thought himself one."   "What! A man who made gold?"   "After a fashion."   "But did he make gold?" persisted Sylvia.   [155] "No not absolutely make it. But he was in his worship of money an alchemist for all that."   "What became of him?"   "I don't know" said Dawes with so much constraint in his tone that the child instinctively turned the subject.   "Then alchemy is a very old art?"   "Oh yes."   "Did the Ancient Britons know it?"   "No not as old as that!"   Sylvia suddenly gave a little scream. The remembrance of the evening when she read about the Ancient Britons to poor Bates came vividly into her mind and though she had since re-read the passage that had then attracted her attention a hundred times it had never before presented itself to her in its full significance. Hurriedly turning the well-thumbed leaves she read aloud the passage which had provoked remark: -   "'The Ancient Britons were little better than Barbarians. They painted their bodies with Woad and seated in their light coracles of skin stretched upon slender wooden frames must have presented a wild and savage appearance.'"   "A coracle! That's a boat! Can't we make a coracle Mr. Dawes?"     CHAPTER XIII. WHAT THE SEAWEED SUGGESTED.  THE question gave the marooned party new hopes. Maurice Frere with his usual impetuosity declared that the project was a most feasible one and wondered - as such men will wonder - that it had never occurred to him before. "It's the simplest thing in the world!" he cried. "Sylvia you have saved us!" But upon taking the matter into more earnest consideration it became apparent that they were as yet a long way from the realization of their hopes. To make a coracle of skins seemed sufficiently easy but how to obtain the skins! The one miserable hide of the unlucky she-goat was utterly inadequate for the purpose. Sylvia - her face beaming with the hope of escape and with delight at having been the means of suggesting it - watched narrowly the countenance [156] of Rufus Dawes but she marked no answering gleam of joy in those eyes. "Can't it be done Mr. Dawes?" she asked trembling for the reply.   The convict knitted his brows gloomily.   "Come Dawes!" cried Frere forgetting his enmity for an instant in the flash of new hope "can't you suggest something?"   Rufus Dawes thus appealed to as the acknowledged Head of the little society felt a pleasant thrill of self-satisfaction. "I don't know" he said. "I must think of it. It looks easy and yet -" He paused as something in the water caught his eye. It was a mass of bladdery seaweed that the returning tide was wafting slowly to the shore. This object which would have passed unnoticed at any other time suggested to Rufus Dawes a new idea. "Yes" he added slowly with a change of tone "it may be done. I think I can see my way."   The others preserved a respectful silence until he should speak again. "How far do you think it is across the bay?" he asked of Frere.   "What to Sarah Island?"   "No to the Pilot Station."   "About four miles."   The convict sighed. "Too far to swim now though I might have done it once. But this sort of life weakens a man. It must be done after all."   "What are you going to do?" asked Frere.   "To kill the goat."   Sylvia uttered a little cry; she had become fond of her dumb companion. "Kill Nanny! Oh Mr. Dawes! What for?"   "I am going to make a boat for you" he said "and I want hides and thread and tallow."   A few weeks back Maurice Frere would have laughed at such a sentence but he had begun now to comprehend that this escaped convict was not a man to be laughed at and though he detested him for his superiority he could not but admit that he was superior.   "You can't get more than one hide off a goat man?" he said with an inquiring tone in his voice - as though it was just possible that such a marvellous being as Dawes could get a second hide by virtue of some secret process known only to himself.   [157] "I am going to catch other goats." "Where?"   "At the Pilot Station."   "But how are you going to get there?"   "Float across. Come there is not time for questioning! Go and cut down some saplings and let us begin!"   The lieutenant-master looked at the convict prisoner with astonishment and then gave way to the power of knowledge and did as he was ordered. Before sundown that evening the carcase of poor Nanny broken into various most unbutcherly fragments was hanging on the nearest tree; and Frere returning with as many young saplings as he could drag together found Rufus Dawes engaged in a curious occupation. He had killed the goat and having cut off its head close under the jaws and its legs at the knee-joint had extracted the carcase through a slit made in the lower portion of the belly which slit he had now sewn together with string. This proceeding gave him a rough bag and he was busily engaged in filling this bag with such coarse grass as he could collect. Frere observed also that the fat of the animal was carefully preserved and the intestines had been placed in a pool of water to soak.   The convict however declined to give information as to what he intended to do. "It's my own notion" he said. "Let me alone. I may make a failure of it." Frere on being pressed by Sylvia affected to know all about the scheme but to impose silence on himself. He was galled to think that a convict brain should contain a mystery which he might not share.   On the next day by Rufus Dawes's direction Frere cut down some rushes that grew about a mile from the camping ground and brought them in on his back. This took him nearly half a day to accomplish. Short rations were beginning to tell upon his physical powers. The convict on the other hand trained by a woeful experience in the Boats to endurance of hardship was slowly recovering his original strength.   "What are they for?" asked Frere as he flung the bundles down. His master condescended to reply. "To make a float."   "Well?"   The other shrugged his broad shoulders. "You are very dull Mr. Frere. I am going to swim over to the Pilot Station [158] and catch some of those goats. I can get across on the stuffed skin but I must float them back on the reeds."   "How the doose do you mean to catch 'em?" asked Frere wiping the sweat from his brow.   The convict motioned to him to approach. He did so and saw that his companion was cleaning the intestines of the goat. The outer membrane having been peeled off Rufus Dawes was turning the gut inside out. This he did by turning up a short piece of it as though it were a coat-sleeve and dipping the turned-up cuff into a pool of water. The weight of the water pressing between the cuff and the rest of the gut bore down a further portion; and so by repeated dippings the whole length was turned inside out. The inner membrane having been scraped away there remained a fine transparent tube which was tightly twisted and set to dry in the sun.   "There is the catgut for the noose" said Dawes. "I learnt that trick at the settlement. Now come here."   Frere following saw that a fire had been made between two stones and that the kettle was partly sunk in the ground near it. On approaching the kettle he found it full of smooth pebbles.   "Take out those stones" said Dawes.   Frere obeyed and saw at the bottom of the kettle a quantity of sparkling white powder and the sides of the vessel crusted with the same material.   "What's that?" he asked.   "Salt."   "How did you get it?"   "I filled the kettle with sea-water and then heating those pebbles red-hot in the fire dropped them into it. We could have caught the steam in a cloth and wrung out fresh water had we wished to do so. But thank God we have plenty."   Frere started. "Did you learn that at the settlement too?" he asked.   Rufus Dawes laughed with a sort of bitterness in his tones. "Do you think I have been at 'the settlement' all my life? The thing is very simple it is merely evaporation."   Frere burst out in sudden fretful admiration: "What a fellow you are Dawes! What are you - I mean what have you been?"   A triumphant light came into the other's face and for the [159] instant he seemed about to make some startling revelation. But the light faded and he checked himself with a gesture of pain.   "I am a convict. Never mind what I have been. A sailor a shipbuilder prodigal vagabond - what does it matter? It won't alter my fate will it?"   "If we get safely back" says Frere "I'll ask for a free pardon for you. You deserve it."   "Come" returned Dawes with a discordant laugh. "Let us wait until we get back."   "You don't believe me?"   "I don't want favour at your hands" he said with a return of the old fierceness. "Let us get to work. Bring up the rushes here and tie them with a fishing line."   At this instant Sylvia came up. "Good afternoon Mr. Dawes. Hard at work? Oh! what's this in the kettle?" The voice of the child acted like a charm upon Rufus Dawes. He smiled quite cheerfully.   "Salt miss. I am going to catch the goats with that."   "Catch the goats! How? Put it on their tails?" she cried merrily.   "Goats are fond of salt and when I get over to the Pilot Station I shall set traps for them baited with this salt. When they come to lick it I shall have a noose of catgut ready to catch them - do you understand?"   "But how will you get across?"   "You will see to-morrow."     CHAPTER XIV. A WONDERFUL DAY'S WORK.  THE NEXT MORNING Rufus Dawes was stirring by daylight. He first got his catgut wound upon a piece of stick and then having moved his frail floats alongside the little rock that served as a pier he took a fishing line and a larger piece of stick and proceeded to draw a diagram on the sand. This diagram when completed represented a rude outline of a punt [160] eight feet long and three broad. At certain distances were eight points - four on each side - into which small willow rods were driven. He then awoke Frere and showed the diagram to him.   "Get eight stakes of celery-top pine" he said. "You can burn them where you cannot cut them and drive a stake into the place of each of these willow wands. When you have done that collect as many willows as you can get. I shall not be back until tonight. Now give me a hand with the floats."   Frere coming to the pier saw Dawes strip himself and piling his clothes upon the stuffed goat-skin stretch himself upon the reed bundles and paddling with his hands push off from the shore. The clothes floated high and dry but the reeds depressed by the weight of the body sank so that the head of the convict alone appeared above water. In this fashion he gained the middle of the current and the out-going tide swept him down towards the mouth of the harbour.   Frere sulkily admiring went back to prepare the breakfast - they were on half rations now Dawes having forbidden the slaughtered goat to be eaten lest his expedition should prove unsuccessful -wondering at the chance which had thrown this convict in his way. "Parsons would call it 'a special providence'" he said to himself. "For if it hadn't been for him we should never have got thus far. If his 'boat' succeeds we're all right I suppose. He's a clever dog. I wonder who he is." His training as a master of convicts made him think how dangerous such a man would be on a convict station. It would be difficult to keep a fellow of such resources. "They'll have to look pretty sharp after him if they ever get him back" he thought. "I'll have a fine tale to tell of his ingenuity." The conversation of the previous day occurred to him. "I promised to ask for a free pardon. He wouldn't have it though. Too proud to accept it at my hands! Wait until we get back. I'll teach him his place; for after all it is his own liberty that he is working for as well as mine - I mean ours." Then a thought came into his head that was in every way worthy of him. "Suppose we took the boat and left him behind!" The notion seemed so ludicrously wicked that he laughed involuntarily.   "What is it Mr. Frere?"   [161] "Oh it's you Sylvia is it? Ha ha ha! I was thinking of something - something funny."   "Indeed" said Sylvia "I am glad of that. Where's Mr. Dawes?"   Frere was displeased at the interest with which she asked the question.   "You are always thinking of that fellow. It's Dawes Dawes Dawes all day long. He has gone."   "Oh!" with a sorrowful accent. "Mamma wants to see him."   "What about?" says Frere roughly. "Mamma is ill Mr. Frere."   "Dawes isn't a doctor. What's the matter with her?"   "She is worse than she was yesterday. I don't know what is the matter."   Frere somewhat alarmed strode over to the little cavern.   The "lady of the Commandant" was in a strange plight. The cavern was lofty but narrow. In shape it was three-cornered having two sides open to the wind. The ingenuity of Rufus Dawes had closed these sides with wicker-work and clay and a sort of door of interlaced brushwood hung at one of them. Frere pushed open this door and entered. The poor woman was lying on a bed of rushes strewn over young brushwood and was moaning feebly. From the first she had felt the privation to which she was subjected most keenly and the mental anxiety from which she suffered increased her physical debility. The exhaustion and lassitude to which she had partially succumbed soon after Dawes's arrival had now completely overcome her and she was unable to rise.   "Cheer up ma'am" said Maurice with an assumption of heartiness. "It will be all right in a day or two."   "Is it you? I sent for Mr. Dawes."   "He is away just now. I am making a boat. Did not Sylvia tell you?"   "She told me that he was making one."   "Well I - that is we - are making it. He will be back again tonight. Can I do anything for you?"   "No thank you. I only wanted to know how he was getting on. I must go soon - if I am to go. Thank you Mr. Frere. I am much obliged to you. This is a - he-he - a dreadful place to have visitors isn't it?"   [162] "Never mind" said Frere again "you will be back in Hobart Town in a few days now. We are sure to get picked up by a ship. But you must cheer up. Have some tea or something."   "No thank you - I don't feel well enough to eat. I am tired."   Sylvia began to cry.   "Don't cry dear. I shall be better by and by. Oh I wish Mr. Dawes was back."   Maurice Frere went out indignant. This "Mr." Dawes was everybody it seemed and he was nobody. Let them wait a little. All that day working hard to carry out the convict's directions he meditated a thousand plans by which he could turn the tables. He would accuse Dawes of violence. He would demand that he should be taken back as an "absconder". He would insist that the law should take its course and that the "death" which was the doom of all who were caught in the act of escape from a penal settlement should be enforced. Yet if they got safe to land the marvellous courage and ingenuity of the prisoner would tell strongly in his favour. The woman and child would bear witness to his tenderness and skill and plead for him. As he had said the convict deserved a pardon. The mean bad man burning with wounded vanity and undefined jealousy waited for some method to suggest itself by which he might claim the credit of the escape and snatch from the prisoner who had dared to rival him the last hope of freedom.   Rufus Dawes drifting with the current had allowed himself to coast along the eastern side of the harbour until the Pilot Station appeared in view on the opposite shore. By this time it was nearly seven o'clock. He landed at a sandy cove and drawing up his raft proceeded to unpack from among his garments a piece of damper. Having eaten sparingly and dried himself in the sun he replaced the remains of his breakfast and pushed his floats again into the water. The Pilot Station lay some distance below him on the opposite shore. He had purposely made his second start from a point which would give him this advantage of position; for had he attempted to paddle across at right angles the strength of the current would have swept him out to sea. Weak as he was he several times nearly lost his hold on the reeds. The clumsy bundle [163] presenting too great a broadside to the stream whirled round and round and was once or twice nearly sucked under. At length however breathless and exhausted he gained the opposite bank half a mile below the point he had attempted to make and carrying his floats out of reach of the tide made off across the hill to the Pilot Station.   Arrived there about midday he set to work to lay his snares. The goats with whose hides he hoped to cover the coracle were sufficiently numerous and tame to encourage him to use every exertion. He carefully examined the tracks of the animals and found that they converged to one point - the track to the nearest water. With much labour he cut down bushes so as to mask the approach to the waterhole on all sides save where these tracks immediately conjoined. Close to the water and at unequal distances along the various tracks he scattered the salt he had obtained by his rude distillation of sea-water. Between this scattered salt and the points where he judged the animals would be likely to approach he set his traps made after the following manner. He took several pliant branches of young trees and having stripped them of leaves and twigs dug with his knife and the end of the rude paddle he had made for the voyage across the inlet a succession of holes about a foot deep. At the thicker end of these saplings he fastened by a piece of fishing line a small cross-bar which swung loosely like the stick handle which a schoolboy fastens to the string of his pegtop. Forcing the ends of the saplings thus prepared into the holes he filled in and stamped down the earth all around them. The saplings thus anchored as it were by the cross-pieces of stick not only stood firm but resisted all his efforts to withdraw them. To the thin ends of these saplings he bound tightly into notches cut in the wood and secured by a multiplicity of twisting the catgut springes he had brought from the camping ground. The saplings were then bent double and the gutted ends secured in the ground by the same means as that employed to fix the butts. This was the most difficult part of the business for it was necessary to discover precisely the amount of pressure that would hold the bent rod without allowing it to escape by reason of this elasticity and which would yet "give" to a slight pull on the gut. After many failures however this happy medium was discovered; and Rufus Dawes concealing his springes by means of twigs [164] smoothed the disturbed sand with a branch and retired to watch the effect of his labours. About two hours after he had gone the goats came to drink. There were five goats and two kids and they trotted calmly along the path to the water. The watcher soon saw that his precautions had been in a manner wasted. The leading goat marched gravely into the springe which catching him round his neck released the bent rod and sprang him off his legs into the air. He uttered a comical bleat and then hung kicking. Rufus Dawes though the success of the scheme was a matter of life and death burst out laughing at the antics of the beast. The other goats bounded off at this sudden elevation of their leader and three more were entrapped at a little distance. Rufus Dawes now thought it time to secure his prize though three of the springes were as yet unsprung. He ran down to the old goat knife in hand but before he could reach him the barely-dried catgut gave way and the old fellow shaking his head with grotesque dismay made off at full speed. The others however were secured and killed. The loss of the springe was not a serious one for three traps remained unsprung and before sundown Rufus Dawes had caught four more goats. Removing with care the catgut that had done such good service he dragged the carcases to the shore and proceeded to pack them upon his floats. He discovered however that the weight was too great and that the water entering through the loops of the stitching in the hide had so soaked the rush-grass as to render the floats no longer buoyant. He was compelled therefore to spend two hours in re-stuffing the skin with such material as he could find. Some light and flock-like seaweed which the action of the water had swathed after the fashion of haybands along the shore formed an excellent substitute for grass and having bound his bundle of rushes lengthwise with the goat-skin as a centre-piece he succeeded in forming a sort of rude canoe upon which the carcases floated securely.   He had eaten nothing since the morning and the violence of his exertions had exhausted him. Still sustained by the excitement of the task he had set himself he dismissed with fierce impatience the thought of rest and dragged his weary limbs along the sand endeavouring to kill fatigue by further exertion. The tide was now running in and he knew it was imperative [165] that he should regain the further shore while the current was in his favour. To cross from the Pilot Station at low water was impossible. If he waited until the ebb he must spend another day on the shore and he could not afford to lose an hour. Cutting a long sapling he fastened to one end of it the floating bundle and thus guided it to a spot where the beach shelved abruptly into deep water. It was a clear night and the risen moon large and low flung a rippling streak of silver across the sea. On the other side of the bay all was bathed in a violet haze which veiled the inlet from which he had started in the morning. The fire of the exiles hidden behind a point of rock cast a red glow into the air. The ocean breakers rolled in upon the cliffs outside the bar with a hoarse and threatening murmur; and the rising tide rippled and lapped with treacherous melody along the sand. He touched the chill water and drew back. For an instant he determined to wait until the beams of morning should illumine that beautiful but treacherous sea and then the thought of the helpless child who was without doubt waiting and watching for him on the shore gave new strength to his wearied frame; and fixing his eyes on the glow that hovering above the dark tree-line marked her presence he pushed the raft before him out into the sea. The reeds sustained him bravely but the strength of the current sucked him underneath the water and for several seconds he feared that he should be compelled to let go his hold. But his muscles steeled in the slow fire of convict-labour withstood this last strain upon them and half-suffocated with bursting chest and paralysed fingers he preserved his position until the mass getting out of the eddies along the shore-line drifted steadily down the silvery track that led to the settlement. After a few moments' rest he set his teeth and urged his strange canoe towards the shore. Paddling and pushing he gradually edged it towards the fire-light; and at last just when his stiffened limbs refused to obey the impulse of his will and he began to drift onwards with the onward tide he felt his feet strike firm ground. Opening his eyes - closed in the desperation of his last efforts - he found himself safe under the lee of the rugged promontory which hid the fire. It seemed that the waves tired of persecuting him had with disdainful pity cast him ashore at the goal of his hopes. Looking back he for the first time realized the frightful peril he had escaped [166] and shuddered. To this shudder succeeded a thrill of triumph. "Why had he stayed so long when escape was so easy?" Dragging the carcases above high-water mark he rounded the little promontory and made for the fire. The recollection of the night when he had first approached it came upon him and increased his exultation. How different a man was he now from then! Passing up the sand he saw the stakes which he had directed Frere to cut whiten in the moonshine. His officer worked for him! In his own brain alone lay the secret of escape! He - Rufus Dawes - the scarred degraded "prisoner" could alone get these three beings back to civilization. Did he refuse to aid them they would for ever remain in that prison where he had so long suffered. The tables were turned - he had become a gaoler! He had gained the fire before the solitary watcher there heard his footsteps and spread his hands to the blaze in silence. He felt as Frere would have felt had their positions been reversed disdainful of the man who had stopped at home.   Frere starting cried "It is you! Have you succeeded?"   Rufus Dawes nodded.   "What! Did you catch them?"   "There are four carcases down by the rocks. You can have meat for breakfast to-morrow!"   The child at the sound of the voice came running down from the hut. "Oh Mr. Dawes! I am so glad! We were beginning to despair - mamma and I."   Dawes snatched her from the ground and bursting into a joyous laugh swung her into the air. "Tell me" he cried holding up the child with two dripping arms above him "what you will do for me if I bring you and mamma safe home again?"   "Give you a free pardon" says Sylvia "and papa shall make you his servant!" Frere burst out laughing at this reply and Dawes with a choking sensation in his throat put the child upon the ground and walked away.   This was in truth all he could hope for. All his scheming all his courage all his peril would but result in the patronage of a great man like Major Vickers. His heart big with love with self-denial and with hopes of a fair future would have this flattering unction laid to it. He had performed a prodigy of skill and daring and for his reward he was to be made a [167] servant to the creatures he had protected. Yet what more could a convict expect? Sylvia saw how deeply her unconscious hand had driven the iron and ran up to the man she had wounded. "And Mr. Dawes remember that I shall love you always." The convict however his momentary excitement over motioned her away; and she saw him stretch himself wearily under the shadow of a rock.   [iii] DEDICATION. To A.L. Mackay Of Port Darwin  DEAR A.-To your advice and encouragement is owing in a great measure the appearance of this my first work in its present form. If you were at all cynically inclined I think you would consider it rather hard to be made a scapegoat of to such an extent; but as you will notwithstanding the many shortcomings of the book now inscribed to you be only gratified that you were thus instrumental in its completion I need say no more on that score.   You may remember an incident which is told of an orator of olden times who upon being warmly applauded by a large assembly asked one near if he had said anything very foolish. I am afraid there are few of us who would be so impervious to enthusiastic [iv] approbation as to make a similar inquiry under like circumstances. Still more limited is the number of authors who can turn their literary offspring adrift on the world without much anxious solicitude as to their fate. Poetry like virtue it has been said should be its own reward. It may be so; yet it is hard to attain to the stoicisin of the Greek orator. Nevertheless in whatever way the present work may be received by the general public the knowledge that it will meet with your approval and indulgence inspires me with confidence that it will not be unacceptable to those whose opinion I would most highly prize. To you and them then I may say in all sincerity-   "An euch nur dacht' ich wenn ich sann und schrieb  Euch zu gefallen war mein hbehster Wunsch  Euch zu ergetzen war mein letzter Zweek.  Wer nicht die Welt in seinen Freunden sieht  Verdient nicht dass die Welt von ihm erfahre."  M. C.  MOUNT GAMBIER   April 1874.    The Explorers  A CHRONICLE OF THE BURKE AND WILLS EXPEDITION.  In Four Parts.  [1] (The Explorers) Part First   THE sound of many voices fills the air  A festal look people and city wear;  And all around the tread of hurrying feet  Rings ceaselessly along each throngëd street.  The sun is shining from a cloudless sky  Glad expectation beams in every eye  And now and then a burst of laughter loud  Breaks through the hum of small talk in the crowd.  Towards one spot in haste it seems to tend  In one quick moving stream the masses blend.  Then one who joined the crowd with searching gaze  Seemed to regard the scene with deep amaze;  [2] He was a stooped grey man in bush costume  Guiltless of gloves or studs or rare perfume;  Bronzed was his face with an Australian sun  And as he went he turned to speak to one  Who walked beside him: "Say friend I pray  Why are the people crowding all this way?"  This one answered - "In what distant spot  Hast thou been living that thou knowest not  Of the great Expedition now sent forth  To explore our mighty isle from south to north?"  The Bushman's eyes lit with a twinkling gleam  "Within the Bush life passes like a dream  In strange oblivion of the wondrous strides  The world at large is making. He who bides  Through many years within the drowsy shade  Of lonely haunts will find the great world fade  In mem'ry's tablets till such far-off hum  And scraps of information as may come  Through newspapers and rumours unto him  From its unceasing whirl will seem as dim  And vague as the faint lines trac'd by a hand  Long long returned to dust.  Unto this land  I came from England fifteen years ago.  The Yarra passed as now with even flow  From Baw Baw's shady heights; Macedon's brow  [3] Was dark with the same trees that shade it now;  But in the place of this great stately town  (This city rather) gleaming like a crown  Superbly fair for these far Southern lands  Set by the mighty ocean by the hands  Of sturdy toil with its grand streets and squares  And round it many a home that proudly wears  The aspect of great wealth there were rude huts  And tents and where we walk were gaping ruts  Over which rumbled laden bullock-drays  Instead of landaus with sleek prancing greys;  And where soft knuckled dandies lisp and drawl  And would-be exquisites at snail's pace crawl  With eye-glass fixed in idiotic stare  And locks front parted with stupendous care  Who think the tasks of life have been well done  When they a ballet-dancer's smiles have won;  Whose fittest duties are to guard the pets  Ladies call poodles from life's jars and frets  And to proclaim a luckless tailor's skill  When sallying forth (unfit to think or till)  In Dent's best kids to keep their hands from harm -   There stalked the digger with his brawny arm  The hardy pioneer who with his axe  Hew'd trees as quickly as the fire melts wax.  In place of dainty Dames in silk and lace  [4] Who flirt in drawing-rooms with well-bred grace  Whose weightiest care is how to dress the hair  And wear a shawl with a becoming air;  Whose fate the milliner holds in her hands  When she decides on puffs or rigid bands;  Whose version of a man's chief aim and end  Is purring flattery with a courtly bend -   You then might see helpmates in word and truth  Who staggered not at work hard and uncouth;  The foremost article of whose homely creed  Was not that God gave hands in very deed  To serve them as soft-jewelled toys through life  But to do battle in the daily strife  Of a prosaic and hard-working world  Instead of jingling tunes ribboned and curl'd.  Truly the change is great but greater still  The tireless energy unflinching will  That wrought such changes in so short a time.  I have liv'd ere now in many a clime - "  Here as the garrulous and stooped old man  Spoke with uplifted hand a youth who ran  With unthinking haste push'd him aside  And stopped his speech. The people ran and cried  And jostled onward in a mighty throng  Unto the verdant glades where the glad song  [5] Of birds is heard the livelong summer day;  Where from the turmoil of the dusty way  And the loud grating noises of the street  A wearied soul might find a quiet retreat  Till wand'ring in the gum-tree's lengthened shade  The feverish discords of life might fade  From the tired heart while softly as the kiss  Prest by fond lips that fear to break the peace  Of a dear sleeper the warm slumbrous breeze  Strays dreamily amid the stately trees.  But none of this unnumbered multitude  Have sought the leafy Park for solitude;  Yet all the discord and the jarring strife  That oft mar the highest purposes of life  Were on this day laid aside forgotten  While gazing on the group of stalwart men  That were to venture forth upon this day  On the danger fraught and toilsome way  (Till they should reach the strange and far-off shore  Where mortal foot had never trod before)  Through unknown hardships through unrecked-of pain.  It was no narrow question of mere gain  That prompted the enterprise. From the first  Lone pioneers that gained this shore none durst  Pierce the vast and trackless realms that lay  Wrapped in mystery from day to day.  [6] If fertile regions or vast deserts bare  Bleached by the great fierce sun's insatiate glare;  If fair watered vales or plains of sand  Formed the interior of this mighty land -   These were the questions men were wont to ask  In vague conjecture. Now the arduous task  Of solving these was to be carried out  Points long disputed placed beyond a doubt;  The man of science and of busy trade  And the philanthropist who long had made  The cause of humanity his first care  To all the enterprise deep interests bear.  But see! Among the crowd one rises now  Earnestly speaking with uncovered brow.  His voice is broken with emotion deep -   "Ay they are pledged through every change to keep  The memory of this day within their heart  Whate'er privations yet may be their part;  Howe'er the expedition yet may end  As through unknown realms their way they wend  The enthusiasm of this mighty crowd  The ringing echoes of their plaudits loud  The mighty cheer - the tremulous God-speed  Will urge them to success through pain and need  Until the goal of all their hopes is won  [7] And the great work on which they are bent is done."  Thus spake the leader then upon their way  Through the vast crowd the Explorers passed away.  Now pressing to the front the old man went  And on the passing train his keen gaze bent  And said aloud - "A score in all but three  Of men and thirty camels; if on me  Rested the weighty burden of command  I should have chosen a much smaller band.  Ah I can see Robert O'Hara Burke  That ere success is thine thou hast thy work  To do. And those same camels - friend dost think"  (This to one near for bushmen do not shrink  From strangers - nor stand on etiquette  Nor let formalities their souls much fret)  "Those animals should be so much esteemed  From what I've seen of them they seemed  (Away from the Bedouin's skilful hand  And the accustomed routes o'er burning sand)  To be most obstinate."  "There I agree  With you" the stranger said. " Aye I foresee  No little trouble to be laid in store  For our Explorers by the brutes. The lore  Of Eastern lands has thrown a marvellous haze  Around them so that when one fain would gaze  [8] And judge them with impartial eyes a train  Of childish crude beliefs rises again  From memory's mystic realms and we perceive  Them not as they are but as we believe  They ought to be. But notwithstanding this  I feel sure our Explorers will not miss  The aim in view. There is my young friend Wills -   His presence in the expedition fills  Me with confidence. I daresay you deem  My judgment over fond and that I seem  To overrate his worth. Ah if you knew  How courageous and brave how leal and true  How modestyet determined - but I know  When I speak of him that my words will grow  Despite myself too warm I would that all  Who start were like him! I don't wish to pall  The general joy with auguries of dark ill  Nor play the raven 'mid glad birds - but still  Incompetence and self-will have ofttimes been  The ruin of great purposes and I ween  Such fatal qualities are not wanting here."  The crowd surged onward and now loud and clear  The last cheer floated to the sunny skies:  And thousands gazed with eager wistful eyes  On the retreating forms that slowly wound  [9] Out from the city while each clamorous sound  Quietly died away as out of sight  The Explorers passed. Then in the fading light  Of that first evening lit their first camp fire.  While sitting round one said; - "'Ere we retire  (That I believe is the genteelest phrase)  On the long nights we might recite some lays  And stories of the Bush as a pastime."  To which all were agreed; of these in rime  A few are here set down.  Floods generally follow droughts. On the coast the more mountainous the country the more rarely are these extremes felt; but no part of the country is free from their visits. It is in the interior however that they have their home and from that stronghold the forces which call the floods forth rule supreme their power declining as they approach that of the ocean. Here in the depression of the great plain there is most probably only one long drought or one long wet season; no seasons of a year but years of a season. Wet seasons like droughts may last years; for the seas of shallow water the innumerable lakes and marshes which some explorers in wet seasons have found north of Lake Eyre may be years in evaporating as frequent condensation must take place by the cold southern winds. And this milder inland climate will tend to mollify that of neighbouring regions. But these two extremes are overpowering; they make that interior almost uninhabitable and they rule the character of the country the produce the people and the history of the land.  The desolation of a drought is not less complete than that of a flood and it perhaps has more effect upon the survivors. For years these droughts gather in force; they multiply their action before they are broken by the floods and their termination is in a melancholy awful landscape. For days and months the earth has been hot parched and cracked; for months the waters have ceased to flow the trees have lived but not grown and the sky has been cloudless. The never-green forest is browner sadder and still in the oppressive air; the plains are bare and dusty; the watering-places filled with dead; and the whole scene quivers before the eye by the great radiation of its heat. [241] Daily the sun rises in a hazy sky sails in a white heat through a cloudless course and sets a round red ball of fire on the edge of a copper dome. A sullen dewless night follows the dreaded day. The leaves of the forest and the surviving grass of the field glisten like blades of steel in the glare of the mighty sun; there is no green thing nor sound of life from bird or beast or tree in the great noonday heat. - At length clouds mysteriously gather - daily they gather and disappear at night - at last they form dense low masses thunder breaks and violent storms of wind sweep the plain; no rain. Again and again these storms break before the longed-for rain comes; and with it comes flood. Perhaps the rain filling the northern streams first floods the southern water-channels before a cloud is in their sky. But with the floods destruction to lingering life no less than hope to withering vegetation is brought down. Many a settler has been ruined by droughts; but many a flock which survived that ordeal has been silently hopelessly swallowed by the flood. Many a life has been lost thus; and here we may find a clue to the fate of Leichhardt.  He started to explore the interior. Having already defined much of the coast watershed he desired to define the inland or southern drainage and the nature of this vast inland plain; but from this expedition he never returned nor have any trace or tidings of him been brought in except of the very beginning of his journey. It has been conjectured that he was murdered by natives; that he perished in a drought or for want of food; and that some of the party may still be alive. But each of these suppositions is weakened by the fact that no authentic information of such a fate has been obtained while some might be fairly expected; for Leichhardt had the severest experience of bush-travelling before he started upon this trip. He was accompanied by chosen men and he had horses mules and goats with him - all sagacious animals. And if want overtook him he could in all probability meet it by his knowledge of the bush and of botany; if the natives attacked him some of the animals would certainly have escaped and made homewards; and if any of the party still lived some certain information would have been brought in of him. In either case some animal some weapon piece of cutlery or part of their equipment would have been found by later explorers and have given a clue to the fate of the party; but no trace has been found. Had however one of these floods overtaken the party weakened by a long drought their total disappearance is quite accountable.  The reader can picture his party toiling over the white withering downs of the inland slopes water becoming at every stage more difficult to find - the grass becoming drier and scanter the horses Weaker and the party more dispirited. Sometimes without water always in a tropical heat and without any sign of a change in the weather they would be compelled to stay their progress and to feel their way from one watering-place to another. [242] This continual scouting would reduce the horses and exhaust the men. But the water-holes dry up and they were forced to shift camp. At last they found a large lagoon and determined to wait for rain.  Let us suppose this lagoon to be in an obscure river channel 200 or 300 yards long having grassy slopes leading into and out of it and not a clearly-cut channel. It had steep banks 30 feet deep and some five or six feet of water in the bottom; it is in one channel of a northern stream where it spreads over the plains effecting a junction with another river - forming a network of channels and flooded flats. There has been no flood for some years most of the channels are overgrown with grass and weeds and patches of downs lie between the meshes of the net. Here the party camped well knowing they were in flooded ground; but there was no other water. They hoped their horses would recover that they would rest and gain strength and with the first rain move on to a better camp. They dreamed of gigantic mountains and noble rivers of plains well watered and shady forests while all around was the most dreadful desolation. There is nothing so oppressive and utterly subduing as a drought. It is not a fierce calamity nor a dreaded blow nor any brief struggle; here in the vast interior of Australia it is a torturing Titan overwhelming and resistless but slow and monotonous in its destruction. Daily the same glaring angry sky the same cracked gaping thirsty earth the leaden ghostly foliage the glistening few blades of grass - all quivering in the mighty heat. No green thing no fresh colour no breath of wind no sound from earth or air of beast or bird or insect; all in silence - in a breathless appalling silence. Nightly the sun sets in sullen anger and the moon rises in the cold distant ether. The firmament is clear beyond conception the stars bright the moon radiant; all cool distant dewless pitiless.  They camped. Some life began to show itself; kites and crows watched their camp and circled over them from daylight to dusk. This was some change from the circling whirlwinds which were the only other break to the dreariness of the scene. Then the air in excessively hot spots would silently gather into an eddy gradually increase the sweep of its little circle and ere it was observed there would be a vortex of wind towering far into the sky lifting up the withered herbs the dry bushes the dead reeds and grass to scatter them - its fury spent - far over the plain. And at the sunset some more life enlivened the scene: flocks clouds of pigeons came and drank at their water then swept away into the dusk to roost upon the hot ground. - But ere they had been many days in camp one sultry night they were surprised to find that most of the kites had left them and that not one pigeon came to drink. It was strange but stranger still that one of the party as he returned from foraging with his gun reported the main channel about a mile from the camp was running. [243] Not a cloud in the sky nor any sign of rain but here was the proof of rain up the country.  At first they talked of their plans of how they would travel up the river slowly; and so on. But this was the beginning of the end - they were caught in a net of floods. The last office of the night was to draw water; and in doing so they found that the channel upon which they had camped was running strong. Then began the struggle. Some went for the horses and animals; these were scattered over the plain cut off from their camp by other rapidly-filling watercourses. Thus the men became separated; nor were the horses ever got together. Some horses and even men in the sudden knowledge of their fate struck out wildly purposelessly for their lives and perished. Others struggled at the camp to save some of their most valuable equipments and stores. They determined to make back to the high land they had left before they crossed a creek two miles back - it must be another river and surely not impassable yet. It was midnight; the leader urged all on with what they could take; he would follow at daylight if necessary - surely their camp would not be flooded and they might save their stores; they would save some horses; they would meet at the last camp; and so on. In the multitude of councils there is confusion.  But the floods came in torrents and volumes; they filled all the channels; they netted all the plain; they joined each with the other; they overflowed all banks and swept the plain fifty miles wide. No man nor horse escaped that night except the solitary man and a few bewildered animals that happened to gather up to the camp fire. All went before the torrents drowned in the streams or bogged in the muddy banks separated bewildered and desperate; the waste of waters swept over all buried the remains in sand and mud or scattered them over 100 miles of plains. No vestige was left. Daylight came and showed Leichhardt his inevitable fate; alone in a wilderness of water. A great sheet of flood spread over the landscape far as the eye could reach to east and west and north and south one steady slow stream its deepest channels only to be told by the tops of the river trees. No sign no hope of any of his party; for he could see many miles of water on each side; he well knew he was in a net of watercourses.  - Water water but no sign of life; no spot of dry land in sight; no hope. At the camp his journals and charts his comrades' saddles raised another and a mightier flood in his mind. No friend no corn-ride save one or two terror-stricken animals; only overhead upon a blasted tree sat a carrion crow. Then the dumb animals their feet flow in water drew up to the camp fire and whimpered low their last sad appeal to friend and comrade. No guidance; and they turned and went with the flood and sailed down the waters looking to right and left for dry land. [244] Last of all as the waters sapped and drowned the camp fire Ludwig Leichhardt strode into the flood and passed away upon that exploration of which no traveller has reported. [...]  All life is thus limited by the aridity and uncertainty of the climate. There is little rain over the great bulk of the continent; there is little vegetation little animal life only one beast of prey and few very few human creatures. But the climate is not only niggardly on the whole it is a most capricious tyrant destroying at uncertain intervals what it has reared in a few milder seasons. No result is gained by a rich growth in the forest if a drought comes and withers up all young or weak life. And the interior which has so many features in common is so extensive in proportion to the whole that it impresses its characteristics upon every part of the country. It reduces tropical forests to exceptional patches in sheltered nooks; it encourages one type of animal everywhere and has forbidden the immigration of the teeming populations of the adjacent tropical archipelago to its barren shores. Floods destroy some life they may drown some young animals but the increased production of all life which follows them more than makes up any decrease. Drought dry seasons and more than all - that deadliest weapon of the tyrant - the bush-fire reduces and selects the life of the country.  During the long dreary months of dry heat without rain or dew those broad-leaved trees and herbs which expose a large evaporating surface and require a large supply of moisture could not survive; only the hard thick narrow leaves of the Australian forest glistening like steel when they cannot hold their edges to the glaring sun come out of the trial. On the plains and downs the acacias cluster in thickets as if to shelter one another or singly droop their scant foliage gracefully over the parched waste. On the flats and meadows the giant eucalypti rear gaunt stems and bare boughs. The hills are timbered but shadeless; and even in the beds of the watercourses the melaleuca is ragged and wretched-looking. All have hard rigid narrow leaves and few of those. The watercourses are drying up and the animals struggle on from one death to another. The marsupials can live for long without water but not so the dog. He the only foreigner of the land cannot live without frequent water; he cannot therefore always accomplish the journey from one water to another as the holes dry up; and he cannot remove his young to water when it is an imperative necessity. No animals are so adapted to such a trial as the marsupials; and they survive. The trees having the smallest amount of foliage and not dependent upon a regularly returning spring to reinvigorate them - an indeciduous shadeless forest - is another result. [245]  Then the grass is withered white it is dry and warm night and day and one spark of fire sets all the landscape in a blaze. This widens over the plain gathers air in its combustion and becomes a hurricane of fire. It sweeps the plains storms the mountains and rushes irresistible over watercourses to lick up withered grass on opposite banks. The seedlings are lost the sapplings destroyed the whole forest scorched and every decayed giant of the wood is wreathed Laocoon-like in fire - scattering from his yielding limbs flakes and sparks on every side from which fires spring hydra-like over the withered sward - to rise to roar and rush on and scale in rapid springs the grassy ranges. In the forest it spares only the giant eucalypti which have stems towering 30 feet without a limb only scorching the smooth bark which is shed and renewed annually; upon the downs it spares only - as it lingers and lulls in the low grass - those hardy acacias which rise in iron-like columns beneath their thin graceful tresses; and upon the mountain it spares only those eucalypti which have their veteran stems bound in an impenetrable coat of "iron bark". All the land is cleared except these selected trees. Hence the open forest of Australia; hence grazing and squatters and land-laws; hence wool and meat-growing are before everything else.  The jungles or "scrubs" are not touched for they have not grass nor sufficient tinder to lead the fire into their masses; and when the country is stocked and bush-fires carefully kept down by man then thickets increase upon every side. If any tract be for some years free from the visitation then the forest will thicken; and the trees which have the most inflammable bark like "stringy-bark" and "peppermint trees" grow in poor ground and grow thickly where fires rarely penetrate and then only to blast the whole forest.  The fire-storm sweeps over the land and reduces the animal kingdom; all is subject. The smaller insects and animals in their struggles are followed by flocks of birds who snatch their prey from the flames. The small game and reptiles flee before destruction or perish in logs and other deceptive lurking-places; and the large rodents who survive instant destruction have to continue the struggle for existence - without any pasture on the plain young or old - with only the hard foliage of the thickets. Desolation is doubly desolate; the desert is burnt black and lifeless. Life has almost to begin again in the lower vegetable kingdom and even animals lose their young. The plain depends upon the deepest roots and the hardest of the barbed and needle-pointed grass seeds buried in the soil to grow another crop. The forest has lost its saplings and must plant again; and the struggle is hardest and longest with the animals. The dog far from shelter cannot circumvent that furious sea of fire: he cannot bound over the walls of flame and fields of cinders; nor can he remove his young nor can they escape. [246] If his lair is in a log upon the plain or by the last water-hole in the valley his life is almost worthless. The marsupial has a better chance than any other type of animal for she can bound far over flames and scorching ground and find a way through many fires. Her young has a much better chance; for placed securely in its mother's pouch it is carried high over the burning ground over death and extermination to live or at least to continue the struggle. The marsupials are the selected survivors; the one type of all the country. The dog has no enemy but the climate; he is not subject to any other beast of the field and he has many varieties of victims utterly defenceless against his attacks but is not the master. He would increase and gather into packs like wolves and hyenas under another climate with the present natural stock of the country; yet he is a solitary exceptional stranger in the land. The marsupials have been selected with hard bare trees and all the peculiar types of the country in that decisive struggle. And it may be conjectured that if the superior types of animals introduced by the colonists were left to continue the struggle alone were the country at once depopulated considering the great degeneration these animals immediately undergo if neglected they would disappear from the climate of marsupials in a few thousand years.  Mr. Thomas Mort has so far succeeded in developing his new industry that in the course of a few days his establishment at the Lithgow Valley will commence active operations. Here cattle sheep &c. will be slaughtered and the carcases dressed on the most improved principles. The meat will then be conveyed down to Sydney in vans specially prepared for the purpose which ensure the meat being kept at a very low temperature during the journey. [171] The establishment at the head of Darling Harbour where the freezing process is carried on has been in operation for some time. We proceed to give a brief description of the two establishments.  The principal portion of the freezing process is carried on at the works in Dixon-street at the head of Darling Harbour adjoining the new railway station now in course of construction. The premises are connected by sidings with the railway so that the meat vans containing meat slaughtered at the establishment at Lithgow Valley hereafter to be described will be brought into the very midst of the works. The vans will be taken under a large shed there to be unloaded by means of a steam hoist. One of these meat vans was exhibited at the last exhibition of the Agricultural Society and the principle on which they are constructed has already been described in these columns. It will therefore be sufficient now to say that they are so well constructed that the meat to the extent of four or five tons will be so packed in them that no two pieces will be allowed to come in contact and the vans being made on the principle of the ice chest the interior is kept intensely cold - a mixture of ice and chloride of calcium being used for this purpose - so that however hot the weather may be the meat will be delivered in Sydney as fresh as when it left the slaughtering establishment. On being hoisted up into the shed the meat is placed on trucks in order to be conveyed to whatever part of the premises it may be necessary. These trucks are of a double construction; in fact they consist of one truck upon another the upper trucks being designed to run along lines of rails running in one direction and the lower ones upon rails running at right angles to the former. By this means it will be seen that the meat can be conveyed wherever it is required without any necessity for handling.  The preserving process is effected in two large apartments each about 75 feet square and 9 feet 6 inches high called respectively the cooling-room and the freezing-room the latter being underneath the former. These apartments are entered only through trap-doors from above. They are enclosed by walls 4 feet 6 inches thick built of brick but constructed so as to contain two or three hollow spaces all round which are filled with materials known to be bad conductors of heat so that when the heat has once been abstracted from the interior by means of the processes presently to be alluded to the subtle fluid will be almost unable to regain an entrance or in popular phraseology the cold will be retained. These two apartments are fitted up with the necessary beams hooks and other apparatuses upon which the meat is to be stowed and each will hold when closely packed something like two or three thousand tons of meat. The cooling-room will be used for the storage of meat intended for home consumption which will not be actually frozen but merely reduced to so low a temperature that it will keep sweet for any time until it is wanted. [172] The freezing room below however is intended for the reception of meat designed for exportation and which it is hoped and expected will solve the great problem of how to supply the English market with whole carcasses of Australian beef mutton and pork. The temperature of this room will always be considerably below freezing point as low even as zero and the meat here is frozen perfectly hard so that if struck by the knuckles it feels like solid wood and emits a similar sound. Meat in this condition it is needless to say will remain good practically for ever - a truth that has long been known but which it has been reserved for Messrs. Mort and Nicolle to bring into actual operation. This meat is intended to ship to Europe and elsewhere the holds of the vessels being prepared after a principle similar to that of the refrigerating machines intended for household use so that the meat will remain in its frozen state until it reaches the foreign markets where it will be offered for sale in the carcass just the same as meat fresh from the shambles. It is needless to expatiate upon the advantages of this plan; the great objection to the Australian preserved meat that it is overcooked will thus be done away with and families may select their joints of Australian meat precisely the same as they would select their joints from English-fed animals and may cook them more or less as their palates dictate. Not the least surprising feature of this system is the economy with which it can be worked for it is calculated that about one penny per pound will include all charges attendant upon this mode of preserving meat including even the cost of transit to England. It will easily be seen what a boon this will be to the English consumer when it is remembered that the price of meat in England is three or four times what it is here and the Australian meat can be delivered and sold in England at a rate far below the present prices thus bringing it within the reach of thousands to whom meat is at present an unattainable luxury while at the same time the price obtained will prove remunerative to the shippers from here.  Sir - I have had the honor to receive to-day from you and three other gentlemen who favoured me with an interview a copy of a resolution passed at a recent meeting at which you presided of the Victorian Protection League expressing the desire of the meeting that I should come forward as the "leader of the Liberal party" in Victoria. The Political approval and confidence implied by this resolution command my acknowledgements and I believe I cannot more fitly express my sense of obligation to the friendly feeling which dictated this invitation than by responding to it in terms which shall at least be free from all intentional ambiguity or reserve.  I have to say then in reply to the request of your branch meeting that there cannot be a leader except where there are followers and that at this moment the Liberal party does not exist as a party in Victoria. A master of politics has defined a political party to be "a body of men united for promoting by their joint endeavours the national interest upon some principle in which they are all agreed." I am not acquainted with half a dozen politicians in this country of whom it could now be said with any regard to accuracy that they constituted "a party" within this the only natural and national definition of the term. There are not a few public men in Victoria who desire to promote the national interest but they are not united. There are others who are united but they aim at promoting interests quite different from and often hostile to national interests. A political party must exist before it can have a leader and a party which shall not be a faction nor a cabal can only form itself upon the basis of political opinions and principles regarding national interests held in common by some considerable section of the people and of the representatives of the people acting in concert with one another. So long as the electors of Victoria continue to be indifferent to questions that concern the whole community; so long as they return members to serve in Parliament who are valued chiefly for the local advantages they secure for their district or on account of their personal claims to the esteem of their constituents it will be vain and moreover unjust to expect that members of Parliament shall actively and unitedly exhibit care for national interests or zeal for public rights. Whenever the people awaken to a sense of the grave social and political dangers that threaten the future welfare of this country a majority of the members of the Legislative Assembly will not be slow to combine for the purpose of discovering and of applying remedies. [549] As soon as the constituencies become really alive to the supreme importance of preserving the remnant of the public estate for the public use of saving all the fertile districts of Victoria from total depopulation and perpetual barrenness of opening for public use the public roads which everywhere have been appropriated by lawless forces and of applying the healthy discipline of a most just and politic tax to a class that now defies wherever it has not yet succeeded in evading the law - the members of the Legislative Assembly will be influenced by similar views and will continue to effect these necessary objects and they will then shrink no longer from addressing themselves in earnest and united action to the needful preliminary duty of establishing in this country self-government which now exists by law only but not in fact. Care for national interests as distinguished from local and personal interests first on the part of the constituencies and next on the part of the representatives of the constituencies in the Legislative Assembly is in my judgment an essential condition precedent and will be found to be the only possible basis of union of a really Liberal political party.  To such a party when it has sprung into existence in the Legislative Assembly by a process of national growth must be left the choice of its leader; and I shall not presume to anticipate its choice by prematurely advancing myself as a candidate for that honorable and most responsible post. In the meantime I decline to usurp a position of prominence to which your invitation gratifying and encouraging as it undoubtedly is does not constitute a completely adequate call and in which under existing circumstances I know. that my views both of public policy and of the present paramount duty of the Victorian statesmen would procure for me a very small and wholly insufficient amount of parliamentary support. I am content and resolved to remain for the present a private member of Parliament unembarrassed by association with any existing political combinations; and in following this course I believe that I shall best fulfil the duties as I understand them that now attach themselves to my office of a representative of the people.  I have the honor to be Sir your faithful servant GEO. HIGINBOTHAM.  FROM THE CLYDE TO BRAIDWOOD  A winter morn. The blue Clyde river winds  'Mid sombre slopes reflecting in clear depths  The tree-clad banks or grassy meadow flats  Now white with hoary frost each jewell'd blade  With myriad crystals glistening in the sun.  Thus smiles the Vale of Clyde as through the air  So keen and fresh three travellers upward ride  Toward the Braidwood heights. Quickly they pass  The rustic dwellings on the hamlet's verge  Winding sometimes beside the glassy depths  Of Nelligen Creek where with the murmuring bass  Of running water sounds the sighing wail  Of dark swamp-oaks that shiver on each bank;  Then winding through a shady-bower'd lane  With flickering streaks of sunlight beaming through  The feathery leaves and pendant tassels green  Of bright mimosa whose wee furry balls  Promise to greet with golden glow of joy  The coming spring-tide.  Now a barren length  Of tall straight eucalyptus till again  A babbling voice is heard and through green banks  Of emerald fern and mossy boulder rocks  The Currawong dances o'er a pebbly bed  In rippling clearness or with cresting foam  Splashes and leaps in snowy cascade steps.  Then every feature changes - up and down   O'er endless ranges like great waves of earth  Each weary steed must climb e'en like a ship  Now rising high upon some billowy ridge  But to plunge down to mount once more again  And still again. [80]  Naught on the road to see  Save sullen trees white arm'd with naked trunks  And hanging bark like tatter'd clothes thrown off  An undergrowth of glossy zamia palms  Bearing their winter store of coral fruit  And here and there some early clematis  Like starry jasmine or a purple wreath  Of dark kennedea blooming o'er their time  As if in pity they would add one joy  Unto the barren landscape.  But at last  A clearer point is reach'd and all around  The loftier ranges loom in contour blue  With indigo shadows and light veiling mist  Rising from steaming valleys. Straight in front  Towers the Sugarloaf pyramidal King  Of Braidwood peaks.  Impossible it seems  To scale that nature-rampart but where man  Would go he must and will; so hewn from out  The mountain's side in gradual ascent  Of league and half of engineering skill  There winds the Weber Pass.  A glorious ride!  Fresher and clearer grows the breezy air  Lighter and freer beats the quickening pulse  As each fair height is gain'd. Stern strong above  Rises the wall of mountain; far beneath  In sheer precipitancy gullies deep  Gloom in dark shadow on their shelter'd breast  Cherishing wealth of leaf age richly dight  With tropic hues of green.  No sound is heard  Save the deep soughing of the wind amid  The swaying leaves and harp-like stems so like  A mighty breathing of great mother earth  That half they seem to see her bosom heave  With each pulsation as she living sleeps.  And now and then to cadence of these throbs  There drops the bell-bird's knell the coach-whip's crack   The wonga-pigeon's coo or echoing notes   Of lyre-tail'd pheasants in their own rich tones   Mocking the song of every forest bird. [81]  Higher the travellers rise - at every turn  Gaining through avenued vista some new glimpse  Of undulating hills the Pigeon-house  Standing against the sky like eyrie nest  Of some great dove or eagle. On each side  Of rock-hewn road the fern trees cluster green  Now and then lighted by a silver star  Of white immortelle flower or overhung  By crimson peals of bright epacris bells.  Another bend a shelter'd deepening rift  And in the mountain's very heart they plunge -   So dark the shade the sun is lost to view.  Great silver wattles tremble o'er the path  Which overlooks a glen - one varying mass  Of exquisite foliage full-green sassafras  The bright-leaf'd myrtle dark-hued Kurrajong  And lavender musk-plant scenting all the air  Entwined with clematis or bignonia vines  And raspberry tendrils hung with scarlet fruit.  The riders pause some moments gazing down  Then upward look. Far as the peeping sky  The dell-like gully yawns into the heights;  A tiny cascade drips o'er mossy rocks  And through an aisle of over-arching trees  Whose stems are dight with lichen creeping vines  A line of sunlight pierces lighting up  A wealth of fern trees; filling every nook  With glorious circles of voluptuous green  Such as unview'd once clothed the silent earth  Long milliards past in Carboniferous Age.  A mighty nature-rockery! Each spot  Of fertile ground is rich with endless joys  Of leaf and fern; now here a velvet moss  And there a broad asplenium's shining frond  With red-black veinings or a hart's-tongue point  Contrasting with a pale-hued tender brake  Or creeping lion's-foot. See where the hand  Of ruthless man hath cleft the rock each wound  Is hidden by thick verdure leaving not  One unclothed spot save on the yellow road.  Reluctant the travellers leave the luscious shade   To mount once more. But now another joy -   An open view is here! Before them spreads  A waving field of ranges purple grey  In haze of distance with black lines of shade  Marking the valleys bounded by a line  Of ocean-blue o'er whose horizon verge  The morning mist-cloud hangs. [82] The distant bay  Is clear defined. The headland's dark arms stretch  (Each finger-point white-lit with dashing foam)  In azure circlet studded with rugged isles -  A picturesque trio whose gold rock sides glow  In noonday sunlight and round which the surf  Gleams like a silvery girdle.  The grand Pass  Is traversed now the inland plateau reach'd  The last sweet glimpse of violet peaks is lost  An upland rocky stream is pass'd and naught  But same same gum-trees vex the wearied eye  Till Braidwood plain is reach'd  A township like  All others with its houses church and school -   Bare bald prosaic - no quaint wild tower  Nor ancient hall to add poetic touch  As in the dear old land - no legend old  Adds softening beauty to the Buddawong Peak  Or near-home ranges with too barbarous names.  But everything is cold new new too new  To foster poesy; and famish'd thought  Looks back with longing to the mountain dream.    BODALLA  A glimpse of England amid Australian hills  Amid the range that nears the southern coast  Bodalla lies - a smiling valley green;  So green that to home-loving eyes it seems  E'en like a quiet dream of England hid  And nestled in the wild Australian hills.  There gleam the still blue lake and winding stream  The golden corn-fields and the sunny slope;  While here and there are cottage homes and farms  With browsing herds in clover pastures fed;  And furrow'd land o'er which the plough has pass'd  In winter readiness for English seed  That here unconscious of an alien soil  With old-world freshness still will spring and grow. [83]  The very air of all this peaceful land  Is soft and still for sheltering mountains rise  And glooming blue and dark with varying shade  Shut out the blighting winds that restless blow  Yet cannot pass the tree-clad ramparts high;  While all the moisture steaming from the earth  Held in though rising turns to dewy mist  And veils th' enclosing hills in sweet revenge;  Thus softly soothing all their rugged lines  Deep'ning their shadows - adding richer glow.  And through alluvial flats the Tuross winds;  At first a serpentining silver stream  But widening with blue waters to the sea  And overhung by blossoming wattles green;  Or like a liquid pathway glancing broad  Between a solemn avenue of oaks -   Swamp-oaks with fibrous fir-like leaves that droop  Till dark reflections quiver in the deeps  And thro' whose chords the gentlest wind will sigh  With soft Aeolian sounds that lull the soul  Yet stir its depths with longings vague and sweet.  A happy vale! that any man might love  To call his own and cherish to his heart!  See in the midst upon a rising slope  Beneath the shelter of the Bumbo Mount  There gleams the homestead - gabled cottage white  With creeping vines and garden flowers bright;  While on one side stand gold-brown stacks of hay  The dairy and surroundings of the farm  The clustering village of the workers' homes  The quick steam-engine and the blacksmith's forge   Then in the front o'er mignonetted beds  The eye looks on a meadow rich and broad  Its glistening tints in double greenness shown  And thrown out by the fringing ranges dark;  While round the fields the bending river flows  And almost makes an island of the spot  Which seems so English-like that we could look  And half believe ourselves again at home  Or think this were a memory taking form  A reminiscence sweet or waking dream!  Ah Comerang! shall I picture thee at morn  While still the valley sleeps in robe of mist.  And lowing cows of varied hue and form  Thro' frosty fields are driven to the sheds  Where childish milkmaids rosy-faced and bright  With skilful hands press out the creamy milk? [84]  Or shall I paint thee in the golden hues  Of evening light - which e'er the sun has set  Floods all the fields with tinted radiance soft  And glances bright through lengthening shadows deep;  While in the west the purpling mountains glow  Or faintly redden with a parting blush  As day's king ling'ring o'er his last good night  Illumes the heights o'er which his glory sinks?  Nay there is still a sweeter holier time!  The sacred stillness of the Sunday morn  When all the sounds of industry have ceased  And labour's garments for a while put off  The people answer to the echoing bell  That calls them to the work of prayer and praise.  Now like a family gather'd in the hall -   The homestead hall with church-like hangings deck'd  They listen to the words and pray the prayers  That thousand brethren e'en are lifting up  In distant churches at the self-same hour;  And music sweet and joyous hymns resound  In men's deep bass and children's voices high  Rising thro' country air so pure and still  To the Great Father of the fruitful earth. 