 Miss Turriff came out to Sydney with a batch of trained nurses consigned to Miss Osborn [sic] lady superintendent of the Infirmary. When the Duke of Edinburgh was struck down by the hand of an assassin Miss Turriff and Nurse Miller (who came out with her and is now in the Alfred Hospital) were appointed to nurse the Royal sufferer. [220] I presume they did their work well and with the aid of Providence and the doctors pulled their interesting charge through his crisis. The Duke was not ungrateful. It is said he gave them each £5 a gold watch and his blessing. He did more - he promised to look after their future welfare. Unlike many royal promises this was not broken. When the foundation-stone of the Alfred Hospital was laid the Duke it is said mentioned the name of Miss Turriff to the committee and she was appointed matron. Nurse Miller was by the same influence elected matron of the Brisbane Infirmary; but she was not strong enough for the place and is now a subordinate of her old comrade. Mr James Service (the treasurer and chairman of the Alfred Hospital Board) is an excessively loyal man. In his eyes no doubt a halo of glory is around the lady who nursed a prince and had the honour of adjusting royal bandages. Anyhow it is the open statement of everyone I have met that Miss Turriff is the protégée (the term is not meant offensively) of Mr Service and as such can do no wrong. . . I believe Miss Turriff to be a lady of remarkably good intentions but she has unfortunately a naturally obnoxious way of displaying these. Almost from the very first she has been at 'loggerheads' with the different members of the staff and under her régime there have been about 120 new female servants and nurses within the last five years. The system of management established by the committee I think was from the very first a wrong one. The secretary and superintendent was supposed to have the power of appointment of all the male servants and the matron of the female servants and nurses. The one was the master and the other the mistress of the house. This division of power and want of a head is I believe a vicious system of administration. The want of harmony between the matron and other officers of the institution came to a crisis early this year. The medical officers appear to have always objected to Miss Turriff's interference with the ward duties of the nurses and also with the patients both male and female. For months at a time things have been in such a state that all communications between the secretary resident surgeon [Dr Cooke] and the matron have been carried on in writing. . . [and] in this the lady had considerably the best of her correspondents. She would make a capital editor of a New York religious newspaper. In January a man died in the hospital and Miss Turriff wrote a letter to Dr Cooke couched in the strongest language accusing him of having through negligence caused the man's death and bringing against him charges which if true would and should ruin him as a professional man for life. . - Miss Turriff had threatened to resign if Dr Cooke remained but did not do so. That gentleman however took an early opportunity of retiring into private practice leaving as I saw entered on the minutes with a most gratifying testimonial from the committee as to his conduct as resident medical officer for three years at the Alfred Hospital.  I think that the very fact of Miss Turriff being retained in her position after the gross charge she brought against Dr Cooke is a conclusive proof of the influence of the Hon. James Service.. . After Dr Cooke left the new medical officers resigned because they would not 'mess' with the matron which elicited from Mr Service the letter published in The Argus of July 19 that 'the medical officers the matron the secretary and the dispenser are all heads of departments and directly responsible to the committee of management and no one else. [221] This admission is sufficient to account for any amount of disorganization and demoralization which may exist at the Alfred Hospital. I am only surprised that there is not more. Mr Service however is a good business man and will take care that any institution he is connected with is ostensibly a first-class concern; and so up to the present moment although injury may have been done individually by the matron's tyranny and although the sight of that lady stamping her feet and exchanging a few mild remarks with a nurse telling her 'to take a month's notice' is not a pleasant one still owing to lucky accident the management has not yet run aground and to the casual visitor everything is satisfactory.  How long will this last however? The dispute mentioned above which is reported in The Argus of October 7 - . . ended in the nurse and wardsman of the male surgical ward leaving immediately. For nearly two days this the most important ward in the place was left in charge of a patient. After that a temporary nurse was appointed but it was not until ten days had passed that any satisfactory arrangements for attending to this ward were made - . - The matron appointing all the nurses has sole control of their disposition and in this respect nominally acts as what she really is lady superintendent. Now as a rule I don't believe in them. There may be a few admirable energetic well-balanced ladies who can 'run' a charity or institution; but the majority are too much governed by their feelings and emotions.  And more than this: this expenditure on godless education this studding the colony with Schools which the Church knows from experience will in course of time fill the country with indifferentists not to speak of absolute infidels; this use of Catholic funds - of taxes paid out of Catholic pockets - for establishing a system of education throughout the land which not merely Catholics cannot safely make use of but which they firmly believe is calculated to sap the foundations of Christianity; is an act so galling to every feeling of fair-play that we do not see how any free man with any spirit in him can allow it to pass unchallenged.  Not merely as Bishops of the Catholic Church but as citizens of a free country which boasts that even-handed justice is dealt out to all its tax-payers we emphatically lay claim to our share of that same even-handed justice; and believe it to be the duty of the Catholic body not to rest until they have been placed on an equal footing with their fellow-colonists. We Catholics who represent one-third of the population do not ask for or seek one jot or tittle more consideration than our fellow tax-payers receive; and we do not see why we should be content with one jot or tittle less.  Let it be borne in mind that this is distinctly a religious question. With politics as such it was never our taste to meddle. But when not justice alone but the future of religion itself is essentially bound up with a certain position; when the question of education is in point of fact the great religious question of the day; we should be prevaricating against our bounden duty and should prove ourselves unfitted for our trust were we to hold our peace; did we not at the present juncture set forth the teaching of the Church with great distinctness and point out to you Dearly Beloved with unmistakeable clearness your duties as interpreted by that teaching. [721]  We find on all sides that where philanthropists have attempted to educate the inner life of man by philosophy legislation or intellectual culture the effect has always been the same. Every civilization which has not had Christianity for its basis has been dwarfed stunted and deformed: and every effort from that of the most remote paganism to that of the most modern infidelity to deal with the conscience the will and the heart of man in their inner sanctuaries has resulted in the degradation of man and in the collapse of the philosophy which corrupted him. The reason may have been exercised and the intellect may have been informed; but apart from Christianity the moral nature on which man's worth so much depends has never been educated nor his powers passions and motives -elevated or refined. [...]  Now we are bound both by the natural and revealed law to educate children in the knowledge of God in His love and in His commandments. As Christians we are bound to educate them in the full revelation of Jesus Christ and to procure for them those blessings and gifts which the Christian Church alone has the power to bestow. By the law of nature parents are bound to train their children; and by the law of Christianity the Church is bound to see that parents do their duty. And whilst Father and Mother on the one hand are obliged under strict obligation thus to rear their children from the dawning of their reason: the Church is bound on the other hand to complete the work which the parents have begun. "Go ye therefore and teach" or make disciples of all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatever I have commanded you" is her commission. Here the duty is imposed upon her and she receives the necessary gifts and powers. Thus both parents and the Church inculcate the same class of teaching; they are in perfect harmony; the education of the child at its mother's knee is not. undone in the Christian Schools but developed and completed. Through the whole period the graces and influences of Christianity are operating on the inner life of the Christian child; the heart the conscience and the will are being moulded for life; and the entire being body soul and senses the complete personality becomes saturated by a civilization of which Christianity alone can be the origin.  Thus it is self-evident that education without Christianity is impossible; you may call it instruction filling the mind with a certain quantity of secular knowledge but you cannot dignify it with the name Education; for religion is an essential part of Education; and to divorce religion or Christianity from Education is to return to paganism and to reject the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thus it is that the Church condemns with marked emphasis those schools and that method of teaching in which the religious element is divorced from the secular. She knows that instruction is not education; and that a system of national training from which Christianity is banished is a system of practical paganism which leads to corruption of morals and loss of faith to national effeminacy and to national dishonour. [722]  Such then being the emphatic teaching of the Catholic Church we the Archbishop and Bishops of this colony with all the weight of our authority condemn the principle of secularist education and those schools which are founded on that principle. We condemn them first because they contravene the first principles of the Christian religion; and secondly because they are seed-plots of future immorality infidelity and lawlessness being calculated to debase the standard of human excellence and to corrupt the political social and individual life of future citizens. Wherefore we urge our clergy to do all in their power in the pulpit and out of it to instruct the people in these teachings of the Christian religion. They should not rest till each member of their congregation fully realizes the true position of affairs. They should bring before the minds of parents the terrible calamity to their children in exposing them to loss of faith and morals and endeavour to make them feel that they could not do a greater service to religion or to the State than to upset by constitutional means a system which whilst it is a crying injustice to themselves promises to be a source of incalculable evil to the colony. Let them moreover warn parents who through a spirit of indifference or worldliness are exposing their children to proximate danger of perversion and of ruin that they are tempting the anger of the Almighty God and that they are jeopardizing the faith the morality the eternal happiness of those who are too young to help themselves and who have been confided by Nature itself to their guardianship and protection Let them often remind the people that they are gravely responsible if they give encouragement to such schools for by so doing they are helping to perpetuate a great evil and are standing as obstacles in the way of Christian men who are bent on bringing about a change. Let one and all remember what their fathers of old suffered for the faith and let them not show themselves unworthy of their own flesh and blood - flesh which was freely wounded and blood which was freely spilt rather than betray Christian principle or compromise Christian Faith.  We are profoundly conscious that a latent sense of fair-play exists in the community at large. Let all Catholics unite in bringing before the minds of their fellow-electors and their representatives in Parliament these two facts first that Catholics have to pay for schools which they cannot safely use and which they consider an evil to the country; and secondly that whilst they are thus made to pay no equal provision has been made for them: let the country fully comprehend our grievances and a sense of common even- handed Justice will assist us in working out a remedy Would secularists hold their peace if without equal provision being made for them public treasure were lavished on Catholic Grammar Schools and Catholic Primary Schools whilst £7500 were spent on the training of boys exclusively from Catholic institutions? [723] Would they not hold that they were being treated with extraordinary injustice and unfairness? And Would not the whole world agree with them? [...]  It will be urged that the State leaves religion to parents and priests and lays claim to instruct children in secular matters only.  True the State does not and cannot claim a commission to educate. It is the bounden duty of the State to protect not to usurp the moral duties of its members. All Christian Fathers and Mothers are required by the natural and divine law to give their children a Christian education. The State has no power or commission to usurp the parental rights and to compel parents to violate their conscience by sending their children to schools where an alien religion or no religion at all is taught. To do so would be to indulge in the most cruel form of religious persecution. The State has no rights higher or more sacred than those of parents. Nor does the authority of the Church cross or thwart the natural rights and duties of parents: its commission is to see that those rights are not invaded and that those duties are performed. The Catholic Church condemns godless schools and secularist education because they are solvents of Christianity and tend towards depriving Christian children of a priceless treasure. And no man can be a sound Catholic and support that which the Church condemns.  The State may declare and statesmen may teach that the secularist system is not adverse to Christianity and to the Catholic religion. But in matters of religion are Catholics to be guided by the world or by the Church? Does not the Church know her own true interests best? Has not she had experience of centuries in point of time; and all over the world in point of space? Are not her professed opponents on the side of secularist education and do not her best friends range themselves upon the Christian side? And to come to facts has the secularist system so far as it has gone fostered and developed a Christian spirit? Has not the Catholic episcopate in various quarters of the world found that its direct tendency is to quench such a spirit? What is our own experience and that of the Catholic clergy in this colony? to their shame it must be said some of our people do send their children to public schools. What is the deliberate conclusion we have arrived at with regard to such children? That there is a marked difference between them and children who have been educated in Catholic schools. Their faith is visibly enfeebled not to allude to their morality: their manners are rough and irreverent they have little sense of respect and gentleness: they have no attraction for prayer or for the Sacraments; Sacraments; and promise to swell a class which is already far too large in number. [724] Our clergy look on the future of such wild uncurbed children with grave misgivings.  If in any country in the world signs are being held out on every side of the necessity of an especial school of self-control reverence piety purity obedience faith it is in Australia. if in any country Catholic children require a strong Catholic education it is here. At home the ancient traditions and monuments of piety and reverence a large staff of clergy a Catholic public opinion with many other external helps assist in the training up of the young in a Christian spirit; but here where all is new the clergy few the population small and scattered and the external helps wanting it is most difficult with the best efforts of the best Catholic training to rear up the children to Christian piety and with thorough Catholic instincts. How ruinous therefore is it not to cast Christianity out of the schools and to confine it to a Sunday catechism-class under such circumstances as these.  The only fair chance for Catholic children turning out Catholic men and women in this colony is for them to be most carefully and conscientiously taught their religion by their parents from their earliest years; and then for them to be sent to thorough Catholic schools where the home teaching is continued and the mind and heart and conscience and senses of the children are impregnated with Catholic instincts and moulded upon Catholic truth.  It may be interjected that some Catholics do not disapprove of Public Schools for a certain number of Catholic children are going to them. We reply because a certain number of Catholics do what is wrong that is no reason why we should not condemn what is wrong and teach them what is right. We declaim against and condemn intemperance and we declaim against and condemn secularist education; and we are led to do so all the more strenuously in proportion as we are inclined to fear that Catholics are beginning to feel less and less horror at drunkenness and infidelity. The Church is not ruled or guided by the practices of corrupt views of bad or indifferent or ignorant Catholics; but by the successor of St. Peter and the Bishops of the Church who are in communion with him.  So long as Catholics obey in faith and morals the voice that speaks with this authority they will be safe; to listen to and follow in such matters any other voice is to plunge into darkness and finally to make shipwreck of the faith.  THE BUSH  Give us from dawn to dark  Blue of Australian skies  Let there be none to mark  Whither our pathway lies.  Give us when noontide comes  Rest in the woodland free - Fragrant breath of the gums  Cold sweet scent of the sea.  Give us the wattle's gold  And the dew-laden air  And the loveliness bold  Loneliest landscapes wear.  These are the haunts we love  Glad with enchanted hours  Bright as the heavens above  Fresh as the wild bush flowers.  Luke Mivers' Harvest  Chapter I.  Doings at Narrgummie  The Sydney Mail   Saturday March 8 1879  NONE of the travellers who passed that way being persons of ordinary observation could satisfactorily explain the reason of Narrgummie. Narrgummie was a village that straggled beside a waterhole which had never been known to run dry. Old hands called the hole Bullybig and sometimes walked a mile or two from their route to look at its waters of which they had memories and stories and mysterious recollections not to be related even when the truth of wine was in them. Narrgummie was near no highway that was to be remembered. There was a loopline of ruts from the Sydney main road to it which the grass hid yearly as it hides graves and bones on the plains with its green furrowed and surfed by the wind giving it the motion of waters eternally stirred. Narrgummie had a hotel built by convict labour from a tarn quarry. This some of the old hardfaced men it was said eyed scowlingly as though like the pyramids each of the big rough stones had cost a life and if so fierce a crediting was not correct then indeed the walls were reared so the story ran by desperate hands and many maledictions. It might have been this strong house with its moss-grown roof that attracted the settlement which in turn attracted an adventurous publican to erect another hostelry. The latter for a time boasted a straggling business and finally dozed-off into desertion and wreck. Disjointed houses here and there strayed about the plot seemingly tortured with rheumatic twists sheltering families whose "heads" were nominally bullock drivers and who supplemented their trade by horse-dealing and various other transactions open to enterprise. [8] The  bullybig waterhole was a periodical haunt for the aboriginals who held their corroborries on the banks and obtained square gin in exchange for opossum rugs and other products of the chase. A couple or three lives were generally waddied into the happy hunting grounds at each of these reunions and as the inquiries into the cause of death invariably ended in free fights such episodes were regarded as eminently favouring trade and rather to be encouraged as a national characteristic which the sons of the soil should be allowed to preserve as one of their most sacred rites. A black protector was once sent up to report on these matters but unfortunately for the early history of our country he got drunk and therewith was seized with such an access of literary ardour that he wrote his paper on the spur of a moment on a butcher's block. This it need scarcely be said was so entangled that it was at once pigeon-holed for future reference.  If any one possessed authority at Narrgummie it was Mr. Mivers. Mr. Mivers was a squatter and a bruiser; he shore 50000 sheep and did all his own boxing. If a shearer had a complaint to make against the cook he heard both sides impartially and polished-off the delinquent; the delinquent being still required for service and refusing to return Mivers had a habit of polishing him into submission and sending him back (painted) to his duties when as might be expected he rigorously pursued them in a swollen and shining state for many days afterwards. One malcontent known as John Slater and described as a broken-down gentleman having been duly operated upon by the Narrgummie artist refused to be comforted and resorted to reprisals. But the vigorous and athletic Mivers having had his suspicions caught Mr. Slater kindling a fire beneath his wool-shed when he launched a crowbar at him with such force so true an aim that both the man's legs were broken. An ex-doctor who employed himself on the station in getting drunk and "foot-rotting" sheep set the bones so peculiarly that Slater was a cripple for life.  "I could have hanged you you know" Mivers said when after some months Slater hobbled in for more than a year's wages "broken bones is better than a rope; you want your money do you? Not a cent sir. Take yourself off or I'll give you in charge. You'll see if I don't."  Slater hobbled out again without speaking a word; his thin pale face spoke a sermon; Mr. Mivers did not see it and most probably he could not have understood it if he had.  But all this was long ago; so distant a time do a few years push back in the history of a young country that the circumstance for the matter of that might be regarded as having occurred in the "dim past." [9] Not so dim however but that men whose hair is now growing grey remember it; not so distant but that many a shrivelled face grows hard at the memory and many a heavy-jawed man has yet energy enough and fire enough to grate his teeth at it and bring his great broad fist down upon the table with a clash and a ground-out curse. If much is changed the characteristics of the village I write of still remain; houses have sprung up between houses and united them into something like streets; there are the decrepid huts still to be seen and the lichened fences yet creep across the ground enclosing sorrelled paddocks. Besides these other enclosures have been railed in cultivation has stretched out far into the rolling grass land and the wave of settlement has surged up to the very confines of Mr. Mivers's freehold. The country here and there bears the fruit of human homes and when the sun strikes down casting long shadows through groups of wattles the loneliness of the desert seems to have blossomed into industry contentment and peace around those finger-marks of the past. The rough stone hotel was there not so long ago and the sullen hostelry when last seen was rougher and dryer and more lonely than ever. The feet of men and the tramp of horses pass it breaking the peace of the still days and starting abrupt echoes through its miserable bar and its silent rooms where were only the landlord and his daughter.  The landlord of the Unicorn is a white-haired man with as many wrinkles in his queer face as there are years in a people's history; he smiles toothlessly against such of the residents as choose to visit him for refreshments and noiselessly rubs his palms in obsequious attention to the conversation and wishes of his patrons. They have their cares but he has nothing to mumble over and when he shuts his face into something like repose shortening it by an inch and pulls at his beard in thought; when at such times the sun comes in over his reverent hair and shambling self it seems as though the unlaid ghost of a mysterious past was afloat in to-day's world and curiously contemplating the all-living present buoying up some unholy resolve with such strength as more than three score years can spare and a single purpose hope to attain. If the truth must be spoken the heavy-footed men who visited Shorter were not impelled thither either by charity or reverence; those lean fingers of his had loaned money at interest and were as tight upon some of them as though they were iron talons. There is always a writhe from a tight grip and speculation was ceaseless as to how long the old fellow would last. Many of the sought-for drinks were but subterfuges to cover curiosity on this vital point. But there was another and let us hope a more laudable purpose actuating the few. [10] In Shorter's daughter there seemed to dwell much magic in her lustreful eyes and bronze hair; there was such unconscious dignity in her bearing and so much of grace sat upon her and lived with her that she drew admirers and swayed them by never so much as an effort from her calm eyes or a word from her scornful lips. The dresses which the old man gave her improved the fine proportions of her figure and that supple buoyancy which the pride of life lent to her. Narrgummie wondered at her open-mouthed and storekeepers and their assistants smouldered with jealousy against each other because of her. Her sisters of every degree shrugged their suspicions at one another and charitably hoped for the sake of others mind you she would be early found out. As to her character-shrugs and sorrowful head-shaking finished the sentence far more completely than words. Indeed it is but just to these persons to say that the trade at the Unicorn improved immensely when Miss Shorter came home whence she had been sojourning in parts unknown. The dull deserted place had been looked on as a reproach to the thriving and vigour which settlement bestowed generally but now what house was becoming so frequented not by selectors alone but by young bloods of squatters who came in irresistible dandyism to drink and talk and watch for her flitting figure and patrician face. Old Shorter was proud to see his patrons he mouthed welcomes and swore through the palsy of his years that he felt quite young again and elated to have the honour of mixing with gentlemen and obeying their behests.  "My daughter gentlemen would be here now but she is visiting a poor selector's family where there is poverty and sickness but for that you would hear her express her gratitude at the condescension of your presence in the old man's house and join her thanks with mine" so saying would old Shorter bow low and flutter humility and his thanks to the aristocrats of the Narrgummie district.  Some years before this time had begun to tell Mr. Mivers that his old force of muscle was leaving him. Shearers and servitors came who were quite capable not only of resisting his polishings off but of taking the role of the artist into their own fists and after Mr. Mivers had on one occasion thrown up the sponge and returned to his homestead he found he was painted and decorated in the highest style of art. Having brooded upon the matter he resolved to betake himself and his bank balance to Mindorf.  At Mindorf he could enjoy at ease the results of his industry and the spoil of his cunning. Mr. Mivers junior was the successor with carte blanche as to bullyism and subtle instructions as to law. "The hands" did not think Mr. Mivers junior was an improvement; he used to polish-off boys and old men with great valour until one day Charley Wallace the fencer interfered and shook him savagely. [11] Since that time the young squatter contented himself with suing servants for breaches of contracts (or absenting themselves from hired service and for every other fault) of every degree which the statute could be stretched to cover. His judgment on such points as these was never doubted and so young Mr. Mivers saved a large portion of the working expenses.  When Shorter's daughter began to attract attention Mivers rode over and lounged into the dark bar. The old man started and looked hurriedly towards his shelves to hide the look that was in his eyes and when he turned his face threaded with wrinkles it wore a flush of pleasure and satisfaction that flattered this young gentleman. To none was Shorter more humble to none more ready to do a service. "Would he step inside; he had often heard of young Mr. Mivers but never expected to have such a pleasure. True other gentlemen were beginning to honour him with their custom but he of all others was honoured by the speaker. His hotel was but a poor one - very poor - for the accommodation of such a gentleman as Mr. Luke Mivers but now that Mr. Mivers had found his way it was probable was it not he would come again. If Mr. Mivers was agreeable he should ask his daughter to thank him in her own and her father's behalf for his courtesy and condescension." The relic having flurried away with his oppressive civility shut his face into repose and when after a short absence he returned it was to state that Margaret would be presently down and in the meantime would Mr. Mivers take something after his ride.  "By jove that's good brandy" coughed the visitor who emptied his tumbler in a manly way; "it's better than I have at the station."  "It's some Mr. Mivers which I got especially for certain customers. I don't think it can be equalled in the district."  " 'Pon my soul this is a rummy kind of hotel and you are just as rummy a landlord. I suppose you know I could get your license taken from you if I chose" the customer remarked with confiding candour.  "Of course I do sir; your word is law here. I haven't been a year at Narrgummie without knowing that. But let me venture the hope that there will be no reason for your taking such a step."  Mr. Mivers hoped there would not but that was the old man's lookout; he merely said it that they might understand each other.  "My daughter sir. Margaret this is Mr. Mivers."  "By jove" muttered Mivers with an embarrassed shrinking. He shuffled towards her with his best bow and looked at her with wonder and blushed and spluttered the pleasure it gave him to see her she calmly embarrassing him with her face. [12]  "I little expected to have such a pleasure. They told me you-you were devilish pretty but 'pon my soul who'd a thought to see one like you in such a place as this. Another glass of that brandy Mr. Shorter will-will you have anything Miss Shorter?"  Miss Shorter declined.  "It's not the cost you know. I'll stand anything you choose to have" the gentleman said elegantly. "I'll pay for it. Have you any champagne Shorter?"  "Sir my daughter does not drink of anything."  "Oh come I say"; turning to the girl "have a glass of champagne."  Miss Margaret Shorter smiled with a look that flashed all over the young squatter; there was a certain dignity in it that made him dissatisfied and uneasy.  "I hope I have not been unintentionally rude. I did not mean any offence."  "No one could take offence at good nature" she laughed letting her eyes catch his.  He fidgetted and heated like a school-boy and to relieve the pause (Mr. Mivers for the life of him could not think of what to say) he drank some more brandy and water and assured the lady it was the best he ever tasted.  "I am very glad indeed you find it to your liking; but you must take care old brandy is strong."  This warning given with her outstretched finger and her face bowed slightly towards him.  Mr. Mivers grew red with pleasure while the old man brought his gums together.  "I should thank you for your kindness in coming to this humble place. It is not often we have gentlemen for visitors. There is but little to amuse one in Narrgummie."  "If you will but let me Miss Shorter I'll come to see you as often as you like. I mean as often as you'll permit. I will by jove; come is it a bargain."  "We shall always be happy to see you."  The visitor poured out another glass of brandy to keep up the conversation as Miss Shorter rose and giving a rich smile which did not disturb the calm of her face left the room. If while passing out the gentleman of so much condescension could have seen her expression of bearing and features he might have gained a warning but he was in exuberant good humour with himself which speedily became apparent in the delicate way in which he set about suborning the parent by the guile of affable intercourse. [13]  "By jove Shorter I say old fellow what a prize you've got. Never you mind I was only joking about the license. Look here I'd get you half-a-dozen if you wanted them."  To which the host made reply not allured from his humility "I thank you for the friendship you have expressed. May I venture to hope sir that we shall understand each other and that we may often have the honour of seeing you in our lowly little place?"  "By gad you may old man" slapping Shorter on the shoulder to seal the intimacy of the equality between them as thenceforth to be of the most friendly description. Helping himself to more brandy and inviting his host to drink with him he waited and talked and again drank but the daughter did not return.  When Mr. Mivers sought to remount his horse the difficulty of getting at the stirrups presented a grave obstacle which was finally overcome by perseverance and liberal maledictions. (to be continued)    [14] Chapter II.  At Her Mercy  The Sydney Mail   Saturday March 8 1879  THERE is some kind of affection or liking or regard whichever is the proper term in the coming connection I do not know that grows up amongst the human kind of our advanced civilization. It is not to be understood by analysis or interpreted by motive. Of such a kind was the attachment of an old servant who dwelt at Narrgummie station for Mivers senior and Mivers junior. Mr. Mivers senior in his cruellest fits of bullying or meanest efforts to overreach and cheat neither ill-used nor insulted old Blane. He had been with him at the time he took up the run and he alone of all his men had the courage to expostulate and advise; and when the father gave the son full charge he left Blane to him as a legacy. The man was aged and rugged but every thought and action that moved his withered body or inspired his bedraggled life had direct reference to the welfare of the Mivers family.  Mr. Luke galloped bravely up to the house walked suddenly in and sat down with a curse at his reeling head. Blane watched him shoulder past and stood looking at him beneath his heavy brows in silence.  It will pay Government to give those people who are suffering innocence justice and liberty. If not I will be compelled to show some colonial strategm which will open the eyes of not only the Victoria Police and inhabitants but also the whole British army and now doubt they will acknowledge their hounds were barking at the wrong stump and that Fitzpatrick will be the cause of greater slaughter to the Union Jack than Saint Patrick was to the snakes and toads in Ireland.  The Queen of England was as guilty as Baumgarten and Kennedy Williamson and Skillion of what they were convicted for when the horses were found on the Murray River I wrote a letter to Mr Swanhill of Lake Rowan to acquaint the Auctioneer and to advertise my horses for sale I brought some of them to that place but did not sell I sold some of them in Benalla Melbourne and other places and left the colony and became a rambling gambler soon after I left there was a warrant for me and the Police searched the place and watched night and day for two or three weeks and when they could not snare me they got a warrant against my brother Dan And on the 15th of April Fitzpatrick came to the eleven mile creek to arrest him he had some conversation with a horse dealer whom he swore was William Skillion this man was not called in Beechworth besides several other witnesses who alone could have proved Fitzpatrick's falsehood after leaving this man he went to the house asked was Dan in; Dan came out I hear previous to this Fitzpatrick had some conversation with Williamson on the hill. [444] He asked Dan to come to Greta with him as he had a warrant for him for stealing Whitty's horses Dan said all right they both went inside Dan was having something to eat his mother asked Fitzpatrick what he wanted Dan for the trooper said he had a warrant for him Dan then asked him to produce it he said it was only a telegram sent from Chiltern but Sergeant Whelan ordered him to relieve Steel at Greta and call and arrest Dan and take him in to Wangaratta next morning and get him remanded Dans mother said Dan need not go without a warrant unless he liked and that the trooper had no business on her premises without some authority besides his own word.  The trooper pulled out his revolver and said he would blow her brains out if she interfered in the arrest she told him it was a good job for him Ned was not there or he would ram his revolver down his throat Dan looked out and said Ned is coming now the trooper being off his guard looked out and when Dan got his attention drawn he dropped the knife and fork which showed he had no murderous intent and slapped Hennan's hug on him took his revolver and kept him there until Skillion and Ryan came with horses which Dan sold that night.  The trooper left and invented some scheme to say that he got shot which any man can see is false he told Dan to clear out that Sergeant Steel and Detective Brown and Strachan would be there before morning Strachan had been over the Murray trying to get up a case against him and they would convict him if they caught him as the stock society offored an enticement for witnesses to swear anything and the germans over the Murray would swear to the wrong man as well as the right.  Next day Williamson and my mother was arrested and Skillion the day after who was not there at all at the time of the row which can be proved by 8 or 9 witnesses and the Police got great credit and praise in the papers for arresting the mother of 12 children one an infant on her breast and those two quiet hard working innocent men who would not know the difference a revolver and a saucepan handle and kept them six months awaiting trial and then convicted them on the evidence of the meanest article that ever the sun shone on it seems that the jury was well chosen by the Police as there was a discharged Sergeant amongst them which is contrary to law they thought it impossible for a Policeman to swear a lie but I can assure them it was by that means and hiring cads they get promoted I have heard from a trooper that he never knew Fitzpatrick to be one night sober and that he sold his sister to a chinaman but he looks a young strapping rather genteel more fit to be a starcher to a laundress than a policeman. For to a keen observer he has the wrong appearance for a manly heart the deceit and cowardice is too plain to be seen in the puny cabbage hearted looking face. [445]  I heard nothing of this transaction until very close on the trial I being then over 400 miles from Greta when I heard I was outlawed and a hundred pound reward for me for shooting a trooper in Victoria and a hundred pound for any man that could prove a conviction of horse-stealing against me so I came back to Victoria knew I would get no justice if I gave myself up I enquired after my brother Dan and found him digging on Bullock Creek heard how the Police used to be blowing that they would not ask me to stand they would shoot me first and then cry surrender and how they used to rush into the house upset all the milk dishes break tins of eggs empty the flour out of bags onto the ground and even the meat out of the cask and destroy all provisions and shove the girls in front of them into the rooms like dogs so as if anyone was there they would shoot the girls first but they knew well I was not there or I would have scattered their blood and brains like rain I would manure the Eleven Mile with their bloated carcasses and yet remember there is not one drop of murderous blood in my veins.  Superintendent Smith used to say to my sisters see all the men all I have out today I will have as many more tomorrow and we will blow him into pieces as small as paper that is in our guns Detective Ward and Constable Hayes took out their revolvers and threatened to shoot the girls and children in Mrs Skillions absence the greatest ruffians and murderers no matter how deprived would not be guilty of such a cowardly action and this sort of cruelty and disgraceful and cowardly conduct to my brothers and sisters who had no protection coupled with the conviction of my mother and those men certainly made my blood boil and I don't think there is a man born could have the patience to suffer it as long as I did or ever allow his blood to get cold while such insults as these were unavenged and yet in every paper that is printed I am called the blackest and coldest blooded murderer ever on record But if I hear any more of it I will not exactly show them what cold blooded murder is but wholesale and retail slaughter something different to shooting three troopers in self defence and robbing a bank. I would have been rather hot blooded to throw down my rifle and let them shoot me and my innocent brother. They were not satisfied with frightening my sisters night and day and destroying their provisions and lagging my mother and infant and those innocent men but should follow me and my brother into the wilds where he had been quietly digging neither molesting or interfering with anyone he was making good wages as the creek is very rich within half a mile where I shot Kennedy. I was not there long and on the 25th of October I came on Police tracks between Table top and the bogs. I crossed them and returning in the evening I came on a different lot of tracks making for the shingle hut I went to our camp and told my brother and his two mates. Me and my brother went and found their camp at the shingle hut about a mile from my brothers house. [446] We saw they carried long firearms and we knew our doom was sealed if we could not beat those before the others would come as I knew the other party of Police would soon join them and if they came on us at our camp they would shoot us down like dogs at our work as we had only two guns we thought it best to try and bail those up take their firearms and ammunition and horses and we could stand a chance with the rest. We approached the spring as close as we could get to the camp as the intervening space being clear ground and no battery we saw two men at the logs they got up and one took a double barreled fowling piece and fetched a horse down and hobbled him at the tent we thought there were more men in the tent asleep those outside being on sentry we could have shot those two men without speaking but not wishing to take their lives we waited McIntyre laid his gun against a stump and Lonigan sat on the log I advanced my brother Dan keeping Mcintyre covered which he took to be Constable Flood and had he not obeyed my orders or attempted to reach for the gun or draw his revolver he would have been shot dead but when I called on them to throw up their hands Mcintyre obeyed and Lonigan ran some six or seven yards to a battery of logs instead of dropping behind the one he was sitting on he had just got to the logs and put his head up to take aim when I shot him that instant or he would have shot me as I took him for Strachan the man who said he would not ask me to stand he would shoot me first like a dog. But it happened to be Lonigan the man who in company with Sergeant Whelan Fitzpatrick and King the Bootmaker and Constable O'Day that tried to put a pair of handcuffs on me in Benalla but could not and had to allow McInnis the miller to put them on previous to Fitzpatrick swearing he was shot I was fined two pounds for hitting Fitzpatrick and two pounds for not allowing five curs like Sergeant Whelan O'Day Fitzpatrick King and Lonigan who caught me by the privates and would have sent me to Kingdom come only I was not ready and he is the man that blowed before he left Violet Town if Ned Kelly was to be shot he was the man would shoot him and no doubt he would shoot me even if I threw up my arms and laid down as he knew four of them could not arrest me single handed not to talk of the rest of my mates also either he or me would have to die this he knew well therefore he had a right to keep out of my road Fitzpatrick is the only one I hit out of the five in Benalla this shows my feeling towards him as he said we were good friends and even swore it but he was the biggest enemy I had in the country with the exception of Lonigan and he can be thankful I was not there when he took a revolver and threatened to shoot my mother in her own house it is not true I fire three shots and missed him a yard and a half I don't think I would use a revolver to shoot a man like him when I was within a yard and a half of him or attempted to fire into a house where my mother brothers and sisters was according to Fitzpatricks statement all around him a man that is such a bad shot as to miss a man three times at a yard and a half would never attempt to fire into a house among a house full of women and children while I had a pair of arms and bunch of fives at the end of them they never failed to peg out anything they came in contact with and Fitzpatrick knew the weight of one them only too well as it run up against him once in Benalla and cost me two pound odd as he is very subject to fainting. [447] As soon as I shot Lonigan he jumped up and staggered some distance from the logs with his hands raised and then fell he surrendered but too late I asked Mcintyre who was in the tent he replied no one. I advanced and took possession of their two revolvers and fowling piece which I loaded with bullets instead of shot.  I asked Mcintyre where his mates was he said they had gone down the creek and he did not expect them that night he asked me was I going to shoot him and his mates. I told him no I would shoot no man if he gave up his arms and leave the force he said the police all knew Fitzpatrick had wronged us and he intended to leave the force as he had bad health and his life was insured he told me he intended going home and that Kennedy and Scanlon were out looking for our camp and also about the other Police he told me the N.S.W. Police had shot a man for shooting Sergeant Watling. I told him if they did they had shot the wrong man and I expect your gang came to do the same with me he said no they did not come to shoot me they came to apprehend me I asked him what they carried spencer rifles and breech loading fowling pieces and so much ammunition for as the Police was only supposed to carry one revolver and 6 cartridges in the revolver but they had eighteen rounds of revolver cartridges each three dozen for the fowling piece and twenty one spencer rifle cartridges and God knows how many they had away with the rifle this looked as if they meant not only to shoot me but to riddle me but I don't know either Kennedy Scanlon or him and had nothing against them he said he would get them to give up their arms if I would not shoot them as I could not blame them they had to do their duty I said I did not blame them for doing honest duty but I could not suffer them blowing me to pieces in my own native land and they knew Fitzpatrick wronged us and why not make it public and convict him but no they would rather riddle poor unfortunate creoles. but they will rue the day ever Fitzpatrick got among them. Our two mates came over when they heard the shot fired but went back again for fear the Police might come to our camp while we were all away and manure bullock flat with us on our arrival I stopped at the logs and Dan went back to the spring for fear the troopers would come in that way but soon I heard them coming up the creek I told Mcintyre to tell them to give up their arms he spoke to Kennedy who was some distance in front of Scanlon he reached for his revolver and jumped off on the offside of his horse and got behind a tree when I called on them to throw up their arms and Scanlan who carried the rifle slewed his horse around to gallop away but the horse would not go and as quick as thought fired at me with the rifle without unslinging it and was in the act of firing again when I had to shoot him and he fell from his horse. [448]  I could have shot them without speaking but their lives was no good to me. McIntyre jumped on Kennedys horse and I allowed him to go as I did not like to shoot him after he surrendered or I would have shot him as he was between me and Kennedy therefore I could not shoot Kennedy without shooting him first. Kennedy kept firing from behind the tree my brother Dan advanced and Kennedy ran. I followed him he stopped behind another tree and fired again. I shot him in the armpit and he dropped his revolver and ran. I fired again with the gun as he slewed around to surrender. I did not know he had dropped his revolver the bullet passed through the right side of his chest and he could not live or I would have let him go had they been my own brothers I could not help shooting them or else let them shoot me which they would have done had their bullets been directed as they intended them. But as for handcuffmg Kennedy to a tree or cutting his ear off or brutally treating any of them is a falsehood if Kennedy's ear was cut off it was not done by me and none of my mates was near him after he was shot I put his cloak over him and left him as well as I could and were they my own brothers I could not have been more sorry for them this cannot be called wilful murder for I was compelled to shoot them or lie down and let them shoot me it would not be wilful murder if they packed our remains in shattered into a mass of animated gore to Mansfield they would have got great praise and credit as well as promotion but I am reconed a horrid brute because I had not been cowardly enough to lie down for them under such trying circumstances and insults to my people certainly their wives and children are to be pitied but they must remember those men came into the bush with the intention of scattering pieces of me and my brother all over the bush and yet they know and acknowledge I have been wronged and my mother and four or five men lagged innocent and is my brothers and sisters and my mother not to be pitied also who has no alternative only to put up with the brutal and cowardly conduct of a parcel of big ugly fatnecked wombat headed big bellied magpie legged narrow hipped splay-footed sons of Irish Bailiffs or english landlords which is better known as offices of Justice or Victorian Police who some calls honest gentlemen but I would like to know what business an honest man would have in the Police as it is an old saying it takes a rogue to catch a rogue and a man that knows nothing about roguery would never enter the force and take an oath to arrest brother sister father or mother if required and to have a case and conviction if possible an man knows it is possible to swear a lie and if a policeman looses a conviction for the sake of swearing a lie he has broke his oath therefore he is a perjuror either ways a Policeman is a disgrace to his country not alone to the mother that suckled him in the first place he is a rogue in his heart but too cowardly to follow it up without having - the force to disguise it. [449] Next he is a traitor to his country ancestors and religion as they were all catholics before the Saxons and Cranmore yoke held sway since they were persecuted massacred thrown into martyrdom and tortured beyond the ideas of the present generation. What would people say if they saw a strapping big lump of an Irishman shepherding sheep for fifteen bob a week or tailing turkeys Tallarook ranges for a smile from Julia or even begging his tucker they would say he ought to be ashamed of himself and tar-and-feather him. But he would be a king to a policeman who for a lazy loafing cowardly bilit left the ash corner deserted the shamrock the emblem of true wit and beauty to serve under a flag and nation that has destroyed massacreed and murdered their fore-fathers by the greatest torture as rolling them down hill in spiked barrels pulling their toe and finger nails and on the wheel and every torture imaginable more was transported to Van Diemand's Land to pine young lives away in starvation and misery among tyrants worse than the promised hell itself all of true blood bone and beauty that was not murdered on their own soil or had fled to America or other countries to bloom again another day were doomed to Port McQuarie Toweringabbie Norfolk island and Emu plains and in those places of tyrany and condemnation many a blooming Irishman rather than subdue to the Saxon yoke were flogged to death and bravely died in servile chains but true to the shamrock and a credit to Paddys land.  What would people say if I became a policeman and took an oath to arrest my brother and sisters and relations and convict them by fair or foul means after the conviction of my mother and the persecutions and insults offered to myself and people. Would they say I was a decent gentleman and yet a policeman is still in worse and guilty of meaner actions than that The Queen must surely be proud of such heroic men as the Police and Irish soldiers as It takes eight or eleven of the biggest mud crushers in Melbourne to take one poor little half starved larrakin to a watchhouse. I have seen as many as eleven big and ugly enough to lift Mount Macedon out of a crab hole more like the species of a baboon or Guerilla than a man actually come into a court house and swear they could not arrest one eight stone larrakin and them armed with battens and niddies without some civilians assistance and some of them going to the hospital from the effects of hits from the fists of the larrakin and the Magistrate would send the poor little larrakin into a dungeon for being a better man than such a parcel of armed curs. [450] What would England do if America declared war and hoisted a green flag as it is all Irishman that has got command of her armies forts and batteries even her very life guards and beef tasters are Irish would they not slew around and fight her with their own arms for the sake of the colour they dare not wear for years and to reinstate it and rise old Erins isle once more from the pressure and tyrannism of the English yoke which has kept it in poverty and starvation and caused them to wear the enemy's coat. What else can England expect.  Is there not big fat-necked Unicorns enough paid to torment and drive me to do thing which I don't wish to do without the public assisting them I have never interfered with any person unless they deserved it and yet there are civilians who take fire-arms against me for what reason I do not know unless they want me to turn on them and exterminate them with out medicine. I shall be compelled to make an example of some of them if they cannot find no other employment. If I had robbed and plundered ravished and murdered everything I met young and old rich and poor the public could not do any more than take firearms and assisting the police as they have done but by the light that shines pegged on an ant-bed with their bellies opened their fat taken out rendered and poured down their throat boiling hot will be cool to what pleasure I will give some of them and any person aiding or harbouring or assisting the Police in any way whatever or employing any person whom they know to be a detective or cad or those who would be so deprived as to take blood money will be outlawed and declared unfit to be allowed human buriel their property either consumed or confiscated and them theirs and all belonging to them exterminated off the face of the earth the enemy I cannot catch myself I shall give a payable reward for I would like to know who put that article that reminds me of a poodle dog half clipped in the lion fashion called Brooke E. Smith Superintendent of Police he knows as much about commanding Police as Captain Standish does about mustering mosquitoes and boiling them down for their fat on the back blocks of the Lachlan for he has a head like a turnip a stiff neck as big as his shoulders narrow hipped and pointed towards the feet like a vine stake and if there is any one to be called a murderer regarding Kennedy Scanlan and Lonigan it is that misplaced poodle he gets as much pay as a dozen good troopers if there is any good in them and what does he do for it he cannot look behind him without turning his whole frame it takes three or four police to keep sentry while he sleeps in Wangaratta for fear of body snatchers do they think he is a superior animal to the men that has to guard him if so why not send the men that gets big pay and reconed superior to the common police after me and you shall soon save the country of high salaries to men that is fit for nothing else but getting better men than himself shot and sending orphan children to the industrial school to make prostitutes and cads of them for the Detectives and other evil disposed persons send the high paid and men that received big salaries for year in a gang by themselves after me. [451]   As it makes no difference to them but it will give them a chance of showing whether they are worth more pay than a common trooper or not and I think the Public will soon find they are only in the road of good men and obtaining money under false pretences. I do not call Mcintyre a coward for I reckon he is as game a man as wears the jacket as he had the presence of mind to know his position directly as he was spoken to and only foolishness to disobey it was cowardice that made Lonigan and the others fight it is only foolhardiness to disobey an outlaw as any Policeman or other man who do not throw up their arms directly as I call on them knows the consequence which is a speedy dispatch to Kingdom come. I wish those men who joined the stock protection society to withdraw their money and give it and as much more to the widows and orphans and poor of Greta district where I spent and will again spend many a happy day fearless free and bold as it only aids the police to procure false witnesses and go whacks with men to steal horses and lag innocent men it would suit them far better to subscribe a sum and give it to the poor of their district and there is no fear of anyone stealing their property for no man could steal their horses without the knowledge of the poor if any man was mean enough to steal their property the poor would rise out to a man and find them if they were on the face of the earth it will always pay a rich man to be liberal with the poor and make as little enemies as he can as he shall find if the poor is on his side he shall loose nothing by it If they depend in the police they shall be drove to destruction as they can not and will not protect them if duffing and bushranging were abolished the police would have to cadge for their living I speak from experience as I have sold horses and cattle innumerable and yet eight head of the culls is all ever was found I never was interfered with whilst I kept up this successful trade I give fair warning to all those who has reason to fear me to sell out and give £10 out of every hundred towards the widow and orphan fund~. and do not attempt to reside in Victoria but as short a time as possible after reading this notice neglect this and abide by the consequences which shall be worse than the rust in the wheat in Victoria or the druth of a dry season to the grasshoppers in New South Wales I do not wish to give the order full force without giving timely warning but I am a widows son outlawed and my orders must be obeyed.  EDWARD KELLY.  Some of our best town housekeepers would find themselves sadly at fault if they should find themselves transplanted into the far bush miles from shop store or the daily tradesman . . . The household on a station must be a miniature town in itself; it must have its store and those who make up a list must be far-seeing not to find that something has been forgotten or the consumption of some article miscalculated. Then the lady on a station is supposed to possess medical and surgical knowledge from pulling a tooth to mending a broken leg. She must be a Lady Bountiful too and have the discernment to know when to give and when to withhold. At times her housekeeping capabilities are put to the utmost stretch when an inroad of visitors come . . . [W]ithout warning . . . eight or nine will . . . make their appearance about sundown of the same day and the busy housekeeper will be hurrying from Mary Ann the cook to Betsy Jane the housemaid 'on hospitable thoughts intent' for the comfort and welfare of her guests.  In the bush the servants' question is surrounded with difficulty: a mistress may be kind and considerate . . . and yet be unable to keep her servants. The young ones will get married . . . and the old ones get drunk; whilst if deluded into engaging a married couple she has made a rod for her own back . . . If one is good the other is invariably worthless and though they quarrel with a perseverance worthy of a better cause a word of rebuke said to either party causes the devoted couple to immediately unite into a defensive alliance against their common enemy - the mistress.  The bush-girl out of a shepherd's or stockman's hut is a creature too fearful almost to be believed in . . . Her capacity for breaking and destroying is marvellous. When waiting at table she joins in the conversation and bursts into a hoarse laugh at anything that amuses her; she drops knives and forks like leaves in a storm; when spoken to answers 'Yes' 'Aye' or 'What do you say?' without prefix or affix and is altogether such a rough uncouth specimen that many a young inexperienced housekeeper has been reduced almost to despair at having to convert the raw material into the semblance of a civilized domestic. Accustomed as she has been in her father's household to well-trained servants who perform their duties with deftness silently and regularly the introduction of a bush-hoyden with a step like a troop of horse and a voice like a boatswain is both trying to the patience and aggravating to the temper.  Many a tenderly reared lady has had to be her own servant making bread washing dishes scrubbing and cleaning with unaccustomed and weary fingers. She must know how to do many things that town housekeepers know nothing about; she must understand how to make bread butter candles and brew beer and rear chickens and make garments of every description for there is no getting in a needlewoman for a day or two when the season changes.  POLICY AND PASSION  Chapter I. At Braysher's Inn.  BRAYSHER'S the chief inn at Kooya was a one-storied wooden building placed at the junction of the two principal streets of the township. A wide verandah enclosed by dingy railings which had been originally painted green and filled with squatters' chairs and small wooden tables extended round the two visible sides of the hotel. A bar much frequented by the roughs who came down from the bush 'for a spree' faced one of the streets and a coffeeroom which served as a rendezvous for the passengers by Cobb's coach to and from Leichardt's Town and opened by glass doors on to the verandah fronted the other thoroughfare.  It wanted now about an hour to the time at which the coach usually started and the vehicle ready to be horsed was drawn up beside the sign-post. It was a clumsy affair painted red and yellow. A wooden framework supported an awning of which the leather curtains might be pulled up or down at will; in front there was a high driver's box; two wooden benches faced each other behind and at the extreme end was a third only to be approached by a scramble over the backs of the others. [2] The coach was generally drawn by five horses.  The time was half-past four in the afternoon of a sultry day in February. A storm brooded in the distance and there was an ominous stillness in the atmosphere. The oleanders and loquat-trees before the opposite houses looked brown and thirsty. The acacias in the inn garden drooped with sickly languor; and the spiky crowns of the golden pine-apples beneath them were thickly coated with dust. Flaming hibiscus flowers stared at the beholder in a hot aggressive fashion. There was no green shadow anywhere to afford relief to eyes wearied with brightness and colour. Brassy clouds were gathering slowly in the west and the sun beating pitilessly upon the zinc roofs of the verandahs was mercilessly refracted from the glaring limestone hills that formed the eastern border of the township.  Two long roads intersected each other at the inn corner. One stretched away into the bush where it wound arnong gaunt gum-trees and lost itself in the dull herbage with which the country was overgrown; the other seemed to terminate abruptly upon the summit of a chalky ridge where a clump of grass trees with their brown spear-like tufts erect looked like sentinels to the barren scene.  Wooden-porticoed shanties alternating at intervals with brick public offices; newly-painted stores which displayed all varieties of wares; and gaudy public-houses round which clustered brawny sunburnt navvies lined but did not shade the streets. The general air of the place was one of inaction. Sometimes a bullock-dray piled with bales of wool or station stores would rumble by; or a covered cart driven by a weather-beaten German woman from some neighbouring selection would pause for a moment in front of Braysher's while its owner interchanged a few words with some acquaintance lounging at the bar.  [3] More frequently a bushman in Crimean shirt and moleskins with his coat strapped before him would clatter over the stony road and dismount before the inn. First he would unsaddle his horse hanging its bridle on to the railings of the verandah while the animal accustomed to the habits of the place would find its own way to the water-trough. Next the new-comer would don his coat and sidle across to the post-office opposite whence he would shortly return laden with letters and newspapers which he would place upon the arm of a squatter's chair in readiness for inspection. Then after carefully choosing the shadiest side of the verandah he would stretch his legs at full length dangle his feet over the railings call for a glass of grog to wash the dust out of his throat thereby intensifying the redness of a sun-baked face and would finally set himself to the perusal of his correspondence.  Many bushmen had arrived at Braysher's that afternoon and all had gone through exactly the same formula with the occasional addition of a greeting to one or other of those already assembled on the inn verandah.  'Good-day to you;' 'Steaming hot;' 'Looks like a storm brewing;' 'Very dry up country;' 'Fine weather this for the cotton-growers;' and such-like interjectional remarks sounded unfamiliarly in the ears of an English gentleman but lately arrived in Australia who was leaning against one of the verandah-posts contemplating with languid interest the scene around him.  He was smoking and apart from his air and physique the silver-mounted match-box in his hand and the perfume of his expensive cigar sufficiently indicated him to the intelligence of the bushmen as 'a chap from the old country.' Nevertheless his tall broadly-built figure bronzed highbred face and soldier-like bearing had no generic affinity with the lank limbs the fresh-coloured supine features and frank gullibility of the typical new chum. [4] The boldest old hand would hardly have attempted to play a practical joke upon Hardress Barrington.  He looked about thirty-five. The upper part of his face was fine with a touch of nobility in the high forehead broad at its base but slightly receding at the crown. The darkbrown hair fringed off in little rings from the temples. The brows were strongly marked and wrinkled together in a frown which deepened the indentures of the sockets and gave to the grey eyes a remarkable intensity of expression. The nose was straight with a somewhat coarse conformation of nostril and had on each side a deep line extending below the upper lip. The mouth was concealed by a heavy moustache and the clean-shaven slightly prominent chin was cleft in the centre. A handsome man upon whom it would be impossible for the stranger not to bestow several glances of interest and of whom it might be safely surmised that he had travelled much and had come into contact with various grades of society.  'I suppose that Cobb's coach is on its last legs now' said one of the squatters relighting a short black pipe that had expired between his lips. 'I shouldn't wonder if we had steam-carriages to Leichardt's Town before December year. Do you think that Longleat will carry his railway bill this session?'  'There'll be a stiff fight over the Speech' said a red-faced bushman in a cabbage-tree hat laying down the Leichardt's Town Chronicle which he had been diligently perusing. 'Middleton has been blowing no end up north; and there are some snug berths to be given away. Folks must have an eye to their own pockets; and for all the blather that people talk about impartiality there's no doubt that bribery tells in the long-run.'  'I'll back Longleat' said another. 'He is the devil for sticking to his purpose. [5] He said he'd make the colony and he is going the right way to work. What Leichardt's Land wants is money and money means Immigration and Public Works. Hullo Tom Dungie! Down from the Koorong eh? Why you've given the little piebald a sore back with your hard riding.'  Tom Dungie the mail-man who had halted at the post-office across the street had just removed his saddle with its load of brown leather post-bags and was ruefully regarding a puffy spot above the loin which threatened unpleasant consequences to a dearly-loved pony. Two other horses which he had been driving one of which bore a pair of empty saddle-bags were browsing by the wayside. Dungie was a tiny fat man with small twinkling grey eyes a round face and a whining voice.  'It's from all the lies I'm a-carryin'' he squeaked. 'The little piebald she's a righteous 'oss; and Lord! them Parliamentary rigmaroles - there's seven of 'em in blue envelopes from Kooralbyn - do hact like a James's blister upon a sensitive back.'  A shout of laughter greeted Tom Dungie's explanation but he maintained an imperturbable gravity during the explosion.  'Who's the hack for?' inquired one of the dwellers at Braysher's.  'It's that there lord at Dyraaba as has a new chum agoin' in for colonial experience' squeaked Dungie giving each of the supernumerary beasts a sharp smack on the wither. 'I say Mr. Braysher put the 'acks up and don't let 'em be turned out for any of your swell customers. My word! it's awful dry to-day - Longleat's on the road behind.'  'Longleat!' shouted a group of men at the bar; and soon the cry spread through the township. Even the children playing at fives with the pebbles in the road caught it up and their mothers rushed out to join in the excitement. [6] Before many minutes a small crowd had assembled in front of Braysher's.  'Who is Longleat?' asked the Englishman.  'Longleat!' echoed a hirsute squatter who expectorated freely and frankly owned to American origin. 'Longleat!' he repeated not looking at his questioner but gazing over the heads of the crowd into the vista of houses and distant trees. 'Wal! it's my opeenion sir that it 'ud be worth your while to study up the politics of this 'ere rising colony ef it's only to become acquainted with the career of Thomas Longleat of Kooralbyn - a remarkable man sir. The Champion of the working class; the Pillar of Progress; and the Enemy of a tyrannical and parsimonious democracy.'  The speaker drawled out with lagging eloquence his e mphasised adjectives hitched up his trousers and slouched to the other end of the verandah his eyes still fixed upon the distant object of his attention which was rapidly resolving itself into a flying speck advancing mid a cloud of freshly-raised dust  'But who is Longleat?' inquired Barrington again.  'Member for Kooya and Premier of Leichardt's Land' replied a spry little stockman in moleskins.  'Thank you' said Barrington.  'A remarkable specimen sir of the vicissitudes of Australia' said the first speaker returning to his former position against the verandah-rails. 'It's a known fact that Thomas Longleat began life in this colony as a bullockdriver. He ain't ashamed to own up to it. A bullockdriver on these very roads that he is spanking over now with the finest team in Leichardt's Land. A man as yoked his own beasts and spread his tarpaulin and chewed his quid of tobacco when the day's work was over; and now why if he floats his Railway Loan her Majesty will make him a Knight of St. Michael and St. George as sure as we're standing in Braysher's verandah. Here he comes.' [7]  A buggy drawn by four steaming chestnuts rattled down the road and was pulled up in front of the hotel. A stout red-faced gentleman with a swelling chest and commanding presence clad in white linen clothes and wearing a broadbrimmed puggareed hat descended from the vehicle. He was followed by a wizened-up little man with very thin legs and a hooked nose whose ferret-like face was fringed by a border of iron-grey hair and wore an unpleasant saturnine expression.  The mob set up a cheer which Longleat acknowledged by a good-humoured salutation while his voice sonorous but unrefined sounded clearly above the uproar as he addressed the innkeeper.  'Hi Braysher! Good-day to you. I am going to Leichardt's Town by the coach to-night; but Mr. Ferris will be stopping here for a day or so. Look after my horses will you? Have you got four stalls empty?'  The innkeeper advanced and touched his hat a mark of deference he had not shown to any of the previous arrivals.  'Well sir we're pretty full but we'll manage. There's Dungie brought down two hacks for that there lord up your way; but they can go off to the paddock and we'll make room somehow for your team.'  Mr. Longleat smiled tickled and somewhat flattered by the evident fact that 'that there lord' was in Braysher's estimation of very small importance compared with himself.  He shook hands with some of the men in the verandah called for a tumbler of cold water which he drank standing and said in a patronising tone to his companion who had ordered a glass of brandy in the coffee-room:  'A bad thing Ferris. Stick to Adam's ale in a hot climate. Temperance and success that's been my motto and I've got no cause to complain of the way I've got on in life.' [8]  Mr. Ferris retreated scowling to partake of his refreshment; and the Premier after throwing a 'chaffing' word to Dungie who was inclined to resent the summary expulsion of his horses turned his eyes upon Barrington. He stared at the Englishman with a half-angry curiosity as though he recognised in him the representative of an order for which he had no liking.  Chapter II. The Premier.  The mob round the hotel had thickened fast and as the Premier stood in Braysher's verandah surveying the crowded street the rowdies set up a series of shouts.  'Hooray for Thomas Longleat! Go it old chap for the Railway; pitch into the obstructionist crew! Down with Middleton and his sneaking northerners!' concluding with an unanimous cry 'I say Longleat give us a bit of talk. Open your jaw while you're waiting and let 'em have it hot.'   The Premier shook his head half deprecating half acknowledging his popularity with the Kooya mob now considerably augmented by a band of idle navvies in blue shirts and felt caps to whom the cry of 'the Railway' was the herald of a new era of pay and plenty.  'We don't mean to let you clear out in this 'ere ---- coach till you've told us what's agoin to become of us when Parliament meets' cried one of these insistents perching himself upon a wheel of Cobb's.  'We aren't the sort of chaps to be put off any longer with these'ere screws' shrieked another rough who had clambered to the box-seat. [9]  'It's steam 'osses that suits our money. Hooray for Longleat's railway! Come go it old chap! Tell us that you hain't got no intention of caving in to them stingy oppositionists.'  The Premier came forward to the edge of the verandah and took off his hat. As he stood in the glare of the declining sun his head thrown back his big chest expanded with his broad capable forehead his keen eyes looking out steadily from under shaggy brows his under lip slightly protruding and giving to his coarsely-moulded face an expression of suave self-complacency in spite of the drawbacks of evident low birth and vulgar assertiveness there were in his bearing and features indications of intellectual power and iron resolution which would have impressed a higher-class mob than that now waiting eagerly for his words. His brawny hands rough still with the traces of work and exposure grasped the verandah-rails while he began to speak in an easy conversational style unembellished by any flowers of oratory.  'Electors and friends' said Mr. Longleat 'you've asked me to make you a speech before I travel down to Leichardt's Town in Cobb's coach yonder; and I dare say you would all cheer me as loudly as your lungs would let you if I just took that vehicle for my text in a tirade against the petty jealousy of northern politicians who grudge to the populated south a means of locomotion of which there ain't enough of squatters let alone free selectors to make any use up there. But it's not my way to abuse the bridge that has carried me over and I won't cry down Cobb's coach that scores of times when I have been driving hard all day from Kooralbyn has saved my horses' legs and my own temper. You can't have railways at a moment's notice my men; and it's not so very long ago that we all thought it a fine and wonderful thing to have any sort of a public conveyance between Leichardt's Town and Kooya. [10] It's a nice roomy well-built vehicle and has done its work well; and I mean no disrespect to Mr. Cobb when I say to you here that I hope before two years are out to travel from this town to the metropolis in one that'll be easier about the springs and more commodious for the carriage of our wool and cotton to port and our meat and vegetables to market.  'I have driven fifty miles to-day along a roughish bit of country and am not much inclined for public speaking; but since you want to know what my policy is going to be this coming session I'll tell you. I'm going to fight might and main for your railway; and if the public feeling is what I take it to be there's not much doubt but that you'll have it. Not because you want it. I do the best I can for my constituency but I bear in mind that Kooya is not the only electorate in Leichardt's Land. It's because our colony requires the fresh impetus which she will receive from the circulation of new moneys that I'm going to move heaven and earth to float the Loan which I shall bring before Parliament at the opening of the session.  'There are folks up north and down south too that say the Ministry will knock under and that when Parliament meets the Railway question will be shuffled over and the Opposition conciliated because Thomas Longleat likes power and place and means to stick to his seat in the Treasury. Now I say that's a lie! Thomas Longleat never knocked under in his life and he's not going to be trodden on now. If he is thrashed and the country goes agen him he'll take his licking and bide his time; but if he knows that the country is with him he'll fight for her while he has got a voice to speak with and a leg to stand on. The Railway Loan will be the party question of this session and upon it my Government stands or falls. You all know me here; it's my way to carry through what I've set my mind on. [11] It's my determination - some call it luck and some call it obstinacy - that's got me on in life. I ain't ashamed to tell you that I began in Leichardt's Land bullock-driving along this very road I'm going over to-night. I was a rough sort of chap in those days my friends but I'd got the will in me strong even then. I said to myself "I'll rise" and I have risen. I've climbed inch by inch step by step till I'm nigh the topmost bough of the tree; and I'm proud of what l've done. It's Leichardt's Land that has made me; and when I see my benefactress low and sinking it's not surprising that I want mine to be the hand to lift her up again. We are watching a critical point in her history. Nations have their turning-points their times of weakness and depression the same as human beings. Leichardt's Land is like a sick person whose powers have been enfeebled and whose glorious capabilities have been contracted by years of parsimonious neglect. She needs a fillip. You have heard of a wonderful operation called transfusion by which fresh vitalising blood is sent coursing through languid veins and a new impetus is given to the springs of life. It is the transfusion of money the blood of nations that Leichardt's Land requires to make her flush and strong.  'Let a temporary loan which will ere long repay itself fourfold be poured into her treasury and we shall see in a short space of time railways penetrating to the very heart of her rich pastures; bridges spanning her rivers; her mines yielding gold and jewels her plantations sugar and cotton; the European market supplied with her wool and the colonial market with her produce. My friends the Loan Bill which will come before the House immediately is not a mere question of internecine jealousy and party rancour but of the introduction of new life and vigour into a glorious but debilitated colony!'  Longleat as he concluded his peroration his rough eloquence kindling as he opened upon his subject stood for a moment his shoulders thrown back his face bland his under lip projecting ere he proceeded with his address. [12]  But at this moment the coach-horses ready harnessed were brought round from the inn-yard and there arose some little confusion amidst the crowd in the street; while the sound of a woman's cry arrested any further words with which Mr. Longleat might have intended to occupy the five minutes which must elapse before the starting of the coach.  A lady dressed in black slight and delicate-looking had been pushed somewhat violently against one of the posts of Braysher's verandah. She was evidently a passenger by Cobb's to Leichardt's Town and being alone and naturally alarmed at finding herself in the centre of a political demonstration was making for the shelter of the hotel.  The Premier attracted by the cry glanced downwards from his raised position and met the appealing gaze of a pair of dark eyes which he knew well. With more agility than might have been expected judging by his age and figure he vaulted the railings and in a moment was at the lady's side.  'Mrs. Vallancy!' he exclaimed! How is it that you are here?'  She grasped his arm and her eyes beamed with gratitude upon his face.  'I have been staying with the Ansons at Cooranga. Mr. Anson brought me down but could not wait to see me off in the coach. I am going to Leichardt's Town this evening.'  'So am I. I shall be able to look after you. You've been knocked agen the railings. I hope you are not hurt?'  'No; it was a mere nothing. I am not hurt - only a little frightened but quite happy now that you are here. I am glad that I have heard you speak in this way. It impresses one in a different manner to the dull debates which one listens to from the Ladies' Gallery. [13] And you know' she added in a lower tone 'I make rather a merit of not taking any great interest in politics; it would not do for me to side openly against my husband whatever I might think and wish in private.'  Mr. Longleat pressed his companion's hand appreciating her delicacy at its very highest pitch. A man of coarse fibre is apt to attribute ultra-refinement to a woman by whom he is attracted.  Mr. Vallancy was a member of the Legislative Council. Though notoriously needy and desirous of a Government appointment he belonged to the Middleton faction and had made himself peculiarly obnoxious to the reigning Ministry. The Premier had become acquainted with Mrs. Vallancy a short time before the present date; and notwithstanding the inimical attitude of her husband certain casual meetings and suggestive conversations had deepened a budding interest into something more than commonplace social intimacy.  'I am sorry that you should have been annoyed by the crowd. I - they insisted upon my speaking - upon my word I could not have got out of it. I wish I had known that you were to be here.' He spoke with a nervous utterance that except in the presence of ladies was unusual to him.  'Ah!' said Mrs. Vallancy in a tone half-melancholy half-arch 'I know that you are the idol of the mob; such popularity must be very delightful. I sincerely hope that you will carry your Railway Bill. I had never before connected it so personally with you. Party questions have been sources of annoyance to me. This one will possess a more agreeable interest.'  They had stepped on to the verandah and Mr. Longleat placed one of the canvas chairs for his companion to sit upon. [14] All the men turned to look at her but not one except Barrington took his pipe from his lips. Though she was perfectly aware of the attention she excited she did not appear to be embarrassed by it. Her hat had been tilted back by the push she had sustained and her low brow and fine eyes were fully visible. The latter were black slightly prominent and restless and dissatisfied in expression; her mouth a curved red line was more characteristic than sweet; her colouring was clear and pale: her voice low and remarkably distinct.  The nervous excitability and sensitive refinement which her face and manner suggested were quite calculated to impress such a temperament as that of Mr. Longleat; but although his admiration was obvious it was evident that he had not acquired perfect ease in her society. In spite of the feminine experience implied by two matrimonial bereavements and the bringing up of a daughter companionship with women of a particular calibre gave him an uncomfortable sense of inferiority and made him conscious of certain lapses in grammar and faults in pronunciation which considerable proficiency as a public speaker and years of unwearied self-education had not enabled him entirely to surmount.  'Is Miss Longleat with you?' inquired Mrs. Vallancy.  'No' he replied. 'She is at Kooralbyn.'  'I am longing to see her again. Some friends of mine who met her in Sydney last winter wrote to me in raptures about her beauty. Is she as lovely as ever?'  Mr. Longleat smiled and elevated his head with an air of gratified pride.  'Yes' he said 'I think she is handsomer now than I've ever seen her. She took her place in Sydney amongst the best of 'em.'  As he spoke he caught Mr. Barrington's eye and scowled with incipient dislike. Though Mrs Vallancy was sitting a little apart from the other loungers in the verandah Barrington was sufficiently near to have overheard her remark and the Premier's reply. [15] An expression of amusement passed over the Englishman's face as he mentally pictured a coarse gaudily-dressed Antipodean belle whose every gesture would inevitably offend against his refined European taste. His supercilious smile incensed Mr. Longleat still more deeply and as Barrington turned away he asked angrily:  'Who is that man?'  'He is evidently a stranger' said Mrs. Vallancy.  'A new chum going up to Lord Dolph's' explained one of the bushmen.  'I could have sworn that he was one of those cursed English swells' muttered Longleat; 'we don't want that brood out here. I'm pretty quick at guessing what a man is made of and my first impressions don't often deceive me. It's instinct; and somehow I don't cotton up to Lord Dolph's new chum.'  The horses had by this time been put to the coach and the driver with the reins in his hand was calling his passengers to mount.  Mr. Longleat helped Mrs. Vallancy to ascend and took his place beside her in the back bench unoccupied by anyone else.  'The box-seat has been reserved for you sir' said the driver.  'Never mind' answered Longleat. 'I've got a lady to look after. I'll sit here.' Mrs. Vallancy cast upon him a look of ineffable gratitude; the other travellers clambered up; the coachman flicked his whip upon the horses' backs and the lumbering vehicle clattered off mid the shouts of the rapidly-dispersing mob.  'Hooray for the Premier! Longleat and his railway for ever.'    [16] Chapter III. The Premier's Storekeeper.  BARRINGTON stood on the verandah of the inn and watched the coach till it was out of sight. Mr. Ferris who had now emerged from the coffee-room stole softly to the railings and sidled towards the Englishman casting at the stranger furtive glances from his keen grey eyes while with one lean hand he stroked his grizzled beard.  The sun was setting behind a range of distant hills. Storm-clouds were still threatening and the deepening dusk had mellowed the glaring white of the limestone ridges into neutral grey and had subdued into harmony the hard outlines and ungraceful colouring of the wooden and brick erections upon each side of the street.  'Not much of a view' said Mr. Ferris looking up in a bird-like way into Barrington's face; 'but picturesque in a manner of its own.'  'I suppose that one admires the landscape because it is unlike those with which one is familiar' replied Barrington.  'European travellers say' continued Mr. Ferris 'that there are no striking features in Australian scenery. Bah! they cry - the eye wearies of endless gum-trees. But that is a mistake. Those who speak so have not penetrated into the heart of the country. Ah! we have mountains in the Koorong district sublime with a wild grandeur that I have never seen equalled. It is nature - nature only which reconciles me to my exile.'   'You call your life here exile' said Barrington. 'I presume that you are English? Have you lived for long in Australia?'  [17] 'Nine years' replied Mr. Ferris. 'No' he added correcting himself 'it will be ten next September. I find it difficult to calculate the course of time when the months are all alike and when they are passed in forests and not in cities.'  'Yet to you a lover of natural beauty this ought not to be a hardship.'  'Sir' said Mr. Ferris with a grandiloquent air 'I have my theories. Let the young seek inspiration in the woods the aged in the breath of towns. There is a close link between nature and humanity. To glorify the one necessitates sympathy with the other. A poet pent up for life upon the fairest desert island would produce few stanzas worthy of immortality.'  'You mean' said Barrington 'that the ideal must be yoked to the practical or inspiration becomes bathos. You yourself are an artist perhaps?'  'I have indeed known the flutterings of enthusiasm and have tasted the bitterness of unappreciated effort' said Mr. Ferris in a joyless piping tone with his eyes fixed upon the wooden verandah-post in mournful abstraction from his surroundings. 'Aspiration has been the keynote of my life. Failure its refrain.'  'That is a melancholy experience' said Barrington in a sympathetic manner.  'How many are dowered with the yearnings of genius and cursed with executive inability!' cried Mr. Ferris almost fiercely. 'How many have lived too soon or too late! In how many has the divine fire been almost quenched in youth and has emitted but a feeble flame in old age! But why do I talk of myself?' he added with a sudden deprecatory gesture. 'It is a morbid egotism that seeks vent in self revelation to a passing stranger. Leichardt's Land only sees in me the shadow of her Premier's greatness. Anthony Ferris sir at your service. [18] Thomas Longleat's accountant store-manager indoor man of all work at Kooralbyn.' He waited a moment then said: 'I glean that you are a new arrival in Australia but I have not heard your name.'  'Barrington' replied the Englishman shortly.  'I knew a man of that name' said Mr. Ferris in a tone of dismal retrospect 'a long time ago - he was a friend of Edmund Kean. Poor Kean! He used to say"If I had Barrington always with me I should never go wrong!" Did you ever see Kean sir?' he added with sharp enthusiasm. 'Ah! that was an actor! Such fire! such wit I I never knew Shakespeare till I knew Edmund Kean.'  'He was rather before my time' said Barrington.  'True; you are a considerably younger man than I. But I have seen others more nearly your contemporaries. Macready - he was statuesque and had studied - Charles Young Kemble. I could criticise these but Kean deprived me of the power of judgment. Shall I ever forget that slender man of diminutive stature and finely-chiselled features whose piercing orbs held the spectator spellbound while he spoke? I saw him last in "The Merchant of Venice" - "Signor Antonio . . . ."' quoted Mr. Ferris in a low intense voice with deep dramatic intonation; then after repeating a few lines he suffered his head to droop dejectedly upon his breast. 'I cannot do it' he said; 'the manner has passed from me.' I am getting old and I forget . . . You saw Longleat just now?'  'Yes' replied Barrington; 'I was interested amused by the excitement his arrival created.'  'People call him my patron. Thomas Longleat patron to me! There is a man who not many years ago was absolutely uneducated. I taught him all that he knows of the classics. I corrected his maiden speech in the Assembly and now he jeers at me for a fool. It is such a man as that who succeeds in Australia. [19] May I ask whether you are visiting the Antipodes from mere curiosity or whether you have thoughts of becoming a cattle farmer?'  'I shall remain in Australia if the life suits me' replied Barrington.  'It will not. Settle your mind at once upon that score. You will be miserable whether you make money or lose what yon have. By-and-by you will acknowledge that I am a true prophet. To the refined Englishman reared mid the associations of art literature music the drama - accustomed to European luxury and the charm of congenial society - Australia if not a hell of discontent must be a sink of degradation.'  'You speak strongly' said Barrington 'and certainly not encouragingly; but I imagine that a man of moderate calibre would be content to exist in a country which afforded him the opportunity for becoming wealthy.'  'Wealthy - yah!' snarled Anthony Ferris in a manner indescribable upon paper. 'Money is after all but money's worth. For instance what sort of occupation can there be to a man like me in weighing sacks of flour chronicling pounds of beef and calculating roods of fencing? Is it not a suffocating degrading slavery? And such to you will be the disgusting routine of station-life. Stock-riding or shepherding branding or shearing. buying and selling weariness of body and slow atrophy of intellect. You are not young enough to anticipate compensating wealth; when if it comes you will have lost the capacity for enjoyment. Excuse my curiosity - are you married?'  'No' replied Barrington.  'You will then lack the incentive of working for a beloved object which sweetens toil to me. I dare say that the uneducated would consider my lot enviable. I have abundance to eat and drink - a comfortable house to live in; I am putting by for the benefit of my child' - Ferris's face softened curiously - 'nevertheless you see before you a disappointed man.' [20]  'May I ask in what particular line you were unsuccessful?' asked Barrington.  'There was none. My ambition was boundless; it embraced every phase of art. Vague aspiration has been my curse. I had not courage or patience to continue struggling against fate. Had I possessed Longleat's insensitive nature I might have succeeded.'  'Mr. Longleat is also English by birth?' asked Barrington curiously.  An odd malignant smile passed over Mr. Ferris's face.  'Yes English by birth certainly. Good-afternoon Tom Dungie' he added addressing the mailman who had approached the verandah-railing. 'What is the news up Dyraaba way?'  'It's you that ought to tell us the news Mr. Ferris' said Dungie. 'Folks say that Dyson Maddox is to be the new Minister for Lands and that he is to marry Miss Longleat. Is it true do you think sir?'  'It's not unlikely' said Mr. Ferris. 'Miss Longleat is a lady of caprices. She may be seized with the caprice for matrimony. I dare say I dare say; and I wish it might be true; but I have not been informed upon the subject.'  'Well' squeaked Dungie in his nasal tones; 'I'm sure I wish Mr. Maddox joy of his bargain. She's a handsome young woman; and if she's got nought else she's got brass. They do say as she is rare winnin'. Gells with tin-mines at their backs don't grow like wild cherries with the stones outside ready to be picked for the stretching.' Tom Dungie always chuckled audibly after uttering what he considered a sharp speech. 'Folks tell' he whispered mysteriously 'that the young woman with the black eyes - her that sat beside the Premier on the coach - is a rum sort and that he has got pretty thick with her lately. Do you think he's hit?' [21]  'That's a married woman' said Mr. Ferris; 'her husband is in the Council.'  'Marriage ain't no security' remarked Dungie reflectively. I've heard said that 'twur like drinking a glass of doctored grog: directly you've swallowed one yer mouth begins to parch for another - and that's the way with women of a sort; there's some of 'em as can't get on without men. She warn't nought to look at though: it's colour as takes me: but a man mostly fancies his opposite and Longleat has got enough red for two. I wur told to look out for a gentleman from England' added Dungie making a lurch in Barrington's direction. 'The lord at Dyraaba sent a 'ack down and a pack 'oss for the swag. I said as I'd show the gentleman the short cut which is pretty stiff for a new chum.'  'Do you mean Lord Adolphus Bassett?' asked Barrington.  'Oh! that's his name is it? Some folks calls him Mr. Bassett and some Mr. Dolph and other folks Lord Dolph. I never knowed rightly which it wur and it ain't of much odds.'  'I knew him in England' said Barrington 'and I'm going to stay with him now. Does he live far from here?'  'Nigh upon forty mile. I shall start at daybreak with my mails. Can you ride sir?'  'Yes' answered Barrington laughing.  'I asked because new chums don't mostly. Didn't know whether you'd be able to keep up with the little piebald. She's a rare un to go she is. That there lord ain't much of a hand with a buck-jumper but my lady lor! she can sit like Old Nick. Well you'll hear me calling in the morning' added Dungie affably; and with another bow which was accomplished by laying his hands upon the pit of his stomach and bending forward as far as the laws of balance would permit he walked away. [22]  Presently a bell rang in the coffee-room and all who had remained in the hotel flocked in to a somewhat nondescript evening meal. There was a smoking joint at one end of the table a tin teapot at the other and bread butter and vegetables were placed promiscuously down the sides. Two women who were respectively Mrs. Braysher and her maid of-all-work waited.  The bushmen - rough specimens of humanity - congregated together. Barrington and Mr. Ferris took their seats a little apart from the rest of the company. There was very little conversation while the meal was in progress. The men were hungry and plied their knives and forks vigorously washing down the tough beef and hard bread with copious draughts of tea. Mr. Ferris who had taken his stimulant beforehand likewise drank tea. Barrington called for a pint of sherry and was brought a muddy decoction which he tasted made a wry face and set down.  'Don't drink wine in Australia' said Mr. Ferris; 'it is bad. Take to spirits; that is the way with most Englishmen. You'll start with theories about colonial wine. I did; but like me you'll find that they are a delusion. There is a good wine made in the south; but till the intercolonial duty is abolished it will never become the national drink. Brandy is cheaper. So we ruin our nervous systems with strong tea and our digestions by promiscuous nips. You will be asked a dozen times in the day to"come and have a nip;" and if you are weak-minded as I am you'll yield till you find that without a stimulant you are a poor creature. The higher your mental calibre the more you'll drink. It is Longleat's boast that he is temperate. Yah! a fig for temperance when a man has the frame of a Hercules and the insusceptibility of a bullock-driver! You don't seem to have much appetite. [23] I see that you have been accustomed to a different style of cooking. If you have finished we will sit out in the verandah. There's a storm in the west but its strength will be spent before it reaches Kooya. The thunder has cooled the air already and we shall be able to smoke in comparative comfort.'  Mr. Ferris led the way to the verandah and pulled two arm-chairs to a breezy corner. He then produced his leather tobacco-pouch and a short black pipe and began to smoke drawing deep breaths as though he enjoyed the narcotism the soft air and the fading light while every now and then he uttered in a snarling neutral tone some discursive remark upon Australian customs or sneering allusion to his master. He seemed a man oppressed by an immense burden of discontent.  The verandah was almost empty. Most of the bushmen had taken up their hats and had gone out. There was a circus performing in a neighbouring street and the attraction weighed even against the charms of the coffee-room was too potent to be resisted. Every now and then shrill bursts of laughter and the braying of musical instruments sounded through the murky night of which the darkness was at regular intervals illuminated by flashes of sheet-lightning in the west.  'You have lately come from England' said Mr. Ferris edging a little closer to his companion. 'I dare say that you have lived in London eh?'  'Yes' said Barrington with a short laugh : 'I'm very well acquainted with London.'  'You've seen the best in the world then. There's no place like London except perhaps Paris. Lord!' peering with his little grey eyes into Barrington's face 'that's what I call life. Balzac and Paul de Kock eh? I dare say now that you know all the club gossip and theatrical scandal. I like a spice of the devil; it's piquant it's refreshing. [24] Now it would interest me to hear who are the newest singers and actors and the painters who have become famous since I was in England. I might perhaps recognise familiar names. I used to be considered a good critic in my day. At Kooralbyn I have a few gems slight things done for me by comparatively insignificant artists in whom I saw the germs of future eminence. If you are a lover of art I shall be happy at some time to show you the sketches.'  Barrington thanked the old man and humouring his fancy talked on with the air of one to whom the subject was familiar of the latest operas the last Academy the newest scandals in the fashionable and artistic world the gossip of the clubs and theatres while every now and then Mr. Ferris would interrupt him with some eager question which showed how deeply he was interested.  'And you have left all this!' he exclaimed at length. 'You have deliberately chosen a life of toil and discomfort amidst the wilds of Australia in preference to one of refined enjoyment in England! You surprise me.'  'My visit is only an experiment' said Barrington; 'I have not yet determined to remain in Australia.'  'Excuse me' said Mr. Ferris with hesitating curiosity; something in your manner and bearing leads me to suppose that you have been in the army; am I right?'  'I was in the Guards' replied Barrington incautiously. A moment later he regretted his want of reticence.  'The Guards' repeated Ferris. 'I am more than ever astonished that you can entertain even as an experiment the idea of living in Australia.'  'I am no longer in the army' said Barrington curtly; and added in a manner that left no room for further questioning 'I think you said that you knew Lord Dolph Bassett?'  [25] 'He has a selection down the Koorong about fifteen miles from Kooralbyn.'  'Kooralbyn is the name of Mr. Longleat's property?' asked Barrington anxious to divert the conversation from himself. 'A native word I presume?'  'Meaning the "abode of serpents." Certain poetic swains have dubbed Miss Longleat the Enchantress of Kooralbyn and in a confusion of classical metaphors have addressed her in sonnets as Medusa and Circe. Apart from its feminine attraction Kooralbyn is worth a visit. The country is wild picturesque inspiring. It might be the refuge of a Timon or the dreamland of a poet. Come over and see it. But you err in using the word property. In your acceptation of the term there is no property in Australia. The owner of freehold is the petty agriculturist the representative of a lower order of settler than the squatter. The bloated aristocrat is he who leases from the Crown and whose rich pastures are only his own till a new land law a mine or a railway turns a horde of free selectors loose upon his borders. Mr. Longleat professes impartiality and sympathy with all classes. It is his political creed and he finds that it brings him in popularity. Lord Dolph took up land on Kooralbyn. Longleat smiled grimly and offered to help him brand his cattle. They are the best of friends but at first the squatterarchy of the Koorong rose up in a body and named its hero martyr.'  'Lord Dolph then is a free selector?'  'He cattle-farms a few thousand acres after an amateur fashion. My lady breaks in the horses and takes care that the calves are branded. It is said that she has an eye to business and does not disdain nuggeting. She was a Koorong girl a sonsie Scotch lassie and he married her because he was told that it was the correct thing for a bushman to have a wife. [26] He builds rustic bridges fancies pigs and poultry plays the piano and poses as a squatter in moleskins and a cabbage-tree hat. She manages the farm.'  'A fair division of labour' returned Barrington.  'You will find it dull at Dyraaba' continued Mr. Ferris; 'and Lord Dolph will probably propose a visit to Kooralbyn. Mr. Longleat will be in Leichardt's Town occupied with political matters unless indeed the Ministry goes out at the beginning of the session. I shall however be charmed to introduce you to my wife and daughter. You may or may not see Miss Longleat; that will be as the caprice takes her.'  'Your allusions to this young lady pique my curiosity. Is the Enchantress of Kooralbyn a person indeed out of the common; or is she merely a pretty rustic spoiled by flattery?'  'Rustic!' repeated Mr. Ferris chuckling softly to himself. 'I dare say that you have seen some of the most beautiful women in Europe; nevertheless you will certainly admire Honoria Longleat. A fine piece of flesh with money to enhance her charms.'  'She is an only child then?'   'No; Mr. Longleat has been twice married. His first wife the mother of Honoria was a beautiful drab whom I believe he picked lip at the Diggings. His second was the daughter of a squatter on the Ubi Ubi. She died at the birth of a girl her only one now a child of seven. The Premier's matrimonial arrangements and my own have been curiously similar. I also have had two wives; my second is still living. I have my theories sir upon marriage as upon other subjects. I consider a carefully-discriminated diversity the important element in a generataion of a perfect style. Since I could not succeed in making a mark in the world I was determined to beget a celebrity. [27] I chose my wife upon physiological principles. The result would have been all that could have been desired had she presented me with a son. Mrs. Ferris has failed in the one duty which I required of her. You see disappointment is my doom.'  'But Miss Longleat's fortune?' suggested Barrington recalling the old man to his own point of interest.  'True! When Honoria Longleat's eldest daughter was a baby in arms old Jem Bagot a ticket-of-leave man and the Premier's pal when they drove bullock-teams together between Leichardt's Town and Kooya left her a bit of land in the Tarrangella district which was then considered of little value. This bit of land is now the great Tarrangella tin mine bringing in somewhere about four thousand per annum.'  'And is this fortune absolutely her own?' asked Barrington excitedly.  'It will be absolutely upon the day that she is twentyone. At present the income is accumulating for her benefit. Oh she is a great heiress. There's Kooralbyn and Mundubbera the valley of the Leichardt the house in Leichardt's Town and the Lord knows how many political pickings to be divided between her and little Janie. And she is her father's favourite. A fine thing to be transported in the old days eh? if a man had brains and luck. A fine thing for a woman to be handsome and rich. What does it matter if her father was a bullock-driver and her mother - ' Mr. Ferris shrugged his shoulders significantly. 'In polite society nobody asks any embarrassing questions. There's only one thing in the world better than money and beauty and that's genius. I have a daughter too Mr. Barrington and I am as proud of her as Longleat is of his but in a different way - a very different way.'  [28] 'Miss Ferris is talented perhaps?' said Barrington.  'My Angela will be a great artist' said Mr. Ferris lifting his head with a sublimity of conviction that amused while it silenced his companion! 'Sir' he added with a kind of proud humility 'I know my weakness; I know my failings. The soul of genius was born with me but not the power of fulfilment. I have prayed that I might be the father of an artist who should combine inspiration and execution. Do I not know the ecstasy of vision and the hell of inability? I said to myself 'I will beget a son who shall be great.' Two generations could not be foredoomed to failure. Instead of a son a daughter was born to me - a frail creature visionary and mystical with an extraordinary development of the creative faculty. From the day that as a child she drew upon the floor and wall rough sketches with a piece of chalk I devoted her to the cause of art. Nature has been her nurse. Cradled in the lap of inspiration she has led an ideal life among woods and mountains. It is for her sake that I labour; for her sake that I submit to insult and degradation. I have saved a thousand pounds to be expended upon her artistic education. In a year's time I shall take her to Italy; in ten the name of Ferris will be renowned.'  Barrington listened in amused toleration of the old man's tall talk. He no more believed in Angela Ferris's genius than he believed in Honoria Longleat's beauty; yet he felt a languid interest in both subjects and would have liked to pursue them. Clearly there was a covert antagonism between Ferris and his patron; and being an observer of human nature in default of better occupation Barrington was ready to follow up the current of jealousy and crabbed conceit to its source. The old man however rose abruptly.  'You seem a link between my former life and the present. Your companionship has excited me beyond my wont and I have talked of matters which are purely personal. [29] Pray attach no importance to my wandering speech. I am a soured old man. Now I have smoked out my pipe and the storm is threatening closely. There has been heavy rain in Leichardt's Town. I'll say good-night. You start early to-morrow morning but we shall meet ere long at Kooralbyn.'  Mr. Ferris shuffled indoors to the coffee-room and thence to bed.    Chapter IV. The Weaving of the Spell.  The coach rattled on beyond the outskirts of Kooya past plantations of pine-apples and bananas and pretty wooden cottages embedded in orange-groves and vineyards till cultivation and even clearing ceased and hedges of cactus and acacia or rough stockading that divided the settlers' paddocks from the road gave place to monotonous forests of she-oak and eucalyptus where there was the brooding stillness of a coming storm. At intervals the driver paused before a bush inn of which at long distances apart there were several standing solitary among the trees to change horses call for the mail or give the passengers an opportunity of descending for refreshment. The night closed in; a murky cloud grew black overhead and occasional growlings of thunder told that the storm was advancing.  Mrs. Vallancy and Mr. Longleat were practically alone in the hinder part of the coach and their tête-à-tête carried on under cover of the rattling of bolts and springs the flapping of curtains and general din of motion was inaudible to the men in front.  'How kind of you it was to give up the box-seat and come here to amuse me' said Mrs. Vallancy in her pathetic monotone. [30] 'It would have been too horrid had I been placed beside any of our companions. I can never be sufficiently grateful to Providence for sending you to Leichardt's Town this evening.'  'I do not like to think that you often travel by yourself in this way' said Longleat.  'I do not often travel by myself' replied she mimicking his tone 'only when necessity obliges me as is the case tonight. I thought that you admired independent women. You have certainly said so' she added alluding to one of his public speeches in which he had advocated female labour in certain Government departments.  'The women I meant aren't of your sort. There's things which drag down both sexes alike and both should be on the same ground. I should like to see all women taught to work for their bread. When I meet one with the pluck to take her own line and fight against poverty and prejudice I respect her for it; but it cuts me to the quick to see a young timid and if you'll excuse my saying it pretty creature like you who has the right to look for protection from others jostled about in this way. You should not travel alone at night in a public conveyance like Cobb's. You lay yourself open to - to -   'Unpleasant remark' she said concluding his stammering sentence. 'Yes I understand; you are right: but it is not my fault - you ought to know that I dislike it. If you were my - my father let us say - you would not allow me to go about like this. But you are not my father. I have no one to take care of me - except my husband. I am married yet there is no one more solitary than I am. The world is hard to me. I am thrown upon outsiders for sympathy and support. And because two or three friends who happen to be men give these to me society judges me cruelly. Is it not so?'  Mrs. Vallancy turned her large eyes upon Mr. Longleat with a frank confidling expression of which she was mistress. [31] He was regarding her fixedly but as their eyes met he abruptly withdrew his gaze; and turned his face away with-out answering her plaintive question.  Given a nascent interest rapidly deepening into a powerful predilection and an unconventional combination of circumstances which places the admirer in close propinquity with the object of his attraction it will depend entirely upon the man's idiosyncrasy whether the position inspires deference or awakens passion.  In the case of the typical gentleman that chivalrous loyalty which is as much inherent as the result of education forbids the merest suggestion of license; but the man of coarse fibre and rude training who has made it his creed to seize opportunity for the furtherance of ambition or the accomplishment of desire and who is ignorant of the subtle definitions of a refined code of honour though he may accurately limit his intentions has less control over his emotions. Such a man does not analyse his inner feelings. There are in his nature no softening shadows nor can he comprehend the imperceptible blending of passive interest with active regard. With him the machinery of passion comes into sudden play and startles by the violent effect it produces.  Mr. Longleat sat silent for some moments taking no notice of several discursive observations with which she sought to relieve his embarrassment. He felt shy of addressing her and tried to steer his thoughts into more impersonal channels. He endeavoured to direct them towards the political conflict in store for him which for months past had held his nerves in a state of tension. In the estimation of the inhabitants of Leichardt's Town the coming session was merely a pleasant stimulus to excitement and the present determinant of a railway that must sooner or later be built.  [32] To Longleat it meant the crowning act of his career upon which rested the balance of victory or defeat. It was the climax of a struggle for supremacy involving his dearest ambitions and affections.  The least poetic man who has succeeded in life is conscious at times of a vein of romance permeating a temperament that he has been proud to style 'matter of fact.' It is the perception of the ideal side by side with the actual that gives courage to encounter and surmount difficulties. He who is devoid of imagination rarely accomplishes a great enterprise. A man may scoff at superstition and yet have a dim consciousness of occult influence at work upon his destiny. At this moment Mr. Longleat felt a curious presentiment that he was approaching a crisis in his fate and that Mrs. Vallancy whose presence affected him so strongly had unknowingly identified herself with his failure or success.  As they drove on through the deepening darkness a sense of unreality oppressed him and it seemed to him that he was being whirled in a dream through an enchanted forest to a destination of which he was ignorant. At last ashamed and annoyed at his unusual susceptibility Mr. Longleat started forward and pulled himself together uttering an ironical 'Pshaw!'  'What is the matter?' asked Mrs. Vallancy.  'Nothing. By the way I hear that Mr. Fielding has sailed for Melbourne.'  'He left Leichardt's Town last week by the mail-boat' replied Mrs. Vallancy with a perceptible alteration in her voice.  'Is it true that you went down to the Bay to see him off?'  'Yes. My husband was with me. Was there any harm in that?'  [33] 'I Suppose not' answered Mr. Longleat. Then added a tone of displeasure 'You were very friendly with Fielding when he was in Leichardt's Town.'  'Are you too going to cavil at my friendships?' said Mrs. Vallancy plaintively. 'I had fancied though indeed I can hardly tell why for we have known each other but a short time that I could always count upon kindness from you.  'I need not tell you that you may always count upon that' replied Mr. Longleat. 'Will you not say - friendship?'  'What could one desire more than kindness? If I asked anything else I should beg that you would put aside any feeling of animosity you may entertain towards my husband and that you would come and see me sometimes. You have not been within my doors.'  'I - I have not ventured' stammered Longleat who had alternations of boldness and timidity; 'but if I may see you home after your journey - '  'My husband will probably meet me at the Australasian when the coach arrives' said Mrs. Vallancy 'but if not I shall gratefully take advantage of your offer. Ah !' she cried 'what a vivid flash! I am as weak as a baby in thunder and lightning. I can only hide my face and tremble.'  'There's a storm coming up' said Longleat 'but it is from the mildest quarter and will soon be over. Do not be frightened.'  In the meantime I had learnt from the stockman at Wyuna the station at which I had found my bullocks which was also the outside station in that direction that there was abundance of excellent unoccupied country close at hand which with the consent of his master he volunteered to show me. [273] This was quite a godsend to me and of course I accepted his offer and the day after my new overseer left with the bullocks rode over Tongala Plain in his company; and as it appeared to me well adapted for stock I made up my mind to abandon Wolfscrag and take it up as a run with the least delay possible. To do this there were in those days no hindrances of any sort the custom being to drive one's stock on to any unoccupied country and then apply to the Commissioner of Crown Lands for a license to depasture the application being granted as a matter of course. The extent of land licensed by the Commissioner was proportioned in a rough way to the quantity of stock owned by the applicant; this permission to occupy country being renewable yearly until the ground should be required by Government for other purposes on the annual payment of £10 into the Treasury. Besides this fee for a license which except in the vicinity of Melbourne everyone thought would last for a generation or two there was also a small capitation tax payable yearly on the sheep. The extent of country which I applied for when I got back to Wolfscrag was fifty square miles half of it on each bank of the River Goulburn.  Having determined to remove my flocks from Wolfscrag to Tongala as I called my new run I started with the stockman (to whom I gave £5 for his trouble) direct for the former run through the bush by the places now known as Bundari Coragorag Colbinabbin and Redcastle. By this time as is usual with a little practise I had become a tolerable bushman for a new chum and the distance saved by the route I took going home across entirely unexplored country was about fifty miles the distance through the bush from Tongala to Wolfscrag being about eighty miles.  Hence the reader will see that the most fortunate thing which befell me at that time was the loss of my bullocks as it was the means of making me a bushman and of my getting an excellent run; so right glad was I to leave the barren scrubs of Wolfscrag and its wretched creek for the well-grassed plains of Tongala and the ever-flowing Goulburn. The occasion was one of unmixed satisfaction; and the country between the two places being unoccupied I took it for granted that the "Scab Act" offered no obstacle to the removal of my flocks in the proposed direction.  Having unsaddled and tethered our horses in one of the gullies on some coarse grass we entered the overseer's hut the interior of which was scarcely an improvement on its outward appearance. It consisted of three rooms one of which was a store in which were kept the flour tea sugar meat-cask &c. of the establishment; another was the bedroom of the overseer's female servant; whilst the principal apartment did duty as kitchen dining room and overseer's bedroom and was arranged in this way : - On one side and close to the fireplace stood a rough bedstead an opossum-rug spread over which concealed the bed-clothes beneath. [275] In the centre of the room there was a large sea-chest which served as a table; and at the fireplace which occupied the whole of one end of the building and was almost as large as one of the smaller rooms the supper was being cooked - to the no small increase of a heat already excessive. Against the walls around which were hung a pair or two of horse-hobbles a gun stock-whip some tin dishes pannikins a rickety looking-glass and other odds and ends appertaining to the gentle craft of squatting were set three rough stools; and on the mantelpiece were disposed evidently with some regard to effect a couple of Hall's powder canisters of a flaming red colour; a horse's hoof; some blue paper boxes containing seidlitz powders (the overseer's substitute for sodawater); a meerschaum pipe with a large glass-stoppered druggist's bottle as a centre-piece containing some three pints of a sherry-coloured liquid and labelled butyr of antimony. In one of the walls of the hut there was an aperture of about a foot square cut through the slabs as a window before which was drawn on strings a little curtain of white calico. The outer door which always stood open by day was secured at night by a bar; and a couple of wool-packs nailed to the tie-beams and reaching the ground supplied the place of doors to the two smaller apartments.  On arriving we had been met by the overseer who ushered us into the hut and formally put me in possession of the premises with the air of one who was relinquishing what he evidently looked on as a very complete little establishment. Of the correctness of his views on this subject it hardly needed the smile which I thought I detected on the faces of my friends to remind me that some diversity of opinion might exist. There was a momentary lull as we sat down and the eyes of each wandered involuntarily over the hut and took stock of its contents. It was clean in its way but very comfortless as I thought then; later on I got used to things still rougher. After a moment the friend who accompanied me broke the silence remarking as he turned towards me - "The hut is well enough though rather small; I assure you we don't think this bad in the bush."  "As tight as a nut sir" said the overseer interposing and looking up at the ridge-pole evidently pleased. "I had it new barked in the spring. You'll find everything very comfortable and dry" continued he addressing me. "A grand thing sir a dry hut; a grand thing! My old one at Western Port used to leak like a sieve and we were always wet. But I dare say gentlemen you are hungry after your ride." And turning to the servant he ordered supper. [276]  In due time the sea-chest table was covered with a clean towel; three willow-pattern plates in more or less dilapidated plight were placed on it; an old pint pannikin partially filled with clay and topped up with mutton fat from the frying-pan with a bit of old shirt wrapped round a stick stuck in the centre for a wick did duty as a lamp; some odd knives and forks made their appearance from the store-room whilst a round wooden box (marvellously like a lather box) supplied the place of a salt-cellar. Beside each plate the servant laid a pint tin pannikin and a slice of damper; and a large tin dish was placed in the centre of the table. Everything was clean at least and the tinware bright as silver. After these preliminary steps had been taken some rather coarse brown sugar was put in the pannikins which were then filled with tea from an iron kettle which was simmering by the fire and finally a leg of mutton was transferred on the end of a large iron skewer amidst clouds of vapour from the iron pot in which it was boiling to the tin dish on the table the overseer at this stage of the proceedings inviting us cordially to "sit in" and have supper whilst it was hot. It certainly was hot and so were we - and no danger of us at least getting cool. The atmosphere of the room the fire the vapour the odour of the "fat lamp" the scalding hot tea and reeking mutton were neither pleasant nor inviting; but as there was no preferable alternative we did "sit in" to the edge of the sea-chest on our three-legged stools and setting to work manfully acquitted ourselves as well as could have been expected of novices under the circumstances. "Messieurs vous étes servis!" said one of my friends laughing as we began our meal; probably some hotel on the Boulevards suggesting itself to his mind as a contrast!  As Steele's Creek was rather overstocked with six thousand sheep according to the notions of those times (when people entertained somewhat princely ideas on the subject of feed for their flocks) it was decided to reduce their numbers and I accordingly started for Tongala with two thousand of the ewes. My road was by what we now know as Pyalong Egan's Creek Redcastle and Colbinabbin. The summer - for it was the month of December - was hot and dry and at Mount Camel or as the Blacks call it Yiberithoop my sheep got their last drink the distance from Tongala being about fifty-five miles. From Yiberithoop down the Colbinabbin Creek and across the plains to Tymering took me I remember two days and a half of tedious driving the sheep being in one lot with two shepherds. As a matter of course I had a bullock-dray with me on which we carried amongst other things a cask of water for ourselves and the sheep dogs in connection with which arose a dispute between the men which resulted in a serious loss to my father. It happened in this way. As the shepherds toiled over the heated plain painfully driving before them the thirsty flock which accustomed to the green grass of the cool hilly country could ill support the heat of the plains the bullock-driver who was a cantankerous bad-tempered fellow overtook them and refused to allow the men to get a drink from the cask. This of course irritated them not a little and occasioned a row at our mid-day camp which ended in my interfering and finally sending the bullock-driver about his business a step which turned out to be as unfortunate as it was hasty and imprudent. Of course as the first consequence I had to tie up my horse behind the dray and drive the team myself which however did not trouble me much. Towards sundown that evening we arrived at Tymering and camped amongst the she-oaks and so far everything went on well.  The whole party however was a good deal fagged as our drive of eight miles which was all we could accomplish was over treeless plains under a burning sun so that nothing but the most constant efforts on our part could keep the sheep moving. It was Christmas-eve I remember and a furious hot wind had been blowing the whole day in our faces. Weary begrimed and half-choked with the dust with blood-shot eyes and sunburnt faces the three of us sat at the camp after having had a pot of tea and something to eat our thirst but half-quenched each one by himself with his back against the leeward side of a tree. The mournful wailing of the wind as it streamed through the she-oak scrub and our fatigue together made us disinclined to talk; so we sat in silence each I suppose occupied with his own thoughts. The fierce sirocco was driving before it sticks and leaves; and in the distance quantities of peculiar red-coloured bushes were rolling away to the southward tumbling over and over before the gale. [282] The horizon had that singular wavy appearance which is common to the plains in such weather; no birds were to be seen but here and there moving columns of dust grass and leaves the result of whirlwinds towered high in the air; whilst close at hand covered with ashes from the small fire which though lately kindled had already burnt itself out lay our kettle frying-pan and pannikins and the bag containing our gritty meat and damper. To complete the scene there were the panting sheep and bullocks with protruding tongues; the close-on-setting sun bathing the landscape in a dull red light suggestive of an eclipse. Altogether it was a melancholy camp that night and the more so from the reduction in our little party.  The next morning however as we took the road at day dawn we were enjoying all the exhilaration of a change of weather and a light southerly breeze so that we accomplished about six miles to our day camp before the great heat came on. It being only nine o'clock when we arrived no probability of being able to get the sheep to move till three and the distance from Tongala but thirteen miles I unfortunately determined being a little sick of the work and short-handed to let the bullocks out of the dray and on my horse drive them into the station to water; having no doubt that a fresh team with men and dogs might be back early to bring on the sheep which were now beginning to get knocked up from thirst. However though I arrived in good time and sent out a fresh team with such directions as would have secured satisfactory results if they had been followed it so happened that the driver allowed his bullocks to give him the slip went after them and never returned; there being no doubt that the poor fellow who was a one-eyed man lost himself and perished miserably from want of water; whilst from the delay thus occasioned five hundred of the flock died the next day before reaching the river or shortly after.  In the matter of books I believe we were better off than most of our neighbours though those in our possession had been got together in a haphazard sort of way at various times and without any idea of making a collection for the bush. However from a pair of stout wooden pegs in the wall-plate of the sitting-room of our rough but not uncomfortable slab hut at Tongala surrounded by a miscellaneous collection of fire-arms foils masks wooden sabres fencing gloves stockwhips spurs and other articles which embellished the walls hung in the place of honour some shelves made of bark on which were ranged our literary treasures. [284] These volumes our great resource for years against ennui for want of something new were read re-read and discussed I cannot say how often. In fact several of them became studies in our small circle. Amongst them were a number of histories ancient and modern Bourrienne's "Napoleon" Segur's "Flistoire de Napoleon et de la Grande Armée" O'Meara's "Voice from St. Helena" "The Court and Camp of Bonaparte" "The Aihambra or New Sketch Book"; the plays of Racine Corneille and Moliere; the poetical works of Milton Shakespeare Byron Tommy Moore Scott and Burns.  There were also several of the Waverley Novels some of them in French translations "Travels in the East" by Lamartine Stephens and Chateaubriand; Silvio Pellico's "Le Mie Prigioni" Horace's "Odes" Pope's "Iliad"Junius's "Letters" some of Florian's works Sterne's "Sentimental Journey" "Blackstone's Commentaries" Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations"; two or three elementary works on natural science; "Youatt on the Sheep and Horse"; and a pile of old magazines chiefly Blackwood's and amongst them those in which the "Noctes Ambrosianae" had appeared. We had besides a few colonial works such as "Major Mitchell's Explorations" and the "Memoirs of Jorgen Jorgenson ex-king of Iceland" whom I remember to have seen when a clerk in my father's office.  Altogether our collection amounted to about a hundred and fifty volumes of which those mentioned are fair samples. None of them perhaps were left entirely unread; diversity of taste however leading to one of us interesting himself in one subject and another in another. A subject we all enjoyed was Eastern travel; and indeed two of our little circle visited later on many of the scenes we so often read and talked about in our solitude at this time. As the reader may imagine the confinement of our reading within such narrow limits was not a matter of choice. It arose from the circumstance that books were hardly obtainable in Melbourne in those days. As an instance of this I may mention that having taken a fancy to learn something of the discovery and conquest of America I tried to obtain "Herrera" "Bernal Diaz" and some other works but without success. Of the volumes in our collection very favourite ones with me were those of Washington Irving which treat of Moorish times in Spain; and as that writer's studies on the subject at his villa on the Hudson were the cause as he tells us of his visiting Granada so my acquaintance with the pages of the American resulted subsequently in my paying a visit to Andalusia. [285]  As however one cannot always be reading especially the same books we used sometimes in the evening by the light of our tallow candle to pass an hour at cards chess or draughts. We had also a number of out-of-door amusements which stood us in good stead and enabled us to while away many a morning which otherwise would have been dull enough. Amongst them were swimming shooting throwing spears and so forth. To such exercises indeed we were much more given than any of our neighbours; and as for horses and hunting many of my happiest hours were passed in the saddle for which in my youth I had a perfect passion.  But though in those days I doated on horses and especially on a horse at a gallop through a pleasant sapling scrub where the chances of getting a broken neck or a knee knocked out of joint seemed about equal still in wet weather when the then untrodden soil was too soft for galloping I made shift to amuse myself with hunting on foot. In this pursuit the charm of the thing was the scope it gave for the exercise of ingenuity in tracking and reading from the tracks the history of the chase. On the whole I do not know but that one got as much amusement and excitement out hunting on foot as on horseback. Of course the nature of the amusements was quite different. At that time tracking was comparatively easy where it is now impossible.  Another out-of-door amusement to which I was much given was duck-shooting especially in winter and spring when trees and shrubs and the banks of lagoons are in their best attire. To me the stillness and freshness into which this sort of shooting led were always a great attraction. Another of our pastimes was breaking young horses though as we had only a dozen brood mares our pleasures in that direction were necessarily limited. We also domesticated some emu and wild pups the observance of whose habits used to amuse us. Corroborees which were very frequent at one or other of our stations were another resource though eventually we became rather blasé as regards that amusement and only sat out the choice morceaux. After all however yarning with the Bangerang swimming climbing trees in the native fashion throwing spears and hunting principally occupied our leisure hours; and as the poet says - "Thus the days of Thalaba went by!"  As the reader may imagine these were dull enough at times; but there were others worse - lengthy intervals of mixed ennui and low spirits literally of times a fumer pipette et a ne rien faire. When overtaken by this complaint which of course was when we were out of work horses dogs guns spears and books became alike insufferable. [286] We came to loathe everything about us and for the time it seemed to me there was little to choose between our position and that of Pellico in the Spielberg; conversation dried up and gloom gradually overshadowed us.  Intervals of solitude too each of us had occasionally to go through. Once for instance it was my luck to pass three weeks at Tongala during which I did not see a face white or black. We were short-handed so one of us had to remain at the head station and by chance it fell to my lot. The weather was frightfully hot at the time and being a prisoner with nothing to occupy me I fell into very irregular ways. Of the days of the month I soon lost count. Sometimes I went to bed late and sometimes early. When I rose late in the morning I fancy the crows thought the silence of the place the unopened doors and smokeless chimneys portended something suspicious. At all events they used to annoy me a good deal with their cawing as they stealthily approached the hut along the top rails of the paddock fence. Probably the muzzle of my gun thrust through the window and the discharge of one or both barrels conveyed to them the first intimation of my being still in the flesh and of my objection to being disturbed. Quiet restored I used to sally out with my kangaroo-dog into the intense glare of the sun despatch the wounded have a look round and saunter to the bathing-place some fifty yards away. The weather was so hot that even at an early hour the choondoonga as the Bangerang called the little birds had taken shelter in the trees out of which occasionally one dropped dead. Days of this sort were of course very hard to get through. Except to cook for myself and chop my firewood I had no employment. Reading I found it difficult to settle down to in the absence of bodily labour of which I got but little as it was probable if I left my hut to hunt or shoot (the only things I could do) that it might be robbed in my absence. Still this idleness compulsory though it was always brought with it feelings of self-reproach.  Of the gentlemen one saw a good sprinkling were squatters who had brought their flocks and herds from New South Wales or Tasmania. As a variety of the genus homo they were distinguishable by their hirsute appearance; whiskers beards and moustaches being decidedly in the ascendant among them. Many of them I noticed indulged in blue serge shirts in lieu of coats cabbage-tree hats belts supporting leather tobacco-pouches and in some few cases a pistol which with breeches boots and spurs completed the costume. [287] The horse too seemed an animal all but inseparable from the young gentlemen I am attempting to describe who if not engaged in chatting in twos and threes at the corners of streets or in the act of coming out of or going into one of the inns might generally be observed hurrying on horseback from one end of the little town to the other occasionally to avoid detours taking their nags over one of the gutter chasms which intersected the streets. One young squatter I remember was particularly noticeable as it was his custom to have a black boy in livery mounted on his horse's croup. Nor did such little eccentricities seem to surprise the residents or attract much notice the accepted idea seeming to be that bushmen were not by any means amenable to the slow ways of the dwellers in towns and that many things were proper enough in them which might have been esteemed strange or even objectionable in others.  The squatters of that period - generally new arrivals from home and young men who had brought with them more cash than experience - were a good deal discussed by the townsfolk and more especially by the ladies who it struck me had vague and curious notions concerning them. As far as I could gather the prevailing notion seemed to be that the squatters' habitat in all cases was some fearfully remote and lonely locality which it would be quite impossible for ordinary persons to reach; that without his horse the squatter could not exist; that he wore habitually Hessian boots and spurs of which it was uncertain whether he ever divested himself; that he was much given to emu and kangaroo hunting; had constant encounters with hordes of blacks; rode as a rule fifty miles a day chiefly at a gallop - a performance which seemed as necessary to his horse as to himself - and at night slept anywhere with his saddle for a pillow. It was also surmised that some sense peculiar to the young squatter enabled him to find his way in the most unerring manner through trackless forests and waterless wastes; that (when out of town) he lived solely on tea mutton and damper and enjoyed when in the saddle a perfect immunity from fatigue. All this of course was mere surmise; what townspeople really did know about the squatter was that in town he was lavish in his expenditure affected tandem driving had a decided penchant for beer and brandy smoked continually and was not as a rule over-punctual in his payments or versed in the ways of merchants or bankers. His peculiarities however real or imaginary did not survive the very early days of the colony; he was too lively a bird for our forests so that eventually lawyers and courts of justice put out many a shining light of those times. In the early days the young men took to the bush and the neighing steed as naturally as they now become bank clerks lawyers and cricketers.  The most noteworthy matter that has come to light and the most ominous for the future well-being of the Colony is the class contest for the possession of its lands which has covered five-sixths of its surface. Division I has to a large extent escaped this feud in consequence of the sound tenure under which the lands included were originally occupied; and some small portions of Division II where nature or circumstance has averted a collision of interests have been kept out of the circle of discord and chicanery; but with the exceptions of these fractions which comprise about one-fiftieth part of the lands of the second Division the huge area of 86 millions of acres has provided a field on which every form of abuse has been carried out in defiance of the public interest. Division III shows the first signs of the evils which have ravaged Division II; for there the public lands are already being spoiled by the lessees in anticipation of the advent of active selection.  It is manifest all through the mass of testimony that the conservation and beneficial management of the Crown Lands as the heritage of the Colony have been the last matters considered. While the waste of the territory has been disregarded the law has at one time been interpreted to favour the squatter at another time to favour the selector; and a spurious claim to credit for even-handed justice is habitually put forward because the one class has thus been enabled by law to retaliate upon the other the injuries which each has suffered. A whole station is despoiled by the conflict of squatter and selector and it is argued that the balance is held fairly if a lawful intrusion on a leasehold by a conditional purchaser can be thwarted or avenged by the use of an improvement purchase or a Volunteer land order. The consequences to the lands so dealt with as affecting those whose birthright they are and the generations whose future depends upon them have been made palpable in a form that cannot admit of doubt.  The study of the maps representing lands in every part of territorial Division II and extending along the eastern frontier of Division III will render a verdict as to either the policy or administration of the Act of 1861 unmistakable.  While that Act has professed to open the country to settlement these maps show that it has supplied with unstinting hand the machinery required to obstruct and injure the settler it created. It has barred the advance of honest enterprise in all directions and has at the same time opened a door for the entrance of every phase of abuse and fraud to be shared in by persons of all classes and conditions.  It would be well if the moral and social evils which have grown from the law could be depicted as vividly as the waste of the national estate has been displayed; but it needs little argument to prove the vice of a policy which of its very essence divides the rural population into two hostile camps; and it would be superfluous to state that the personal virtues of veracity and honorable dealing have been tarnished by the daily habit of intrigue the practice of evading the law and by declarations in defiance of fact universally made. [128] It is in evidence that self-interest has created a laxity of conscience in all matters connected with the Land Law and that the stain attaches to men of all classes and all degrees.  But the extent to which the essential object of the Act has been carried out it may be held is the true test of the policy. On this point there is no direct proof. The Department of Lands contains in its records no statistics bearing upon the actual results in settlement which have accrued from the legislation initiated in 1861. The returns provided by the Conditional Sales Branch indicate the number of applications dealt with in various stages and the number which up to a certain date remain not transferred; but these transactions are not in any way identified with the existence of actual homesteads or with the occupation of the soil by individuals. The system of inspection adopted of late years is directed merely to the scrutiny of particular cases but as a means of verifying positive settlement is futile.  The general results of the policy can however be ascertained with tolerable certainty in spite of the obscurity which shrouds departmental dealings but to make the facts apparent will require a good deal more detail than would be necessary if method and lucidity had characterised the administration of the Act.  The return of conditional purchases states the progress of alienation under the Branch as follows: - Since 1861 there have been 170242 original applications. Of these there have been dealt with either wholly or partially 1298011. The number under the residential clauses sections 13 and 14 are stated at 62085 and of these there remained not transferred in December 1882 32795. These 32795 and a proportion of the 29290 transferred purchases to be hereafter dealt with purport to represent existing residential conditional purchases. The question next arises how far these may be taken to represent homestead settlement It is to be noted to begin that of the 32795 over 11000 have been taken up since the Act of 1880 came into force. That measure necessitates a residence of five years before transfer can be effected; consequently till the expiry of that term no conclusion can be come to as to their integrity in law or the bona fides of the applicants. It is likewise to be borne in mind that prior to the Act of 1875 selection by minors or on behalf of minors was largely practised. The children of people living on stations and on selections were made use of universally to secure land. In many districts from this cause the actual homesteads number only one-third or one-fourth of the selections upon which all conditions are field to have been fulfilled. Further before the appointment of inspectors great numbers of spurious and irregular selections were condoned and the land passed into the hands of the applicants without either improvement or residence being enforced. [129] In regard to the 29290 transferred selections it must of course be borne in mind that many of the original holders have when obtaining pecuniary assistance transferred their selections by way of mortgages continuing however to reside on the land. Many also have sold out to other persons who reside in their stead. The balance - say two-thirds - may be held then to represent the transferred selections unoccupied or held by pastoral lessees and not used for purpose of residence.  The general result has been that a great proportion of the selections taken up before 1875 were confirmed and became private property without in any way representing settlement; and as to those taken up since May 1880 the question of residence has not yet arisen but it is generally believed that only a small proportion will take the form of homesteads.  The Census returns again supply no direct evidence as to the number of conditional purchasers who are permanent settlers on the soil. They contain no enumeration of selectors as such and the electoral rolls are equally indefinite. In both all alienees of land from the Crown and owners of freehold property appear classed together as freeholders without distinction. The facts about selection have been apparently considered things that it did not concern the public to know; but an approximation to these facts may be reached through an analysis of the tabulated figures detailing the distribution of landed estate furnished by the Registrar-General. As more effective for the purpose of this Report the figures are now presented apportioned according to the three Territorial Divisions adopted. [...] [130]  This estimate is not inconsistent with the departmental returns. The difference is met by a fair allowance for minors' selections aggregated holdings of two or more purchases under the 13th or 14th clause selections acquired where conditions have not been fulfilled holdings transferred to pastoral lessees and not resided upon other unoccupied selections purchases the title to which is now pending (for there can be little doubt that when the five years' period for residence and improvement in regard to selections applied for under the Act of 1880 falls in another deduction will be made for voidings forfeitures and transfers) and occupied areas the titles to which were acquired under clauses of the Act other than those relating to conditional sale. In all probability the selections held as homesteads according to the intent of the law do not equal 20000 or indeed 18000.  Had it been possible a correct account of the resident conditional purchasers in a few of the electorates would have been taken as a test of the accuracy of the returns but time would not permit this to be done. Only one accurate return of this character has been obtained and that is from the Surveyors' District of Deniliquin. In that district 1424 residential selectors purchased 558705 acres but now only 244 remain who own about 200000 acres. Of these 115 own 500 sheep and upwards and about 190000 acres of land the remaining 10000 acres being held by 129 persons. Within the electorate of Murray which comprises the Surveyors' District of Deniliquin and also large adjoining areas 2100 selectors became possessed (to the satisfaction of the Lands Department) of residential homesteads and although it is notorious that there are many other freeholders residing on purchased land therein such for instance as improvement areas used for squatting homesteads and out-stations the Registrar-General's return gives but 590 as the number of free-holders who remain in occupation. This tallies with the result of local observation.  The distribution of landed property in the three Territorial divisions as shown above is well worthy of study as illustrating different phases of the land question. Division I is less than one third of the area of Division II besides consisting of much poorer country; yet owing to the sound principles upon which its colonization was originally based it has escaped all the greater evils of the class contest which has pervaded the rest of the Colony. [131] The figures quoted show that nearly one-half of the settlement of New South Wales has taken place within this narrow tract and moreover this settlement is known to be of a far sounder more permanent and less speculative character than in Division II. Division I actually contains more properties of from 40 acres to 1000 than Division II and relatively to the acreage double the proportion of estates from 1000 acres to 40000. There is also a vast difference in the character of these larger holdings in the two Divisions in Division I the 925 estates of from 1000 to 40000 acres are mostly genuine family homesteads such as are to be seen in the Roxburgh map. In Division II many of the 1728 so-called estates are not estates at all but are simply made up of scattered portions such as appear on the maps Gwydir 2 and Clarence 1 - runs "peacocked" to keep off selectors.  But if Division II fails so signally in the number of small and moderate-sized properties for its acreage it monopolizes all the distinction to be gained from the number of its great estates. The eighty estates recorded as being over 40000 acres ate mainly in Riverina and some of them contain more than 200000 acres of freehold land.  The success of settlement in a tract of country so poor and so limited as contrasted with its failure in a territory so much richer and more extensive tells little in favour of free selection on pastoral leaseholds. Division I has produced general family settlement; Division II has produced eighty huge estates up to 300000 acres from which human habitation has been all but obliterated.  Though the Census of 1881 as has been already remarked takes no note of the results of the law of 1861 still it throws a light on the question of settlement which more than confirms the conclusions arrived at from Departmental and Statistical Returns. It shows clearly that the increase of the rural population is approaching stagnation and that there must be thousands of selections taken up yearly which represent no settlement whatever.  The diagram illustrating the comparative increase of town and country population constructed by scale from figures compiled under the responsibility of the Registrar-General cannot be studied too closely the accuracy of the facts it discloses being unquestionable. If in connection with this diagram an analysis is made of the figures contained in tabular return No. 2 it will be found that during the first decennial period (1862-1871) of the operation of the Land Laws approved residential conditional purchases bore the proportion of 23 per centum to the increased rural population whereas during the second term (1872-1881) that proportion increased to 81 per centum. Again taking another view of the question we find that during the 1862-1871 period for each individual member of the rural increase an area of 27 acres was conditionally purchased whilst for the 1872-1881 term no less than 236 acres were selected. [132]  If the increased population of 1862-1871 numbering 78097 was due to occupation by conditional purchase and might fairly be considered as representing family settlement the same proportion of occupation to selection should have resulted in an increase of 168126 persons during the 1872-1881 period instead of 47433 the actual increase. There is reason in reality to believe that even this trifling extra-urban increase of the past ten years is as much caused by railway works and the opening of new mines as by the settlement of population employed in either pastoral or agricultural operations. So that if free selection before survey is to be accepted as the principal factor in or inducement to permanent rural settlement in this Colony it must be evident that it has signally failed. The accompanying table illustrates in a striking manner the facts we have endeavoured to delineate: -   The proofs which have been submitted of the waste of territory and the failure of settlement are enough to condemn the existing policy but an inquiry into the state of the public lands and the operation of the law would not be complete that did not deal also with the technical construction of the Acts and the method of their administration.  Ambiguity in intent as well as in expression has been a marked characteristic of all Land legislation since 1861. Litigation wasteful cost and delay arising from this cause have injuriously affected numbers of persons. The special interpretation of some term susceptible of two different meanings has led to lives being wasted and properties eaten up with legal expenses; and lawyers of eminence have condemned in no measured terms statutes which they considered equally pernicious in their intent imperfect in their construction and ambiguous in their wording. The history of the 31st clause is an instance of law-making in this Colony which should not pass unnoticed in this inquiry.  In addition to the defective construction of the various Land Acts the large permissive powers always appended have involved a most unnecessary and pernicious exercise of ministerial discretion. [133] It is possible that there may be communities elsewhere to which the exercise of ministerial discretion may be an advantage but the effect in New South Wales through the endless diversity of interpretations and misinterpretations for years has been to annul the value of the law altogether. The plain meaning of any existing Act is now of less weight than the caprice or bias of the Minister and it is notorious that the most effective mode of getting business done at the "Lands" whether in terms of the law or with the view of thwarting its operation is to select a land agent who is a member of the popular branch of the Legislature.  The extent to which the Colony suffers from the centralized system of administration is second only to the evils which have grown from the vicious policy of the land law. Delay accumulation of arrears of work individual loss the daily growth of the official staff are all most needlessly occasioned by carrying the details of transactions to headquarters which might be much more easily and accurately completed in the districts where they arise. To give full proof of the utter folly of our centralized method it is not necessary to go beyond the limits of the Colony itself; but if the dealings of the kindred communities of the group are looked into then the contrast would not for a moment stand the light of day.  In the course of the inquiry the want of one fixed unit bf division for the Colony has greatly added to the difficulty of presenting many matters in an intelligible form. Counties land office districts survey districts pastoral districts stock inspectors' districts police census electoral and licensing districts have all been arranged without any attempt at harmony and irrespective of general practical results: In considering an amended system the advantages of establishing one invariable standard of division such as the county should not be lost sight of.  Throughout the inquiry every effort has been made to ascertain the extent of land which used according to proved methods would yield a fair independent livelihood to a working family. It is assumed in the first place that the most eligible spots possessing exceptional fertility or value from position are to be reserved as agricultural and village areas and that this question applies simply to the average bush country - the ordinary pastoral land. The evidence shows that in Division II a general uniformity of opinion holds that four selections or 2560 acres will be necessary to form a homestead capable of supporting a family by the combination of the only industries practicable - namely keeping sheep or other live stock and cultivation. In Division III the country being generally waterless and the rainfall uncertain an extent of nine sections of a farm of 5760 acres is considered the smallest area that would enable such a family to make an independent living. In Division I the available land being largely disposed of and much of the surface remaining being very inferior in character it is stated that a portion of land fit for any use could not now be got larger than two sections or 1280 acres. [134]  It is doubtful if this extent of third-class land or mountain country would by itself be worth occupying. Still a leasehold of that character granted under condition of fencing might be a good addition to an ordinary selection. Moreover much of this Division is almost of a suburban character and it is known that even the most rugged ranges acquire a value near the centres of traffic. The substitution of a more permanent tenure for the existing pre-lease is advocated with the view of bringing the inferior lands of this Division under more beneficial occupation; and the evidence put forward in respect to the occupation of the Church and School Lands is conclusive as to the value of second and third class grazing lands under a secure tenure.  Consideration has been given to the policy of keeping survey ahead of settlement in contra-distinction to the existing method of selection before survey. By Return No. 3 in the Appendix it is shown that during a period of five years from 1878 to 1882 inclusive in nineteen land districts conditional purchases to the number of 2155 were void and that the applicants were not informed of the invalidity for an average period after application of eight and a half months. The delay loss and disappointment arising from this cause must have been very great over the whole Colony during the full term of the Act's operation if five years within a small area entailed the voiding of 2000 conditional purchases. Of a total of 1827 selections void in the year 1881 1232 became invalid from errors that would have been prevented by previous survey. If settlement has been checked to the extent indicated by these figures then a grave indictment may be preferred against the present method. As to the relative cost the testimony of qualified witnesses is invariable to the effect that a general survey ahead of settlement would cost not more than one-fourth of the expense entailed by the measuring of separate selections while the superior advantages of security of title with immediate and certain possession would be comparatively incalculable. As indicating the amount of inconvenience and loss which has  though the want of a preliminary survey fallen upon conditional purchasers it is to be remarked that since 1861 three separate validating Bills have been passed for the relief of persons who had used the light of selection on reserves and other lands not open to alienation.  Where mistresses are many and servants are few it goes almost without saying that large establishments are out of the question. Given equal incomes and the English mistress has twice as many servants as the Australian and what is more twice as competent ones. Even our friend Muttonwool only has six - coachman boy cook housemaid nurse and parlourmaid. I don't suppose there are a hundred households in all Australia which keep a butler pure and simple though there must be several thousand with what is generically known as a man-servant who gets twenty-five shillings a week all found. A coachman's wages are on the average about the same. The "boy" gets ten shillings. Man-cooks are rare. A decent female cook who ranks out here as first-class earns fifteen shillings to a pound a week. [679] For this sum she is supposed to know something about cooking; yet I have known one in receipt of a weekly guinea look with astonishment at a hare which had been sent to her master as a present and declare that it was "impossible to make soup out of that thing". After a little persuasion she was induced to try to make hare-soup after Mrs. Beeton's recipe but the result was such as to try the politeness of her master's visitors. This lack of decent cooks is principally due to the lack of establishments large enough to keep kitchen maids. Would-be cooks have no chance of acquiring their art by training from their superiors; they gain their knowledge by experiments on their employers' digestions; never staying long in one place they learn to make some new dishes in each house they go to and gradually rise in the wages-scale.  Directly you come to incomes below a thousand a year the number of servants is often reduced to a maid-of-all-work more or less competent according to her wages which run from seven to fifteen shillings a week. At the former price she knows absolutely nothing; at the latter something of everything. She cooks washes sweeps dusts makes the beds clears the baths and answers the door. All is grist that comes to her mill; and if she is Jill-of-all-trades and mistress of none one must admit that an English-bred servant would not be one quarter so suitable to colonial requirements. Of course she is independent often even cheeky but a mistress learns to put up with occasional tantrums provided the general behaviour and character are good. When we were first out here we used to run a-muck with our servants about once a week; but now We find it better to bear the ills we have than to fly to others which we know not of. Our present Lizzie is impertinent to a degree when reproved; but then she can cook decently and she is the first decent cook we have had since we have been out here. When you have lived on colonial fare for a few months a good plain dinner covers a multitude of sins.  Unfortunately four-fifths of our servants are Irish - liars and dirty. These Irish are less impertinent than the colonials; but if you do get hold of a well-trained colonial she is worth her weight in gold on account of her heterogeneity. Your Irish immigrant at eight and ten shillings a week has as often as not never been inside any other household than her native hovel and stares in astonishment to find that you don't keep a pig on your drawing-room sofa. On entering your house she gapes in awe of what she considers the grandeur around her and the whole of her first day's work consists of ejaculating "Lord" and "Goodness !" We once had a hopeful of this kind who after she had been given full instructions as to how a rice-pudding was to be made sat down and wept bitterly for half an hour till - her mistress having told her to "bake" - the happy thought struck her to put a dish full of rice in the oven sans milk sans eggs sans everything. [680] Another Biddy engaged by a friend of ours having to make a yeast-cake put it under her bed-clothes "just to plump it a bit". A third having been given a bill-of-fare for the day put soup meat and pudding all into one pot and served them up au pot-pourri.  When there are children in a middle-class family a nurse-girl is generally but by no means always kept. Hers is the lowest of all the branches of service and is only taken by a young girl just going out into the world. Trained nurses such as are common at home are in great demand and are almost unobtainable. They can earn a pound a week easily and at such wages a man whose income only runs into three figures is forced to put up with a nurse-girl. She undertakes no responsibility her duties being confined to carrying the baby and screaming at the other children if they attempt to' do themselves any bodily harm. If you wish to under stand what the average nurse-girl is like you have but to walk through any of the public gardens; you will see babies without number left in the blazing sun some hanging half-way out of their perambulators others sucking large painted "lollies" or green apples. The elder children if they are unruly are slapped and sent off to play by themselves while the nurse-girls hold a confab on a neighbouring bench. Not that these girls are necessarily bad but they lack the supervision and training of a head-nurse; they have been taught to look upon nursing as derogatory and never staying enough as nurses to get any experience in handling children. A few months of this the lowest stage of servant-galdom and then they pass into the maid-of-all-work class. Thus it is that many mothers prefer undertaking the duties of nurse themselves and devote themselves to their children at the expense of their husbands and certainly of all social relations.  The great redeeming-point about the servant-girl is the power she acquires of getting through a large and multifarious quantity of work. She has frequently to do the whole house - work cooking washing and ironing for a family of six or seven and unless the mistress and her daughters are particularly helpful it is out of all reason to expect that any of those things can be well done. Of course there are some good servants but unfortunately for their employers the butchers and bakers generally have a keen eye for such arguing with great justice that a good servant is likely to make a good wife.  The greater part of the high wages which servants get is spent on dress. If ever they condescend to wear their mistress's left-off clothes it is only for work in the house; but the trouble they take to copy the exact fashion and cut of their mistress's clothes is very amusing. [681] One girl we had frankly asked my wife to allow her to take a dress she admired to her dressmaker in order that she might have one made up like it. Whilst girls in the upper and middle classes are very handy with their fingers and often make up their own hats and dresses the servant-class despise to do this and almost invariably employ milliners who often cheat them dreadfully knowing that they appreciate a hat or a dress much according to the price they have paid for it and the amount of show it makes. In hats and bonnets this is specially noticeable; I have often seen our servants with hats or bonnets on which cannot have cost them less than three or four pounds.  The shortest and upon the whole the best way to get a servant is by going to one of the numerous registry offices. Some of these exist merely to palm off bad servants upon you; but there are always offices of good reputation which will not recommend a girl they know absolutely nothing about.  The needlewoman is little in vogue here; but as nearly everyone washes at home washerwomen are plentiful; their wages run from four to five shillings a day according to their capabilities food being of course included.  In spite of constant shipments from England servants are always at a premium and I need scarcely point out what an excellent opening these colonies afford for women-servants. Unfortunately but a very small proportion of the daughters of the poorer colonial working-class will go into service. For some inexplicable reason they turn up their noses at the high wages and comparatively light work offered and prefer to undertake the veriest drudgery in factories for a miserable pittance. At a recent strike in a large shirt-making factory in Melbourne it came out that a competent needlewoman could not make more than eighteen shillings a week even by working overtime and that the general average earnings of a factory girl were only eleven to thirteen shillings a week. But so great is the love of independence in the colonial girl that she prefers hard work and low wages in order to be able to enjoy freedom of an evening. It is in vain that the press points out that girls whose parents do not keep Servants are accustomed to perform the same household duties in their own homes that are required of them in service; that work which is not degrading at home cannot become degrading in service; and that they will be the better wives for the knowledge of household work which they acquire in service. They might as well preach to the winds; and there are more applications for employment in shops and factories than there is work for whilst mistresses go begging for lady-helps. There is a sad side to this picture as regards the social condition of the colonies in addition to the inconvenience to people who keep servants. [682] The girls who go into shops and factories and have their evenings to themselves necessarily undergo a great deal of temptation and it is undeniable that they are not at all delivered from evil. The subject is out of keeping with these letters but unless some means can be found to reconcile colonial girls to service I fear an evil is growing up in our midst which is likely to be even more baneful in its effects upon the community than the corresponding tendency to "larrikinism" amongst colonial youths.  It was also one of the functions of the Commissioner to adjust the frequent differences which occurred between the original lords of the soil and the Anglo-Saxon parvenus. Now though the reader may fancy that this was easily done it was not in fact without difficulties. Disturbances were constantly occurring. Generally the first intimation the Commissioner got of a case was a letter from a stock-owner complaining that after having treated the Blacks with uniform kindness and consideration for a length of time they had suddenly killed one of his shepherds under circumstances of peculiar atrocity and roasted and eaten two hundred of his flock. On the receipt of reports of this sort the Commissioner proceeded as soon as he was able to the scene of the outrage where he heard the complaint repeated viva voce. Strange to say the Blacks habitually neglected to give their version of the tale though we know that they had constantly very serious charges to advance against shepherds in connection with their conduct towards the females of the tribe.  As the Blacks therefore neglected to appear before the Commissioner in what might be termed his judicial capacity nothing was left for him as guardian of the public peace but to appear before them which he did at a gallop sabre in hand surrounded by his troopers industriously loading and discharging their carbines. Now it may seem strange to the reader that there were a few well-intentioned visionaries at the time who made the Government policy as carried out by the Commissioner a subject for unfavourable comment. Some asserted that there was no statute which authorized proceedings of the sort; that the Blacks were unable to represent wrongs which everyone knew they suffered from want of knowledge of our language; that fire and sword were carried into their camps and death indiscriminately dealt out amongst them without any proper examination of the complainant having been made or a single deposition taken. [47] In fact that less evidence was required to condemn a tribe to destruction than to consign an habitual drunkard for four-and-twenty hours to the lock-up. Other persons indulged in poetic flights in the very worst taste in connection with the subject and describe John Bull as landing on foreign shores the Bible in his pocket a blunderbuss in one hand and a rum-bottle in the other leaving the savage no alternative but to give up his land and die by one instrument or the other drunk or sober.  All this being as tedious to answer as it is trifling in itself we will pass to another complaint which was that the Commissioner and his troopers occasionally administered justice with sword and carbine to the wrong tribe in mistake.  In connection with this veracity compels me to admit that the Aborigines being a very homogeneous race much alike in colour and features with but little variety of costume - there being also but little evidence and that purely circumstantial as to which of them had committed any particular outrage - eases of mistaken identity would and did occasionally occur.  After the return of my brother and myself from the Moira we set to work to make preparations for occupying a block of country in that locality. Whilst so engaged however the solitude of Tongala was broken in upon by the arrival of several troopers headed by the officer in charge of the native mounted police. The detachment rather a larger one than usual consisted besides the officer of four blacks and four white troopers. Such a visitation from the outer world as a matter of course somewhat fluttered us Volscians in Corioli. The station hands all turned out to gaze on the strange men and horses as if such a sight had never met their eyes before and bestowed on the removal of cloaks unslinging of carbines watering of chargers &c. their undivided attention; whilst the uniformity practised in such matters by the troopers and their systematic clock-work-like mode of managing matters which civilians are apt to look on as trifles did not fail to elicit sotto voce uncomplimentary remarks from some of my men to whom such methodical ways brought back unpleasant reminiscences of prison days. The officer who accompanied me to my hut after he had seen his men disposed of carelessly unbuckled his sabre and pitched it and his foraging cap on to the sofa and taking a chair amused me a good deal as he rattled out in the most degage manner that he had received instructions 'to put himself at the head of his present force apprehend all troublesome Blacks and restore quiet to the disaffected district; that a reinforcement in the person of Corporal Rolfe a non-commissioned officer in whom he placed the greatest confidence was momentarily expected; that his fellows were all of the right sort specially trained indeed by himself; and that the service was thoroughly to his liking however he might otherwise regret his temporary absence from Melbourne and the ladies.' [48]  The effect of this unexpected gush was not a little heightened by the jaunty ways of my guest who having got rid of his buckskin gloves and propitiated his moustache with some little caresses sauntered up and down the room in all the fascinations of a preternaturally erect carriage shell-jacket fixed spurs and red stripes down the side scams of his breeches. In fact the tout ensemble of the thing tickled my fancy so much occurring in the midst of monotonous days that I have not yet forgotten it.  Another of the little peculiarities of my guest (a pleasant and genial person) and one which I found exceedingly comical was his habitual use of military phraseology; so that the shepherds' huts and places of the sort figured as positions in his conversation men riding abreast were said to be in line; a camp in the bush took rank as a bivouac and so on. In addition it was charming also to notice on short acquaintance not only that the estimate in which this warrior (long since poor fellow a pilgrim to the happy hunting grounds) held civilians was in the main a low one; but that unknown to himself probably he looked on them ass very unimportant portion of the community whose raison d'étre might have been the erection of towns in which the military in times of peace might enjoy the usual agréments of society of which the daughters of civilians to flirt with formed a prominent feature; whilst of course in times of war such places would be put to their proper purposes and be defended battered and sacked in the orthodox way - as we always read in history.   As the Blacks who were now to be taught manners would probably be found at the Moira on the bank of the Murray across which they would certainly swim on the first appearance of the police it was agreed that the sheep and dray which was despatching to the Moira should be sent on ahead and halted at some distance from the river the tribe being decoyed to the encampment so that the white troopers might be enabled to close with them away from the water. As regards the black portion of the 'force' it was decided by the officer for various urgent reasons that it should be left at Tongala. This reduction of his forces I noticed seemed to prey a good deal on the military mind of the leader (a man of well-known pluck however) and produced an uneasiness which even the timely arrival of Corporal Rolfe did trot entirely remove. Why it should have been so I never could exactly understand. Danger (except to the enemy) there could be little or none the result being substantially the same in respect to firearms whether they be opposed to spears or pop-guns.  Measures having been thus concerted a flock of sheep in charge of several men and accompanied by a dray and bullocks was despatched to the Moira with the requisites for forming an out-station the time of its arrival being so arranged as to be shortly antecedent to that of the police. This combined movement as the officer pointed out to me afterwards with some satisfaction was managed more successfully than sometimes happens in war on a larger scale; for shortly before the police 'debouched' from the timber which skirted the proposed scene of action the other party had arrived in the proper quarter and as could be seen had gathered round them the Blacks whom it was so desirable to entice from the vicinity of the river and the reed-beds. [49] The result of this was an immediate charge on the part of the troopers; a movement executed as it seemed to my inexperienced eye with more élan than regularity. Being myself with the party and armed with sword and pistols I received a friendly hint from the officer before charging to abstain from the use of weapons unless called on by him to act; an injunction which being of a peaceful tendency was quite in accordance with my feelings.  And here I regret for the reader's sake that I am unable to describe the evolutions which ensued for though I have a perfect recollection of what occurred I am destitute of the knowledge necessary to enable me to set down the circumstances in the proper relations of cause and effect as the officer did in a report (bulletin?) on the subject which he read to me prior to forwarding it to the authorities. That there were however some points concerning the matter in which we did not completely agree truth requires me to confess as he omitted some incidents which I thought should have been mentioned. On my hinting something to that effect however he laughed good-humouredly saying that 'persons unconnected with the public service know nothing of reports; indeed civilians from first to last are ill fitted to describe collisions of the sort being apt to blurt out statements more properly held in reserve' which it has since occurred to me might probably be the case.  However lo cierto e that one of the police horses bolted at the outset and carried his rider almost out of sight whilst another trooper lodged by his charger in the fork of a tree very providentially escaped getting his neck broken the chargers generally being as the officer said in his report 'somewhat unsteady'. The Blacks in the meantime passed through or round our 'line' and fled to the river followed by the remaining horsemen no shots having been fired so far or spears thrown; when as the last Aborigine was in the very act of leaping from the bank into his native stream someone at hand not connected with the 'force' on being called upon by the officer discharged two barrels putting one ball through the fugitive's arm and the other through an old cap which he had on. This proceeding however appears to have been irregular in some way as it found no place in the bulletin. At this juncture I recollect the officer who was leisurely scanning the opposite bank of the river across which he had driven the enemy in such masterly style received a slight wound in his sword arm from a spear hurled by a blackfellow from the opposite side. Hit at last! his laughing exclamation as he handed me a white handkerchief the corner of which I had noticed peeping from the pocket of his shell-jacket to bind up what he termed the 'scratch'.  The Blacks having retreated across the Murray and the troopers being assembled again around their leader that indefatigable officer after a few moments spent in reviewing the battlefield turned his attention towards my sheep camp in quest of stragglers. [50] Fortunately one blackfellow still remained there who having been promised the head of a sheep which was being butchered for supper waited quietly for the expected prize in spite of the firing and galloping which had been going on. This unfortunate was accordingly seized by our party and at once placed in handcuffs which being found too large for his hands were transferred at the suggestion of Corporal Rolfe to his ankles.  The explorers who first entered Riverina were Oxley and Sturt. Oxley's was what might be called a trial trip and a very gallant one and no old hand forgets that 'Sturt's furthest' held the post of honour on our maps for nearly twenty years and that he was a most energetic explorer. But though I value highly the labours of these leaders and their results I may remark that the records of their travels produce the impression that they suffered a good deal from despondency as they wended their way through the woods at the heads of their small parties. Brought up in the old country where the features of nature are on a small scale and the presence of man everywhere visible they appear never to have been able to overcome early associations or to reconcile themselves to the bush. Transplanted from an island continental features affected them unpleasantly. Forests which look weeks to traverse; plains like the ocean horizon bounded; the vast length of our rivers when compared to those of England often flowing immense distances without change or tributary now all but dry for hundreds of miles at other times flooding the countries on their banks to the extent of inland seas wearied them more in the contemplation than by travel.  Then we know that our cloudless skies the mirage the long-sustained high range of the thermometer in the central portion of the continent troubled them a good deal more than they do us and helped to make them look on the dark side of things. Hence as a rule their reports were unfavourable. If the reader has any doubt on this head let him read as an instance Sturt's account of his detention at Depot Glen and then remember that the locality described as so horrible proved in time to be a very good sheep run differing in nothing from others around it; and eventually was found to be a goldfield and got extensively worked. The garb of romance with which Sturt cloaked it wore off. Hence in connection with early misjudgement and despondencies the funny outcome has often presented itself of persons buying in fee simple allotments on Mount Miseries at £2 or £4 an acre and of others determined at all hazards to locate themselves for life if possible at some Mount Desolation or place with an equally objectionable name.  Referring particularly to Sturt's estimates of country the reader will be amused if he contrast them with those of the Melbourne auctioneer of 1882 by finding now and then that a tract of country which the explorer had passed over during a day or two's march and described as little better than genuine desert is now covered with immense flocks of sheep in prime condition and is valued with stock at perhaps from £50000 to £100000. In fact a great portion of the land which Oxley and Sturt described as useless is now worth on an average at least twenty shillings per acre. But all explorers were not constituted like Sturt and Oxley. Though a far none desolate country fell to Eyre than to any other explorer country which though bordered by the sea and comparatively near at hand is still unoccupied the Bayard of Australian explorers never faltered. [222] Even three consecutive stages each of one hundred and fifty miles without finding a drop of water were insufficient either to turn him back or extract a sigh; and it was not until his only white companion was butchered by the Blacks in his party and he found himself in the desert with a single black boy for a mate horses drooping from thirst the whereabouts of water unknown. and provisions all but exhausted that 'some natural tears he shed' - not for himself but for his lost companion and then kept on his way. As for Mitchell Leichhardt and other explorers they had imbibed a good deal of the knowledge and ideas of persons born and brought up in the bush; and instead of suffering from despondent views we find them on the contrary with a fresh paradise to report at the end of each exploration.  POEMS  [5] Where the Pelican Builds.   (The unexplored parts of Australia are sometimes spoken of by the bushmen of Western Queensland as the home of the pelican a bird whose nesting place so far as the writer knows is seldom if ever found.)  The horses were ready the rails were down  But the riders lingered still-  One had a parting word to say  And one had his pipe to fill.  Then they mounted one with a granted prayer  And one with a grief unguessed.  "We are going" they said as they rode away-  "Where the pelican builds her nest!"  They had told us of pastures wide and green   To be sought past the sunset's glow;   Of rifts in the ranges by opal lit    And gold 'neath the river's flow.  And thirst and hunger were banished words   When they spoke of that unknown West;   No drought they dreaded no flood they feared   Where the pelican builds her nest!  The creek at the ford was but fetlock deep   When we watched them crossing there ;   The rains have replenished it thrice since then   And thrice has the rock lain bare.  But the waters of Hope have flowed and fled   And never from blue hill's breast   Come back-by the sun and the sands devoured -   Where the pelican builds her nest !  5th March 1881.     [6] Up North   Into Thy hands let me fall O Lord-   Not into the hands of men-  And she thinned the ranks of the savage horde   Till they shrank to the mangrove fen.  In a rudderless boat with a scanty store   Of food for the fated three-  With her babe and her stricken servitor   She fled to the open sea.  Oh days of dolor and nights of drouth   While she watched for a sail in vain  Or the tawny tinge of a river mouth   Or the rush of the tropic rain.  The valiant woman! Her feeble oar   Sufficed and her fervent prayer  Was heard though she reached but a barren shore   And died with her darling there.  For the demons of murder and foul disgrace   On her hearthstone dared not light;  But the Angel of Womanhood held the place   And its site is a holy site.   In The Land Of Dreams   A bridle-path in the tangled mallee   With blossoms unnamed and unknown bespread-  And two who ride through its leafy alley-   But never the sound of a horse's tread.  And one by one whilst the foremost rider   Puts back the boughs which have grown apace-  And side by side where the track is wider-   Together they come to the olden place. [7]   To the leaf-dyed pool whence the mallards flattered   Or ever the horses had paused to drink ;  Where the word was said and the vow was uttered   That brighten for ever its weedy brink.  And Memory closes her sad recital-   In Fate's cold eyes there are kindly gleams-  While for one brief moment of blest requital-   The parted have met-in the Land of Dreams.  13th June 1882.     Happy Days   A fringe of rushes- one green line   Upon a faded plain-  A silver streak of water-shine-   Above tree-watchers twain.  It was our resting-place awhile   And still with backward gaze  We say: "'Tis many a weary mile-   But there were happy days."  And shall no ripple break the sand   Upon our farther way ?-  Or reedy ranks all knee-deep stand ?-   Or leafy tree-tops sway ?-  The gold of dawn is surely met   In sunset's lavish blaze;  And -in horizons hidden yet-   There shall be happy days.  In The South Pacific   A vision of a savage land   A glimpse of cloud-ringed seas;  A moonlit deck a murderous hand;-   No more no more of these! [8]   No more! how heals the tender flesh   Once torn by savage beast?  The wound re-opening bleeds afresh   Each season at the least!  O day for dawn of thee how prayed   The spirit sore distressed;  Thy latest beams upslanting made   A pathway for the blest.  And robes new-donned of the redeemed   Gleamed white past grief's dark pall:  So this a day of death which seemed   A birthday let us call.  Remembering such day as this   A soul from flesh was shriven  By death God's messenger of bliss;   A spirit entered Heaven.  Thy dying head no loving breast   Upheld O early slain ;  But soon mid welcoming saints 'twas prest   Where God's own Child has lain !  Though none at death broke Bread for thee   Or poured the Sacred Wine ;  Thou nourished at His Board dost see   The Substance of the Sign.  We mourned thee! Heaven's new born and rich   Past all our prayers could claim  Secure in blessedness of which   Wehave not learnt the name.     In Time Of Drought   "The river of God is full of water. "  -Psalm.  The rushes are black by the river bed   And the sheep and the cattle stand  Wistful-eyed- where the waters were   In a waste of gravel and sand ;  Or pass o'er their dying and dead to slake   Their thirst at the slimy pool.  [9] Shall they pine and perish in pangs of drought   While Thy river O God is full.  The fields are furrowed the seed is sown   But no dews from the heavens are shed;  And where shall the grain for the harvest be ?   And how shall the poor be fed?  In waterless gullies they winnow the earth   New-turned by the miner's tool ;  And the way-farer faints 'neath his lightened load -   Yet the river of God is full.  For us O Father from tropic seas   Let the clouds be filled that shed  Rough rains upon Andes' eastward slope-   Soft snows on Himàleh's head.  Freight for us as for others thy dark-winged fleet   That soon by the waters cool  We may say with gladness-"Our need was great   But the river of God was full !"     The Aurora Australis   A radiance in the midnight sky   No white moon gave nor yellow star;  We thought its red glow mounted high   Where fire and forest fought afar  Half questioning if the township blazed   Perchance beyond the boundary hill;  Then finding what it was we gazed   And wondered till we shivered chill.  And Fancy showed the sister-glow   Of our Aurora sending lines  Of lustre forth to tint the snow   That lodges in Norwegian pines. [10]   And South and North alternate swept   In vision past us to and fro;  While stealthy winds of midnight crept   About us whispering fast and low.  The North whose star burns steadily   High set in heaven long ago:  The South-new-risen on the sea-   A tremulous horizon-glow.  We mused "Shall there be gallant guests   Within our polar hermitage  As on the shore where Franklin rests   And others named in Glory's page?  And "Shall the light we look on blaze   Above such battles as have been  In other countries - other days -   The giants and the gods between ?"  Till one declared "We live to-night   In what shall be the poet's world:  The lands 'neath our Aurora's light   Are as the rocks the Titans hurled.  "From southern waters ice-enthralled   Year after year the rays that glance  Shall see the Desert shrink appalled   Before the City's swift advance.  "Shall see the precipice a stair-   The river as a road. And then  There shall be voices to declare   'This work was wrought by manly men.'"  And so our South all stately swept   In vision past us to and fro;  While stealthy winds of midnight crept   About us whispering fast and low.     [11] Wentworth   'Tis a new thing for Australia that the waters to her bear  One who seeks not strength of sunshine or the breath of healing air ;  One who reeks not of her riches nor remembers she is fair  One who land and houses henceforth holdeth not- for evermore;  Coming for such narrow dwelling as the dead need- to the shore  Named aforetime by the spirit to receive the garb it wore.  'Tis a strange thing for Australia that her name should be the name  Breathed ere death by one who loved her-claiming with a patriot's claim  Earth of her as chosen grave-place; rather than the lands of fame ;  Rather than the Sacred City where a sepulchre was sought  For the noblest hearts of Europe; rather than the Country fraught  With the incense of the altars whence our household gods were brought.  'Tis a proud thing for Australia while the funeral-prayers are said  To remember loving service frankly rendered by the dead;  How he strove amid the nations evermore to raise her head.  How in youth he sang her glory as it is and is to be  Called her "Empress"- while they held her yet as base-born over sea  Owned her "Mother"- when her children scarce were counted with the free!  How he claimed of King and Commons that his birthland should be used  As a daughter not an alien; till the boon so oft refused  Was withheld at last no longer; and the former bonds were loosed.  How the sears of serfdom faded. How he led within the light  Ofher fireside Earth's Immortals; chrism-touched from Olympus' height;  Whom gods loved; for whom the New Faith too has guest-rooms garnished bright.  [12] 'Tis a great thing for Australia; that her child of early years  Shared her path of desert-travel-bread of sorrow drink of tears-  Holding by her to these hill-tops whence her Promised Place appears.  Titles were not hers to offer as the meed of service done;  Rank of peer or badge of knighthood star or ribbon-she had none;  But she breathes a mother's blessing o'er the ashes of her soil.  6th May 1873.     Nearing Port.   A blue line to the westward that surely is not cloud  A green tinge in the waters; a clamorous bird-crowd;   Then far-off foamy edges and hill-tops timber fringed;   And perched aloft a light-house o'er grey cliffs golden-tinged.  O watchers leaning landward know ye of nothing more ?-   And hear ye but the sea-birds?- and see ye but the shore ?   Nay- look awhile- and listen who bids you welcome there;-  The great seas kiss her sandals the high stars gem her hair!  Behold her in the gateway! - high-held in either hand -  A blazing beacon- lighted to lead you to the land.  "Now welcome kindly welcome who come to me for cheer!  My forts may frown on others but ye have nought to fear.  The cannon's flash and thunder are all for joy to-day-   No murmurs meet your coming - none wish to bar your way."  O later called to labour shall we who toiled at morn  Remember as against you the heat and burthen borne?  No verity we shall not !- We pray the labourer's Lord  May give you after-comers a full day's full reward.  Now fear not fair-haired maiden for gladness waits thee here  As by thy father's fireside in bygone days and dear.  Thy troubled brow O matron beneath its silvering hair  Shall gain no fresher furrows shall lose its look of care;   No longer for thy household the winter need'st thou dread  Nor fearing for to-morrow shalt stint the children's bread.  [13] And thou a "mother's darling" on those young locks of thine  What midnight rains shall batter- what tropic suns shall shine!  Thy tender hands toil-hardened unwonted tools shall wield-  Shall fell the columned forest- shall till the furrowed field.  Yet when at England's fireside her olden tales are told  Perchance 'mid tearful silence one from the land of gold.  Shall tell a brave new story- of want and work and care-  Of trial and of triumph- to touch the coldest there!  Now enter ye a haven your fathers have not known;  Now dwell ye in a country that once was not your own.  Part of the New World's army-the pioneers- are ye;  For whom there waits ungathered the wealth of earth and sea!  No need of "fiery baptisrn"- no blood no tears to flow-  Ah legions of the Caesars had you but conquered so!  Ah Vikings in Valhalla - our fathers dead and gone -  Could you have made such landing such golden shores upon!     The Future Of Australia   Sing us the Land of the Southern Sea-   The land we have called our own;  Tell us what harvest there shall be   From the seed that we have sown.  We love the legends of olden days   The songs of the wind and wave;  And border ballads and minstrel lays   And the poems Shakespeare gave-  The fireside carols and battle rhymes   And romaunt of the knightly ring;  And the chant with hint of cathedral chimes-   Of him "made blind to sing."  The tears they tell of our brethren wept-   Their praise is our fathers' fame ;  They sing of the seas our navies swept-   Of the shrines that lent us flame.  [14] But the Past is past - with all its pride-   And its ways are not our ways.  We watch the flow of a fresher tide   And the dawn of newer days.  Sing us the Isle of the Southern Sea-   The land we have called our own;  Tell us what harvest there shall be   From the seed that we have sown.  I see the Child we are tending now   To a queenly stature grown ;  The jewels of empire on her brow   And the purple round her thrown.  She feeds her household plenteously   From the granaries we have filled;  Her vintage is gathered in with glee   From the fields our toil has tilled.  The Old World's outcast starvelings feast   Ungrudged- on her corn and wine;  The gleaners are welcome from west and east   Where her autumn sickles shine.  She clothes her people in silk and wool-   Whose warp and whose woof we spun;  And sons and daughters are hers to rule;   And of slaves- she has not one!  There are herds of hers on a thousand hills!   There are fleecy flocks untold ?  No foreign conquest her coffer fills-   She has streams whose sands are gold!  She shall not scramble for falling crowns-   No theft her soul shall soil-  So rich in rivers so dowered with downs-   She shall have no need of spoil !  But if- wronged or menaced- she shall stand   Where the battle-surges swell  Be a sword from Heaven in her swarthy hand   Like the sword of La Pucelle !  [15] If there be ever so base a foe   As to speak of a time-cleansed stain-  To say "She was cradled long ago   'Mid clank of the convict's chain."  Ask- as the taunt in his teeth is hurled-   "What lineage sprang SHE from  Who was Empress once of the Pagan World   And the Queen of Christendom?"  When the toilsome years of her youth are o'er   And her children round her throng ;  They shall learn from her of the sage's lore   And her lips shall teach them song.  Then of those in the dust who dwell   May there kindly mention be  When the birds that build in the branches tell   Of the planting of the tree.     Sonnets I. CHRISTMAS DAY.  O happy day with seven-fold blessings set   Amid thy hallowed hours - the memories dear   Of childhood's holidays - and household cheer   When friends and kin in loving circle met-  And youth's glad gatherings where the sands were wet  By waves that hurt not whilst the great cliffs near  With storms erewhile acquaint gave echo clear   Of voices gay and laughter gayer yet.   And graver thoughts and holier arise   Of how 'twixt that first eve and dawn of thine   The Star ascended which hath lit our skies   More than the sun himself ; and 'mid the kine   The Child was born whom shepherds and the wise;  Who came from far and angels called Divine.    [16] II. THE NEW YEAR.  With supple boughs and new-born leaflets crowned  Rejoicing in fresh verdure stands the tree   Though weather-scarred and scooped by fire may be  Its ancient trunk. So may our lives be found   (God leaving still our roots within His ground.)  Where gaps of loss and waste show brokenly   May each new year that comes to greet us see  Branches and foliage and flowers abound.   Where Fortune spoiling wayfarer hath left  Unsightly rents may garlands spring apace.   And if perchance some pitiless wind hath reft   Away what newer green shall ne'er replace   May heaven-light come the closer for the cleft   O'er which no tender fronds shall interlace.     Watch-Night.   Midnight- musical and splendid-   And the Old Year's life is ended-  And the New "born in the purple" babe yet crowned among us dwells ;   While Creation's welcome swells-   Starlight all the heavens pervading   And the whole world serenading   Him at birth with all its bells!  Round the cradle of the tender    Flows the music shines the splendor;  It is early yet for counsel -but bethink how Hermes gave-   (While the Myths were bright and brave)-   Thwarted Phoebus no small battle    Seeking back his lifted cattle-   Hour-old Hermes in his cave!  [17] New Year if thy youth should blind us   Thy swift feet perchance may find us  Sleeping in the dark- unguarded- as the sun-god's herds were found !   Lest unready on his round    We be hurried- World take warning    That already it is morning   And a giant is unbound!  Idle-handed yet but willing-   Let us ponder ere the filling  Of his empty eager fingers with our heedless hot behest.   Be our failures frank-confessed-   'Mid the gush of gladsome greeting   Requiem in our hearts repeating   For the years that died unblest.  How they came to us- so precious!-   How abode with us- so gracious!-  Blindly doing all our bidding ; stronger swifter than we thought.   Like the sprites by magic brought   Shaping dream to action for us;    Till we stood- beset with sorrows-   Wondering what ourselves had wrought!  Ere the tightening of the tether   Bind THIS YEAR and us together  Let us pause awhile and ponder-"Whither tend we side by side-   He who gallops- we who guide?-    Once we start- like lost LENORE    Sung in Bürger's ballad-story   Fast as ODIN'S Hunt- we ride!     [18] The Belated Swallow.   "And the birds of the air have nests."  Belated swallow whither flying?   The day is dead the light is dying    The night draws near:   Where is thy nest slow put together  Soft-lined with moss and downy feather  For shelter-place in stress of weather   And darkness drear?  Past past above the lighted city   Unknowing of my wondering pity    Seaward she flies.   Alas poor bird! what rude awaking   Has driven thee forth when storms are breaking  And frightened gulls the waves forsaking    With warning cries?  Alas my soul! while leaves are greenest  Thy heedless head thou fondly screenest   Beneath thy wing.   How bravely thou thy plumage wearest-  How lightly thou life's burthen bearest-  How happily thy home preparest-   In careless spring!  Yet Destiny the hour may bring thee   When none of all that sing can sing thee    To joy or rest!   When all the winds that blow shall blow thee;  And ere the floods shall overflow thee   The sunlight linger but to show thee    Thy shattered nest!     [19] No Message.   She heard the story of the end   Each message too she heard-  And there was one for every friend-   For her alone - no word.  And shall she bear a heavier heart   And deem his love was fled ;  Because his soul from earth could part   Leaving her name unsaid ?  No-no!-Though neither sign or sound   A parting thought expressed-  Not heedless passed the Homeward-Bound   Of her he loved the best.  Of vovage-perils bravely borne   He would not tell the tale;  Of shattered planks and canvas torn   And war with wind and gale.  He waited-till the light-house star   Should rise against the sky ;  And from the mainland looming far   The forest scents blow by.  He hoped to tell - assurance sweet!-   That pain and grief were o'er-  What blessings haste the soul to meet   Ere yet within the door.  Then one farewell he thought to speak   When all the rest were past-  As in the parting-hour we seek   The dearest hand the last.  And while for this delaying but   To see Heaven's opening Gate-  Lo- it received him- and was shut   Ere he could say "I wait."    [20] For Charles Dickens 1870  Above our dear Romancer's dust   Grief takes the place of praise  Because of sudden cypress thrust   Amid the old-earned bays.  Ah! when shall such another friend   By England's fireside sit.  To tell her of her faults yet blend   Sage words with kindly wit?  He brings no pageants of the past   To wile our hearts away;  But wins our love for those who cast   Their lot with ours to-day.  He gives us laughter glad and long;   He gives us tears as pure;  He shames as with the published wrong   We meted to the poor.  Through webs and dust and weather-stains   His sunlike genius paints  On life's transfigured chancel-panes   The angels and the saints.  He bade us to a lordly feast   And gave us of his best;  And vanished while the mirth increased   To be Another's guest.  For Death had summoned him in haste   Where hands of the Divine  Pour out for him who toiled to taste   The Paradisal wine.  Well God be thanked we did not wait   His greatness to discern  By funeral lights- in that Too- Late   When ashes fill the urn.     [21] Ave Caesar! Morituri te salutant. 1870  The coup d'etat is blotted out   With fresher blood with blacker crime-  As midnight horrors put to rout   The vaguer ghosts of twilight-time.  "Greeting from those who are to die!--   Hail Caesar!"- Draw the curtains round.  In vain !- That mournful mocking cry   Pierces the purple with its sound.  And they who raise it enter too-   With spectral looks and noiseless tread-  Unbidden hold their dread review   Beside the Emperor's very bed.  They sought in his deserted tent;   They found him in the German camp.  They tarry till the oil be spent   That feeds his life's poor flickering lamp.  The hope of France-the "gilded youth"-   So answering the trumpet's peal  As if revealing how in sooth   The gilding oft o'erlies the steel.  Soldiers Algeria's sun has spared ;   Heroes from Russia's fire and frost;  Grey veterans-scarred and scanty-haired-   Who wept at word of eagles lost.  Workmen who leave the rattling looms   To ply perforce a deadlier trade;  Students who quit their cloudy rooms   To step within a heavier shade.  Slow-breaking hearts that suffer long-   Blinded and chilled 'neath love's eclipse;  Singing no more the happy song   By horror frozen on their lips.  [22] From castled cities battle-proof   They press to the accusing ranks-  From cottage walls-from canvas roof-   Ere passing to the Stygian banks.  The thousands famine yet shall waste-   The holocaust disease will claim-  As to God's Judgment-Bar they haste   They gaze on him who is to blame.  "Hail Caesar!"-While Napoleon's star   From yon horizon beams "Farewell!"  Setting in exile-where afar   The children of St. Louis dwell.  Come from the past-once-dreaded ghosts   Whose number and whose names he knew!-  The future plants-at countless posts-   Sentries more terrible than you!     Napoleon III.   9th JANUARY 1873.  His silent spirit from the place   Slid forth unseen ; amid the throng  Of those whose love outlived disgrace-   Whose fealty to the last was strong.  'Midst homage 'neath Fate's adverse reign   Paid to the star shorn of its rays-  How passed the Exile ?- Lingering fain-   As never once in prouder days?  The Mother and the Child were there-   Discrowned and disinherited !-  No hand henceforth to right the heir:   New griefs to bow the golden head.  How passed Napoleon ?- Prizing more   Old fame in camp and council won -  Or fearless England's aegis o'er   The future of her ally's son?  [23] Gate of that World we know not yet-   What thou beheld'st who may proclaim!-  Were spirit-ranks in order set   Haunting thy portals- as he came-  With voices murmuring-"Our life torch-   Unspent-was quenched at his behest"?-  Did bygone princes fill the porch-   Bourbon and Valois and the rest?  How passed the soldier?- Cold and stern-   'Mid weaponless reproachful ghosts-  As when he led them forth to learn   How fight the hardy German hosts?  How passed the Emperor where THEY gazed-   Once wearers of the ancient crown?  As one who knew its lustre blazed   The brighter ere he laid it down ?  How passed he?- brighter grows the dreand   Past yon accusing spirit-band-  Beyond the scornful Old Regime-   Another group of watchers stand!-  Those hands are stretched to greet him now   That once Charlemagne's proud sceptre won;  While hastes Hortense with beaming brow-   No longer banished from her son!   WHERE THE DEAD MEN LIE  Out on the wastes of the Never Never - That's where the dead men lie!  There where the heat-waves dance for ever - That's where the dead men lie!  That's where the Earth's loved Sons are keeping  Endless tryst: not the west wind sweeping  Feverish pinions can wake their sleeping - Out where the dead men lie!  Where brown Summer and Death have mated - That's where the dead men die!  Loving with fiery lust unsated - That's where the dead men lie!  Out where the grinning skulls bleach whitely  Under the saltbush sparkling brightly;  Out where the wild dogs chorus nightly - That's where the dead men lie!  Deep in the yellow flowing river - That's where the dead men lie!  Under the banks where the shadows quiver - That's where the dead men lie!  Where the platypus twists and doubles Leaving a train of tiny bubbles; Rid at last of their earthly troubles - That's where the dead men lie!  East and backward pale faces turning - That's how the dead men lie!  Gaunt arms stretch with a voiceless yearning - That's how the dead men lie!  Oft in the fragrant bush of nooning Hearing again their mother's crooning Wrapt for aye in a dreamful swooning - That's how the dead men lie!  Only the hand of Night can free them - That's when the dead men fly!  Only the frightened cattle see them - See the dead men go by!  Cloven hoofs beating out one measure Bidding the stockmen know no leisure - That's when the dead men take their pleasure!  That's when the dead men fly! [99]  Ask too the never-sleeping drover:  He sees the dead pass by;  Hearing them call to their friends - the plover Hearing the dead men cry;  Seeing their faces stealing stealing Hearing their laughter pealing pealing Watching their grey forms wheeling wheeling Round where the cattle lie!  Strangled by thirst and fierce privation - That's how the dead men die!  Out on Moneygrub's farthest station - That's how the dead men die!  Hard-faced greybeards youngsters callow;  Some mounds cared for some left fallow;  Some deep down yet others shallow; Some having but the sky.  Moneygrub as he sips his claret  Looks with complacent eye  Down at his watch-chain eighteen carat - There in his club hard by:  Recks not that every link is stamped with  Names of the men whose limbs are cramped with  Too long lying in grave-mould cramped with Death where the dead men lie.  A unanimous meeting of shearers was held at Fern's hotel on Saturday night. [742] Mr. W. G. Spence occupied the chair. The secretary (Mr. Temple) reported that there were forty names on the roll and when all returns were in from the enrolling representatives he estimated that there would be considerably over 100 members. A strong feeling was entertained at the meeting and it was decided to form the union with the following objects: -   1. To protect the rights and privileges of shearers throughout Australasia. 2. To secure a fair rate of wages by the adoption of prices suitable to the circumstances of the several colonies and districts. 3. The adoption of just and equitable agreements between employers and employs. 4. To make such arrangements as will prevent undue loss of time in travelling to sheds and to ensure the carrying out of agreements made by shearers with sheep-owners.  5. To protect members against exorbitant prices for rations. The initiation fee was fixed at 2s. 6d. Mr. Temple was elected secretary and a provisional committee of nine members was elected with Mr. W. G. Spence as chairman. The committee meet to-night at Fern's hotel at eight o'clock to adopt rules &c.  The religious ceremony was very brief and simple. What may be called the festive part of the proceedings began at three o'clock.  Though few the decorations mostly in flowers and ferns were extremely chaste and looked exceedingly pretty but the pupils themselves all arrayed in white with rich cardinal satin sashes presented an appearance 'more exquisite still'. The pupils 200 or more a considerable per centage boarders were ranged on ascending rows at one side of the hall . . - The assemblage was a brilliant one in every respect the fair ladies in their elegant dresses lending that charming element of grace and beauty inseparable from a fashionable school celebration ..  Immediately on his Eminence [Cardinal Moran] taking his seat. . [an] ode [seven stanzas in length] was beautifully delivered the young lady to whom the task had been entrusted speaking the lines with a clear bright and penetrating voice which made every word ring through the large halls. [202] [...] and as the chorus was numerically and vocally strong and the solo voices excellent the success of the cantata was well nigh perfection. .. The programme was a model of refined taste; the pieces were few (eight in all exclusive of the ode and cantata) but every item was a 'gem of purest ray serene'. The instrumental music which consisted of performances on two four and five pianos was distinguished by exquisite delicacy of touch fine grace of expression and perfect technical accuracy. Of the five selections played all of them high class . - - the most brilliant were Suppe's ever charming 'Poet and Peasant' and a noble march - . - dashed off with great verve and spirit by ten clever hands. In what may be styled the literary line the recitation by three young ladies of an academic 'Discourse on Education' - - - was something very much out of the common  A scene from Moliere's 'Le Bourgeois gentilhomme' was given by two pupils in a surprisingly bright and intelligent manner - - - (During an address to Cardinal Moran by a senior pupil) six little fairies representing Erin and Australia advanced and drew aside the green and gold banner of the Hibernian Society which had been hiding from view a magnificent marble statue of the Apostle of Ireland - . . All were exquisitely dressed the representatives of Ireland being in green and gold with bright gold shamrocks glittering on the delicate silk and the thin web-like veils while the Australians were clad in native blue and pearl ornaments . . . It was a prettily picturesque tableau as the bright-faced little fairies in their glittering apparel stood at either side of the pale white marble image -  The presentation of the prizes which were numerous and valuable followed . . . The exhibition of work in the adjoining hail was the largest and best in the history of the convent - . - all the exhibits whether in needlework drawing painting or any other department of art being to a really good standard. Some of the crayon drawings were worthy of being hung in our national art gallery.  THE MYSTERY OF A HANSOM CAB.  CHAPTER I. WHAT THE ARGUS SAID. THE following report appeared in the Argus newspaper of Saturday the 28th July 18 -   "Truth is said to be stranger than fiction and certainly the extraordinary murder which took place in Melbourne on Thursday night or rather Friday morning goes a long way towards verifying this saying. A crime has been committed by an unknown assassin within a short distance of the principal streets of this great city and is surrounded by an inpenetrable mystery. Indeed from the nature of the crime itself the place where it was committed and the fact that the assassin has escaped without leaving a trace behind him it would seem as though the case itself had been taken bodily from one of Gaboreau's novels and that his famous detective Lecoq alone would be able to unravel it. The facts of the case are simply these: -   [14] "On the twenty-seventh day of July at the hour of twenty minutes to two o'clock in the morning a hansom cab drove up to the police station in Grey Street St. Kilda and the driver made the startling statement that his cab contained the body of a man who he had reason to believe had been murdered. "Being taken into the presence of the inspector the cabman who gave his name as Malcolm Royston related the following strange story: -   "At the hour of one o'clock in the morning he was driving down Collins Street East when as he was passing the Burke and Wills' monument he was hailed by a gentleman standing at the corner by the Scotch Church. He immediately drove up and saw that the gentleman who hailed him was supporting the deceased who appeared to be intoxicated. Both were in evening dress but the deceased had on no overcoat while the other wore a short covert coat of a light fawn colour which was open. As Royston drove up the gentleman in the light coat said 'Look here cabby here's some fellow awfully tight you'd better take him home!'   "Royston then asked him if the drunken man was his friend but this the other denied saying that he had just picked him up from the footpath and did not know him from Adam. At this moment the deceased turned his face up to the light of the lamp under which both were standing and the other seemed to recognise him for he recoiled a pace letting the drunken man fall in a heap on the pavement and gasping out 'You?' he turned on his heel and walked rapidly away down Russell Street in the direction of Bourke Street.   "Royston was staring after him and wondering at his strange conduct when he was recalled to himself by the voice of the deceased who had struggled to his feet and was holding on to the lamp-post swaying to and fro. 'I wan' g'ome' he said in a thick voice 'St. Kilda.' [15] He then tried to get into the cab but was too drunk to do so and finally sat down again on the pavement. Seeing this Royston got down and lifting him up helped him into the cab with some considerable difficulty. The deceased fell back into the cab and seemed to drop off to sleep; so after closing the door Royston turned to remount his driving-seat when he found the gentleman in the light coat whom he had seen holding up the deceased close to his elbow. Royston said 'Oh you've come back' and the other answered 'Yes I've changed my mind and will see him home.' As he said this he opened the door of the cab stepped in beside the deceased and told Royston to drive down to St. Kilda. Royston who was glad that the friend of the deceased had come to look after him drove as he had been directed but near the Church of England Grammar School on the St. Kilda Road the gentleman in the light coat called out to him to stop. He did so and the gentleman got out of the cab closing the door after him.   "'He won't let me take him home' he said 'so I'll just walk back to the city and you can drive him to St. Kilda.'   "'What street sir?' asked Royston.   "'Grey Street I fancy' said the other 'but my friend will direct you when you get to the Junction.' "'Ain't he too much on sir?' said Royston dubiously.   "'Oh no! I think he'll be able to tell you where he lives - it's Grey Street or Ackland Street I fancy. I don't know which.'   "He then opened the door of the cab and looked in. 'Good night old man' he said - the other apparently did not answer for the gentleman in the light coat shrugging his shoulders and muttering 'sulky brute' closed the door again. He then gave Royston half-a-sovereign lit a cigarette and after making a few remarks about the beauty of the night walked off quickly in the direction of Melbourne. Royston drove down to the Junction and having stopped there according to his instructions he asked his 'fare' several times where he was to drive him to. Receiving no response and thinking that the deceased was too drunk to answer he got down from his seat opened the door of the cab and found the deceased lying back in the corner with a handkerchief across his mouth. He put out his hand with the intention of rousing him thinking that he had gone to sleep. But on touching him the deceased fell forward and on examination to his horror he found that he was quite dead. Alarmed at what had taken place and suspecting the gentleman in the light coat he drove to the police station at St. Kilda and there made the above report. The body of the deceased was taken out of the cab and brought into the station a doctor being sent for at once. On his arrival however he found that life was quite extinct and also discovered that the handkerchief which was tied lightly over the mouth was saturated with chloroform. He had no hesitation in stating that from the way in which the handkerchief was placed and the presence of chloroform that a murder had been committed and from all appearances the deceased died easily and without a struggle. The deceased is a slender man of medium height with a dark complexion and is dressed in evening dress which will render identification difficult as it is a costume which has no distinctive mark to render it noticeable. There were no papers or cards found on the deceased from which his name could be discovered and the clothing was not marked in any way. The handkerchief however which was tied across his mouth was of white silk and marked in one of the corners with the letters 'O.W.' in red silk. The assassin of course may have used his own handkerchief to commit the crime so that if the initials are those of his name they may ultimately lead to his detection. There will be an inquest held on the body of the deceased this morning when no doubt some evidence may be elicited which may solve the mystery." [16] [17]   In Monday morning's issue of the Argus the following article appeared with reference to the matter: -   "The following additional evidence which has been obtained may throw some light on the mysterious murder in a hansom cab of which we gave a full description in Saturday's issue: - 'Another hansom cabman called at the police office and gave a clue which will no doubt prove of value to the detectives in their search for the murderer. He states that he was driving up the St. Kilda Road on Friday morning about halfpast one o'clock when he was hailed by a gentleman in a light coat who stepped into the cab and told him to drive to Powlett Street in East Melbourne. He did so and after paying him the gentleman got out at the corner of Wellington Parade and Powlett Street and walked slowly up Powlett Street while the cab drove back to town. Here all clue ends but there can be no doubt in the minds of our readers as to the identity of the man in the light coat who got out of Royston's cab on the St. Kilda Road with the one who entered the other cab and alighted therefrom at Powlett Street. There could have been no struggle as had any taken place the cabman Royston surely would have heard the noise. The supposition is therefore that the deceased was too drunk to make any resistance and that the other watching his opportunity placed the handkerchief saturated with chloroform over the mouth of his victim. Then after perhaps a few ineffectual struggles the latter would succumb to the effects of his inhalation. The man in the light coat judging from his conduct before getting into the cab appears to have known the deceased though the circumstance of his walking away on recognition and returning again shows that his attitude towards the deceased was not altogether a friendly one. [18]  "The difficulty is where to start from in the search after the author of what appears to be a deliberate murder as the deceased seems to be unknown and his presumed murderer has escaped. But it is impossible that the body can remain long without being identified by someone as though Melbourne is a large city yet it is neither Paris nor London where a man can disappear in a crowd and never be heard of again. The first thing to be done is to establish the identity of the deceased and then no doubt a clue will be obtained leading to the detection of the man in the light coat who appears to have been the perpetrator of the crime. It is of the utmost importance that the mystery in which the crime is shrouded should be cleared up not only in the interests of justice but also in those of the public - taking place as it did in a public conveyance and in the public street. To think that the author of such a crime is at present at large walking in our midst and perhaps preparing for the committal of another is enough to shake the strongest nerves. In one of Du Boisgobey's stories entitled 'An Omnibus Mystery' a murder closely resembling this tragedy takes place in an omnibus but we question if even that author would have been daring enough to write about a crime being committed in such an unlikely place as a hansom cab. Here is a great chance for some of our detectives to render themselves famous and we feel sure that they will do their utmost to trace the author of this cowardly and dastardly murder."     [19] CHAPTER II. THE EVIDENCE AT THE INQUEST.   At the inquest held on the body found in the hansom cab the following articles taken from the deceased were placed on the table: -   1. Two pounds ten shillings in gold and silver.   2. The white silk handkerchief which was saturated with chloroform and was found tied across the mouth of the deceased marked with the letters O.W. in red silk.   3. A cigarette case of Russian leather half filled with "Old Judge" cigarettes. 4. A left-hand white glove of kid - rather soiled - with black seams down the back. Samuel Gorby of the detective office was present in order to see if anything might be said by the witnesses likely to point to the cause or to the author of the crime.   The first witness called was Malcolm Royston in whose cab the crime had been committed. He told the same story as had already appeared in the Argus and the following facts were elicited by the Coroner: -   Q. Can you give a description of the gentleman in the light coat who was holding the deceased when you drove up?   A. I did not observe him very closely as my attention was taken up by the deceased; and besides the gentleman in the light coat was in the shadow. [20]  Q Describe him from what you saw of him.   A. He was fair I think because I could see his moustache rather tall and in evening dress with a light coat over it. I could not see his face very plainly as he wore a soft felt hat which was pulled down over his eyes.   Q. What kind of hat was it he wore - a wide-awake?   A. Yes. The brim was turned down and I could see only his mouth and moustache.   Q. What did he say when you asked him if he knew the deceased?   A. He said he didn't; that he had just picked him up.   Q. And afterwards he seemed to recognise him?   A. Yes. When the deceased looked up he said "You!" and let him fall on to the ground; then he walked away towards Bourke Street.   Q. Did he look back?   A. Not that I saw.   Q. How long were you looking after him?   A. About a minute.   Q. And when did you see him again?   A. After I put deceased into the cab I turned round and found him at my elbow.   Q. And what did he say?   A. I said "Oh! you've come back" and he said "Yes I've changed my mind and will see him home" and then he got into the cab and told me to drive to St. Kilda.   Q. He spoke then as if he knew the deceased?   A. Yes; I thought that he recognised him only when he looked up and perhaps having had a row with him walked away but thought he'd come back.   Q. Did you see him coming back?   [21] A. No; the first I saw of him was at my elbow when I turned.   Q. And when did he get out?   A. Just as I was turning down by the Grammar School on the St. Kilda Road.   Q. Did you hear any sounds of fighting or struggling in the cab during the drive?   A. No; the road was rather rough and the noise of the wheels going over the stones would have prevented my hearing anything.   Q. When the gentleman in the light coat got out did he appear disturbed?   A. No; he was perfectly calm.   Q. How could you tell that?   A. Because the moon had risen and I could see plainly.   Q. Did you see his face then?   A. No; his hat was pulled down over it. I only saw as much as I did when he entered the cab in Collins Street.   Q. Were his clothes torn or disarranged in any way?   A. No; the only difference I remarked in him was that his coat was buttoned.   Q. And was it open when he got in?   A. No; but it was when he was holding up the deceased.   Q. Then he buttoned it before he came back and got into the cab?   A. Yes. I suppose so.   Q. What did he say when he got out of the cab on the St. Kilda Road?   A. He said that the deceased would not let him take him home and that he would walk back to Melbourne.   Q. And you asked him where you were to drive the deceased to?   A. Yes; and he said that the deceased lived either in Grey Street or Ackland Street St. Kilda but that the deceased would direct me at the Junction. [22]  Q. Did you not think that the deceased was too drunk to direct you?   A. Yes I did; but his friend said that the sleep and the shaking of the cab would sober him a bit by the time I got to the Junction.   Q. The gentleman in the light coat apparently did not know where the deceased lived?   A. No; he said it was either in Ackland Street or Grey Street.   Q. Did you not think that curious?   A. No; I thought he might be a club friend of the deceased.   Q. For how long did the man in the light coat talk to you?   A. About five minutes.   Q. And during that time you heard no noise in the cab?   A. No; I thought the deceased had gone to sleep.   Q. And after the man in the light coat said "good-night" to the deceased what happened?   A. He lit a cigarette gave me a half-sovereign and walked off towards Melbourne.   Q. Did you observe if the gentleman in the light coat had his handkerchief with him?   A. Oh yes; because he dusted his boots with it. The road was very dusty.   Q. Did you notice any striking peculiarity about him?   A. Well no; except that he wore a diamond ring.   Q. What was there peculiar about that?   A. He wore it on the forefinger of the right hand and I never saw it that way before.   Q. When did you notice this?   A. When he was lighting his cigarette.   [23] Q. How often did you call to the deceased when you got to the Junction?   A. Three or four times. I then got down and found he was quite dead.   Q. How was he lying?   A. He was doubled up in the far corner of the cab very much in the same position as I left him when I put him in. His head was hanging on one side and there was a handkerchief across his mouth. When I touched him he fell into the other corner of the cab and then I found out he was dead. I immediately drove to the St. Kilda police station and told the police.   At the conclusion of Royston's evidence during which Gorby had been continually taking notes Robert Chinston was called. He deposed: -   I am a duly qualified medical practitioner residing in Collins Street East. I made a post-mortem examination of the body of the deceased on Friday.   Q. That was within a few hours of his death?   A. Yes judging from the position of the handkerchief and the presence of chloroform that the deceased had died from the effects of anaesthesia and knowing how rapidly the poison evaporates I made the examination at once.   Coroner: Go on sir.   Dr. Chinston: Externally the body was healthy-looking and well nourished. There were no marks of violence. The staining apparent at the back of the legs and trunk was due to post-mortem congestion. Internally the brain was hyperaemic and there was a considerable amount of congestion especially apparent in the superficial vessels. There was no brain disease. The lungs were healthy but slightly congested. On opening the thorax there was a faint spirituous odour discernible. The stomach contained about a pint of completely digested food. The heart was flaccid. The right-heart contained a considerable quantity of dark fluid blood. There was a tendency to fatty degeneration of that organ. [24]  I am of opinion that the deceased died from the inhalation of some such vapour as chloroform or methylene.   Q. You say there was a tendency to fatty degeneration of the heart? Would that have anything to do with the death of deceased?   A. Not of itself. But chloroform administered while the heart was in such a state would have a decided tendency to accelerate the fatal result. At the same time I may mention that the post-mortem signs of poisoning by chloroform are mostly negative.   Dr. Chinston was then permitted to retire and Clement Rankin another hansom cabman was called. He deposed: I am a cabman living in Collingwood and usually drive a hansom cab. I remember Thursday last. I had driven a party down to St. Kilda and was returning about half-past one o'clock. A short distance past the Grammar School I was hailed by a gentleman in a light coat; he was smoking a cigarette and told me to drive him to Powlett Street East Melbourne. I did so and he got out at the corner of Wellington Parade and Powlett Street. He paid me half-a-sovereign for my fare and then walked up Powlett Street while I drove back to town.   Q. What time was it when you stopped at Powlett Street?   A. Two o'clock exactly.   Q. How do you know?   A. Because it was a still night and I heard the Post Office clock strike two o'clock.   Q. Did you notice anything peculiar about the man in the light coat?   A. No! He looked just the same as anyone else. I thought he was some swell of the town out for a lark. His hat was pulled down over his eyes and I could not see his face. [25]  Q. Did you notice if he wore a ring?   A. Yes! I did. When he was handing me the half-sovereign I saw he had a diamond ring on the forefinger of his right hand.   Q. He did not say why he was on the St. Kilda Road at such an hour?   A. No! He did not.   Clement Rankin was then ordered to stand down and the Coroner then summed up in an address of half-an-hour's duration. There was he pointed out no doubt that the death of the deceased had resulted not from natural causes but from the effects of poisoning. Only slight evidence had been obtained up to the present time regarding the circumstances of the case but the only person who could be accused of committing the crime was the unknown man who entered the cab with the deceased on Friday morning at the corner of the Scotch Church near the Burke and Wills' monument. It had been proved that the deceased when he entered the cab was to all appearances in good health though in a state of intoxication and the fact that he was found by the cabman Royston after the man in the light coat had left the cab with a handkerchief saturated with chloroform tied over his mouth would seem to show that he had died through the inhalation of chloroform which had been deliberately administered. All the obtainable evidence in the case was circumstantial but nevertheless showed conclusively that a crime had been committed. Therefore as the circumstances of the case pointed to one conclusion the jury could not do otherwise than frame a verdict in accordance with that conclusion.   The jury retired at four o'clock and after an absence of a quarter of an hour returned with the following verdict: -   [26] "That the deceased whose name there is no evidence to determine died on the 27th day of July from the effects of poison namely chloroform feloniously administered by some person unknown; and the jury on their oaths say that the said unknown person feloniously wilfully and maliciously did murder the said deceased."     [27] CHAPTER III. ONE HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.   V.R. MURDER.  £100 REWARD.  "Whereas on Friday the 27th day of July the body of a man name unknown was found in a hansom cab. AND Whereas at an inquest held at St. Kilda on the 30th day of July a verdict of wilful murder against some person unknown was brought in by the jury. The deceased is of medium height with a dark complexion dark hair clean shaved has a mole on the left temple and was dressed in evening dress. Notice is hereby given that a reward of £100 will be paid by the Government for such information as will lead to the conviction of the murderer who is presumed to be a man who entered the hansom cab with the deceased at the corner of Collins and Russell Streets on the morning of the 27th day of July."    [28] CHAPTER IV. MR. GORBY MAKES A START.   "Well" said Mr. Gorby addressing his reflection in the looking-glass "I've been finding out things these last twenty years but this is a puzzler and no mistake."   Mr. Gorby was shaving and as was his usual custom conversed with his reflection. Being a detective and of an extremely reticent disposition he never talked outside about his business or made a confidant of anyone. When he did want to unbosom himself he retired to his bedroom and talked to his reflection in the mirror. This method of procedure he found to work capitally for it relieved his sometimes overburdened mind with absolute security to himself. Did not the barber of Midas when he found out what was under the royal crown of his master fret and chafe over his secret until one morning he stole to the reeds by the river and whispered "Midas has ass's ears?"   In the like manner Mr. Gorby felt a longing at times to give speech to his innermost secrets; and having no fancy for chattering to the air he made his mirror his confidant. So far it had never betrayed him while for the rest it joyed him to see his own jolly red face nodding gravely at him from out the shining surface like a mandarin.   [29] This morning the detective was unusually animated in his confidences to his mirror. At times too a puzzled expression would pass over his face. The hansom cab murder had been placed in his hands for solution and he was trying to think how he should make a beginning.   "Hang it" he said thoughtfully stropping his razor "a thing with an end must have a start and if I don't get the start how am I to get the end?"   As the mirror did not answer this question Mr. Gorby lathered his face and started shaving in a somewhat mechanical fashion for his thoughts were with the case and ran on in this manner: -   "Here's a man - well say a gentleman - who gets drunk and therefore don't know what he's up to. Another gent who is on the square comes up and sings out for a cab for him - first he says he don't know him and then he shows plainly he does - he walks away in a temper changes his mind comes back and gets into the cab after telling the cabby to drive down to St. Kilda. Then he polishes the drunk one off with chloroform gets out of the cab jumps into another and after getting out at Powlett Street vanishes - that's the riddle I've got to find out and I don't think the Sphinx ever had a harder one. There are three things to be discovered - First who is the dead man? Second what was he killed for? And third who did it? Once I get hold of the first the other two won't be very hard to find out for one can tell pretty well from a man's life whether it's to anyone's interest that he should be got off the books. The man that murdered that chap must have had some strong motive and I must find out what that motive was. Love? No it wasn't that - men in love don't go to such lengths in real life - they do in novels and plays but I've never seen it occurring in my experience. Robbery? [30] No there was plenty of money in his pocket. Revenge? Now really it might be that - it's a kind of thing that carries most people further than they want to go. There was no violence used for his clothes weren't torn so he must have been taken sudden and before he knew what the other chap was up to. By the way I don't think I examined his clothes sufficiently there might be something about them to give a clue; at any rate it's worth looking after so I'll start with his clothes."   So Mr. Gorby having dressed and breakfasted walked quickly to the police station where he asked for the clothes of the deceased to be shown to him. When he received them he retired into a corner and commenced an exhaustive examination of them.   There was nothing remarkable about the coat. It was merely a well-cut and well-made dress coat; so with a grunt of dissatisfaction Mr. Gorby threw it aside and picked up the waistcoat. Here he found something to interest him in the shape of a pocket made on the left-hand side and on the inside of the garment.   "Now what the deuce is this for?" said Mr. Gorby scratching his head; "it ain't usual for a dress waistcoat to have a pocket on its inside as I'm aware of; and" continued the detective greatly excited "this ain't tailor's work he did it himself and jolly badly he did it too. Now he must have taken the trouble to make this pocket himself so that no one else would know anything about it and it was made to carry something valuable - so valuable that he had to carry it with him even when he wore evening clothes. Ah! here's a tear on the side nearest the outside of the waistcoat; something has been pulled out roughly. I begin to see now. The dead man possessed something which the other man wanted and which he knew the dead one carried about with him. He sees him drunk gets into the cab with him and tries to get what he wants. The dead man resists upon which the other kills him by means of the chloroform which he had with him and being afraid that the Gab will stop and he will be found out snatches what he wants out of the pocket so quickly that he tears the waistcoat and then makes off. That's clear enough but the question is What was it he wanted? A case with jewels? No! It could not have been anything so bulky or the dead man would never have carried it about inside his waistcoat. It was something that which could easily lie in the pocket - a paper - some valuable paper which the assassin wanted and for which he killed the other. "This is all very well" said Mr. Gorby throwing down the waistcoat and rising. "I have found number two before number one. The first question is: Who is the murdered man. [31]  The Perversity Of Human Nature.  [1] Chapter I. Amongst the hundreds and thousands of pretty and cosy little villa houses that cluster round our Melbourne city The Nest at St. Kilda is one that seldom escapes the notice of the passer-by. It stands a little back from the street at the top of a sloping lawn a one storied broad verandahed rose embowered bungalow - as charming a nest as you would wish to see. Jupiter Pluvius twirls upon the velvet grass and the gorgeous flower borders making a delicate liquid tinkle and patter with its spreading showers. The gravel path sweeping in the form of a horse shoe from the front gate has never a weed on its smooth face. The shrubs are glossy and bushy; the fern trees thrive as in their native forests; the dark pines that line the enclosure and guard the little dwelling and its exquisite garden from wind and dust and prying eyes are dense and shapely without a ragged branch anywhere. And the house itself retiring under its spreading eaves is simply perfection in the finish of its simple appointments and the almost glittering cleanliness of every part of it. [2]  The inside matches the outside. Persian carpets on the dark floors; Liberty stuffs at the windows; Morris chintzes on the chairs and sofas; good though not rare pictures on the walls which are tinted on purpose to suit them; low book cases running like dados round the rooms filled with books to read and not to look at and bearing on the top shelf dainty bric-a-brac of which every piece has been selected on its own merits and not at the command of a vulgar fashion. A thoroughly refined and harmonious house in short; such a house as could only belong to cultivated and enlightened people.   Three years ago - and it was then very much as it is now - these people were newly settled in it. They were two only - a young Australian husband and his English wife to whom he had been married about eighteen months. He had met her at the Grosvenor Gallery a bright girl fresh from Girton when he was himself enjoying a six months' trip to Europe. He was then as now partner in a flourishing firm of stock and station agents having offices in Collins-street west - Brown Brown and Ponsonby. He was the second Brown - Brown the younger; the old one was his uncle. Until the memorable occasion when he met his wife he had never travelled beyond the bounds of his native continent; and he went to England with the conviction that he knew as much as the old country could teach him and a little more - except on one point. He was prepared to own and subsequently did own that England could furnish more and better pictures than all he had seen in Australia. It was his one artistic taste. Goodness knows how he came by it but there it was. From a child he had been fond of drawing and fond of pictures - of which naturally he considered himself a connoisseur - after his return from Europe an infallible judge.   So he went to the Grosvenor Gallery. And so (for she was fond of pictures too) he met Miss Alexandra Hay. She was an orphan of five and twenty independent of guardians and interfering relatives entirely mistress of herself and of a safe little income of £200 a year. She lived - or had been living - with a fellow Girtonian in aesthetically furnished lodgings in Whitechapel and made "slumming" her profession - scorning delights (except such as rush bottomed chairs and high art cups and saucers) and living laborious days enjoying the very life for which if she had not had it she would have sighed and aspired as the highest and most satisfying that could fall to the lot of woman. But at the time of this visit to the Grosvenor - for the East-End missionaries took their little artistic diversions in the West End occasionally as a duty to themselves and to everybody - she was very unhappy. She and her dearest friend had quarrelled irrevocably (I am sorry to say they often did it) and life that had been so rich and full was now utterly blank and desolate. They had gone the length of selling their furniture and dividing the proceeds; and Alexandra Hay was alone in the world. A mutual acquaintance introduced Robert Brown to her at this juncture - he was a fine figure of a man tall broad shouldered blue-eyed with a handsome red beard - and she took his arm to walk through the crowd and look at the pictures with a sense that after all it was possible that men were more generous more constant and more to be depended on than women. But how she came to marry him and that within six weeks of their first meeting she declares to this very day that she never knew. My own notion is that she did it because she thought it would be nice when her dear friend came to her to "make it up" and beg for a resumption of the old life to be able to say "It is too late now." Or because the suddenness and strikingness of the enterprise was irresistible to her impulsive nature and dramatic imagination. But how can I tell? It is one of those things that no one is expected to understand. They were both lonely and on the look out for sympathy; and Robert Brown criticising the Grosvenor Gallery pictures showed to the best advantage. She thought him a most cultivated person with the true artist's soul. And time was short. Robert's passage was taken and she had to make up her mind quickly. There were no parents to consult and of course she with her training had nothing but scorn for conventional practices. So in six weeks they became man and wife walking out to be married in their everyday clothes and afterwards lunching tête-a-tête at an hotel. And thereafter they lived together as she often bitterly expressed it like a pair of convicts dragging their connecting leg-irons between them and feeling the weight and pain of them at every step.   When they arrived in Australia they went to live in the Riverina where Robert Brown had charge of a branch office and a good deal of country business. Here young Mrs. Brown cut off from every interest she had in the world and disappointed in her marriage moped and moped until she nearly went melancholy mad. At the end of the first year her nervous state was such that the doctors ordered her change of scene and a change of life - declared that it was absolutely necessary to her mental health that she should have more cheerful surroundings. Thereupon her husband anxious to do his best for her exchanged posts with Mr. Ponsonby and transferred himself to the office in town. And they went to live at The Nest - that abode of love and peace as it appeared to the uninitiated spectator out of doors - and made an attempt to start afresh and turn over a new leaf.   At St. Kilda Mrs. Brown grew stronger and for a little time she was happier - for just so long as she was occupied in the fitting up of her new house and making it pretty according to her own ideas. When that was done and she had nothing more to do with her husband at business all day and often at his club at night and herself refusing to associate with the intellectually benighted persons amongst whom she had come to dwell her solitude was as complete and depressing as before and she became more miserable and more melancholy than ever.   On the evening of Christmas day three years ago she and her husband sat in their charming drawingroom together. Christmas in these parts is seldom a complete success under the most favorable conditions; to them as a reason of domestic festivity it was the most dismal failure imaginable and both were longing for the interminable hours to pass and bring the common days again. Robert sat in one of the luxurious Morris chairs sorely tempted to go away and smoke off the effects of the plum pudding but feeling that it would be an impropriety to do so on such an occasion which demanded that the head of the household should devote himself to his family; and between the little dozes into which he lapsed at intervals he gazed at his wife - who seemed for her part unconscious of his existence. She sat by an open window leaning an elbow on the sill and her cheek in her hand and stared at the sky with eyes that evidently saw nothing. They were very pretty sad dark eyes with a kind of starry brilliance in them - strictly speaking the only beauty of her face which was nevertheless intelligent and interesting. She was picturesquely dressed in sage-tinted Liberty silk draped Greek fashion in mysterious loose folds from her shoulders to her feet and slightly held to her slender figure with a silk cord tasselled at the ends. The Philistines of the tight waists whose acquaintance she would not condescend to called her Mrs. Cimabue Brown and scoffed at her eccentric garments of which they caught a glimpse occasionally; but all the same she contrived to look very graceful in them. Her husband thought so to-night as he studied her - sitting in the dying daylight - from his chair in the shadow of the room. She had been his choice and he still believed in her as a most elegant and superior woman bitterly as she had disappointed him.   "Lexie" he said breaking a long silence and speaking kindly and cheeringly "don't look so utterly miserable."   She did not move her position nor did her face lighten. "You needn't look at me" she said indifferently. He felt repulsed but made no verbal retort. With an impatient ostentatious sigh he kicked away a footstool rose and taking a match box from his pocket proceeded to light the gas under half a dozen tinted shades.   "It's a nice sort of Christmas" he grumbled presently beginning to perambulate the room with his hands behind him. "A nice sort of home - after a man has done his best to make his wife comfortable and happy." She took no notice of this remark and he added sharply "If you don't shut that window you'll have the mosquitoes in."   She shut the window with an exasperating air of humble obedience and turned into the room to seek another seat. As the soft pink light fell upon her face and he saw how pale and worn it looked another twinge of uxorious pity visited him.   "I don't mean to find fault with you my dear. But I wish you had a more occupied life and enjoyed your home and did more to make yourself and me happy. You have everything that heart can wish - nothing to do but to amuse yourself - and a good husband though I say it that shouldn't. It isn't every man that would make the sacrifices I have done to give his wife pleasure."   "What sacrifices?"   "Coming to town when I was doing so well where I was."   "I am very sorry you came if it involved a sacrifice. I am very sorry" - here her voice trembled - "that I ever came across your path to be so much trouble to you."   "Now Lexie don't begin that."   "It was the most unlucky day in my whole life - the day that I married you" she declared recklessly.   "Well at any rate you did it of your own accord. You can't say I forced you" said Robert with a grim smile.   "Are you going to insult me by implying that I threw myself at your head - that I ran after you?" she demanded her woman's soul burning within her.   His grim smile relaxed and there was a twinkle in his blue eyes. "Like Barkis you were willin' Lexie. You were very willin' my dear. You know you were so don't pretend you weren't."   For a moment her rage and indignation at this deadly and unexpected outrage deprived her of the power of speech. She looked at him with her dark eyes blazing her delicate nostrils quivering her lips compressed her hands clenched. Then she broke out wildly - addressing the walls and furniture - "O it serves me right! It richly serves me right! I have brought it upon myself - I ought to have known better than to expose myself to the indignities and degradations of a married woman's lot! I ought to have listened to Emily Price! - she warned me of what I was doing and how bitterly I should repent it when it was too late!" &c. &c. &c. She raved with fluency and bitterness for full five minutes and her husband only interrupted her once.   "It's all very well to talk about your dear Emily Price now; you know that when you were with her you quarrelled like cat and dog" said he. "You couldn't even live under the same roof."   "We never quarrelled" said Lexie solemnly. "We did not always agree on the surface but at bottom we understood each other thoroughly. We had one heart and mind in everything." And then she went off into harrowing reminiscences of her Girton and Whitechapel life with Emily contrasting the noble freedom of that happy time with the present ignominious bondage. "I only wish" she concluded fervently "that I were back in that old life now!"   "I'm sure I wish you were" said Robert for his patience was exhausted. It was the first time he had expressed himself in those terms and after he had done so he was rather sorry for it. Lexie looked as if he had struck her; she quite staggered as she stood. She thought nothing of telling him that she wished herself away from him; but that he should wish himself away from her was quite a different matter. She sat down silently laid her arms upon a little table near and her face in her arms and broke into a tempest of hysterical tears and sobs. She felt herself utterly desolate and abandoned now.   Robert let her cry for a little for he was angry and he thought she deserved no pity. Then he reminded himself that she was only a woman and that her health was delicate and made an attempt at consolation.   "You're just moped with having nothing to do" said he. "Why don't you get some needlework? Other women occupy themselves embroidering things and so on but I never see you with a needle in your hand. Get some crewel work - or knit me some socks; that'll be better for you than always reading and thinking and idling about. You've no idea how charming a woman looks in a man's eyes when she's doing those feminine kind o' things - sitting by her fireside and stitching away ---"   He laid his hand on her shoulder as he spoke meaning the gesture for a caress. But she snatched herself from it with a shudder as if it had been a toad or a snake. "O let me alone!" she cried sharply. "Don't speak to me! Don't touch me!"   He drew himself up straight and then turned away deeply offended. "All right" he retorted roughly "please yourself; I'll not meddle with you. You may go to the devil for what I care; I'm sick and tired of your tantrums."   And with that he went off to bed banging the doors behind him.     Chapter II. Like many another woman Lexie dearly loved a grievance though she would never have forgiven the frank friend who dared to tell her so. And now she had one of sufficient importance to satisfy her. Robert had told her he wished she was gone - had called her abusive names sworn at her - treated her in short as no woman who respected herself could submit to be treated. Therefore she determined not to speak to him again until he had suitably apologised and nursed vague but desperate plans for the vindication of her honor and dignity.   Robert for his part thought it was high time for a husband of spirit to put his foot down. He had borne with her tantrums because she was delicate and "only a woman" until he had completely spoilt her. Therefore he resolved that until she made amends for her conduct he would withhold his pardon and favor. And so it came to pass that for many days they were not on speaking terms except at meal times when the servants were in the room. Robert went off to his business after breakfast returned to dinner went off again to spend the evening at his club; and when he came home at night and found his wife gone to bed and her door locked retired peaceably to rest in his dressing room. And Lexie her sense of injury deepening hour by hour with the continuance of this state of things her nerves overwrought with the long strain upon them became nearly frantic. In her husband's presence pride kept her severely calm and composed; but when he was out of the house or she could hear him snoring in his bachelor bed on the other side of the locked door as if nothing were the matter she cried and wrung her hands and paced wildly about the floor and declared that she could not and would not stand it.   Since she had come to St. Kilda her favorite and only amusement had been to look at the sea and the ships. In the hottest weather she would walk along the beach till she found a sufficiently lonely spot and there sit down on a sand hummock or a bit of driftwood clasp her hands round her knees and stare from under her lowered hat brim at the twinkling water and the arriving and departing vessels for hours together. After dinner when her husband was not at home she would put a light wrap over her evening dress and walk down to the pier and there sit till bed time without stirring wistfully gazing at the clustering lights of Williamstown and Sandridge - the riding lights of the great ships resting in port between their ocean voyages. Frequently she went to the piers where those ships were berthed to have a nearer look at them - wandering up and down amongst the trucks and the smoke and the clatter and watching the loading and unloading of cargo going on busily on both sides - to the surprise and curiosity of idle sailors and sweating stevedores who could not make out what a lady all by herself could be wanting there. What she really wanted was to look at the fabric and the faces that had come direct from England and were going back there again - to get in fact as near to England itself as possible. She looked back to England now as the true believer looks forward to Heaven. There was the home of the elect - the city of satisfied desires - the haven where she would be.   One day when loitering on the pier at Sandridge she was astonished to hear her name called.   "Miss Hay - ahem! - Mrs. Brown - Lexie!"   It was the voice of a young sailor lad who leaned over the poop railing of a big clipper that she was slowly passing her attention at the moment being absorbed by a still bigger steamer on the other side. With a start she looked up and recognised Joe Price - none other than her darling Emily's own cousin. She had known of his going to sea but had not known in what direction - in fact had not cared. In those old days boys were of no interest to her whatever. Now she hurried to meet him as he ran down the gangway and nearly threw herself into his arms.   "Joe! Joe!" she cried excitedly. "My dear dear boy how did you come here? Is this your ship? Oh how glad I am to meet you again! And when did you see them last? How did you leave Emily? Oh do tell me all about everything!"   "Come up on deck" said Joe. And up on deck they went accordingly. There was an awning over the poop and the captain's wicker chair stood there. "Sit here" said Joe "and I'll tell them to get you some lemonade or something." He was third mate it appeared and in charge of the ship. She was one of the few passenger sailing ships left on the line but there were no passengers on her now and for a wonder no cargo going in or out. It was very peaceful in contrast with the racket of the pier. Lexie sat down in the captain's chair refreshed herself with lemonade and had a long talk with her new found friend. [3]  "No" said Joe. "She never seemed to care for anybody else after you were gone. She tried living with Miss Fothergill but that didn't answer at all. They were ready to tear each other's hair off in a week."   "Bless her!" ejaculated Lexie fervently with tears in her eyes.   "So she gave up slumming and went home and took to painting. She's regularly studying at it now - Royal Academy and all that sort of thing you know. She's going to be a great gun someday like Mrs. Butler and the Montalbas - at least so she says. For my part I wish she'd take pattern by you and get married and be comfortable like other people."   "Oh don't wish anything so cruel!" cried Lexie with a tragical air. "Let her be as she is - free and happy and using all her faculties. Believe me she is far better off than she has any idea of."   Joe gave her a long look feeling rather as if he had put his foot in it and hastened to change the conversation. But Mrs. Brown did not want to talk upon the new topic; she went back to the old one lovingly.   "How well I remember the first day we became friends! It was at Girton soon after I went there - dear Girton! I had to go out one afternoon and it was cold and I wanted my fire kept in; so I put a notice on my door asking anyone who happened to pass to look in and see to it; and when I returned there was Emily on her knees blowing it up. She was wearing a terra-cotta cashmere - I can see it now! And then I put the kettle on and we had tea together and a long long talk. That was the beginning and from that day to this" said Lexie without a falter or a blush "there has never been a cloud between us."   Joe rounded his mouth to whistle but forbore. "You certainly seemed to suit each other down to the ground" he said gravely. "She always said you were the only real friend she ever had."   "I was - I was" said Lexie clasping her hands in her lap. "And she was my only one. Oh if I could only be with her now - if we could only work together as we used to do!"   "Oh well" said Joe encouragingly "I suppose you will be coming home some day. Then you can do things."   "Ah! what wouldn't I give!"   "You must talk to Mr. Brown. Tell him a change would do him good. Nothing like the sea you know. You ought to come along with us."   "When are you leaving?"   "In about a month I suppose. Come and have a look round." And he jumped up from the flag box on which he had been sitting. He was proud of his ship of course though in the matter of art and luxury she was not much to boast of in comparison with the great steam vessels which had rendered her nearly obsolete; and he showed his guest over her with a complacent and superior air. "Ever so much better than the mail boats you know. No noise no vibration no coal dust no smells fit to knock you backwards no Red Sea no dressing up and bothering yourself. [4] There's no romance on those modern steamers - you might as well be in an hotel at once."   Lexie let him ramble on and said nothing in reply. He thought it was because she was so impressed and interested that she was so silent. But in point of fact she did not take in a word that he was saying. The great enterprise of her life was just then shaping itself in her brain.   "I will go" she was thinking to herself - the thought had been in her mind for days but only now presented itself as a practicable idea. "I will run away to England and to Emily - I will get off secretly so that Robert shall not find it out and stop me. He wants to get rid of me - he said so. He will be happy when I am gone." (This was what she persuaded herself to be the case but what she knew in her inmost heart was that he would be miserable when she was gone; and therein lay the great merit of the scheme.)   "I am afraid you are not well" Joe said at last when he saw that she was really inattentive and looked perturbed and nervous.   "Yes I am" she replied mouth and hands trembling. "But I must be going now. I have a great deal to do."   He protested against this sudden hurry and begged her to wait for lunch which would be ready in half an hour; but she would not stay another minute. So he escorted her down the gang way and they said good-bye and she hastened up the pier to the station without having made any appointment for seeing him again. He looked after her with a gloomy face wondering why she hadn't asked him to her house when she must have known that he had no other friend in Melbourne where he was going to kick his heels for a month or more. "She always was a queer girl" he soliloquised as he returned to the deck. "And I fancy she's got a brute of a husband by the manner of her. She was afraid to stay any longer for fear he'd make a row."     Chapter III. Lexie went home in a fever of excitement. Minute by minute her desperate plan grew more distinct and looked more reasonable and more attractive. Minute by minute her determination to carry it out increased. It was full of difficulties but the difficulties disappeared when she strenuously thought them out. She had the woman's quickness of imagination and readiness of resource. By the time she reached home the whole thing was arranged in her mind down to the most trifling detail. It was like an inspiration. It would set Robert free who openly wished himself rid of her; and (only of course she didn't consider that) it would give her the most dramatic and magnificent revenge. "I will do it" she said setting her teeth. And do it she did.   When she reached The Nest hot dusty and tired though not conscious that she was tired she found her lunch ready for her in the cool and pretty diningroom. She sat down and tried to eat because the housemaid was there to wait upon her but she had no appetite for food. She messed a plate or two drank two tumblers of iced water and then went to her bedroom taking the morning newspaper with her. Locking the door she sat down to read the shipping advertisements and found that a mail steamer was to leave in two days. This was the ship she decided to go by for she felt that if the thing was to be done it must be done quickly before her courage could cool. Then she thought of her luggage. What should she take? She must not be seen packing and making arrangements nor carrying boxes from the house. And yet she must have clothes and necessaries. Here was the chief difficulty of her undertaking.   She called for a cup of tea and while it was being prepared went into the boxroom to look at the chests and portmanteaus stowed there to see if there was anything she could make use of. It was a vain search as she knew it would be. On every article hers as well as his "Robert Brown" or "R.B." was printed in staring letters (he had had it done when they were married without asking her leave); and she did not mean to take her passage under that name. Besides she did not want to carry off anything that would be missed. Robert would eventually guess where she was gone and probably would follow to fetch her back; but considering what a husband's powers were and that the telegraph and police might be used to supplement them it was necessary to the success of her scheme that she should get as long a start as possible. She looked at the rows of lettered trunks with a curling lip. "A married woman has not even a name of her own" she said to herself bitterly. "The husband swallows us up. We have no longer any individuality whatever."   Then she returned to her bedroom and Ellen brought her tea. Her servants were excellent of their kind but she had only two in the house cook and housemaid. A boy came for an hour or two in the early morning and a gardener twice a week. This was not the gardener's day fortunately. Lexie looked at her watch and saw that it was past two.   "Ellen" she said carelessly "when you have cleared away the lunch things you may go and see your mother if you like."   The facts which have been placed beyond a doubt by the analysis of the statistics of the two countries which is now brought to a conclusion may be summarised thus: -   1. That New South Wales having had 50 years the start of Victoria four times the territory payable coal fields and all the other advantages enumerated in the first of these articles with its so-called perfect fiscal policy thrown in is to-day far behind Victoria industrially and financially measured either by rate of progress or actual results.  2. That while New South Wales shows larger results gauged by the bare figures in the matter of foreign trade the figures are themselves not to be depended upon and even if they be absolutely correct the trade they represent is very largely made up of dealings for commissions in the products of other countries rather than a legitimate trade in its own products.  3. That while our external trade is somewhat smaller than that of New South Wales it is of a healthier and more profitable character and every year increasingly so as the finished products of our factories are increasingly taking the place of raw material in our exports.  4. That eliminating the one product wool from the exports of both countries as an article unaffected by either fiscal policy our exports of all other products exceed those of New South Wales and that the portion of them represented by manufactured goods is with us increasing while with New South Wales it is decreasing.  5. That in the matter of intercolonial trade we have distanced our rival entirely so much so that in the markets of New South Wales itself the greatest demand is found for our manufactured and other products.  6. That as regards the progress even of the pastoral industry as gauged by the value of stock Victoria has had far and away the best of the competition during the past decade.  7. That in the department of Agriculture New South Wales is so far behind as to make the idea even of a comparison absurd. [265]  8. That as regards the export of agricultural products our neighbour has not yet reached the stage of self dependence for its food. supply while Victoria has for years past had a large surplus to sell abroad.  9. That as a manufacturing country New South Wales is hopelessly in the rear; that while it makes a hard struggle to keep in sight even on paper by claiming to have thousands more factories than Victoria has it is of no avail; for the factories so called are chiefly repairing workshops producing little or nothing as the imports of New South Wales show that the class of goods they are supposed to make have to be almost entirely supplied from abroad.  10. That on the other hand our factories are what they claim to be; that they are constantly increasing in numbers but more particularly in size and importance as shown by the enormous growth in the value of their plant machinery land and buildings and their output of finished products.  11. That whatever progress has been made by New South Wales during the past 20 years is largely due to two causes altogether apart from its fiscal policy; the one being the development of its pastoral industry by Victorian capital and energy and the other being a reckless and lavish expenditure of money by the Government chiefly obtained from the sale of Crown lands the people's' patrimony.  12. That bringing the whole facts of both cases and the whole circumstances of both countries to the test of actual results as proved by the accumulations of wealth in each the outcome is so immensely in favor of Victoria and its protective policy as to make any further comment or discussion superfluous.  Judged by these practical results therefore direct and indirect Victoria and the policy of protection come triumphantly through the ordeal and New South Wales adds another to the many illustrations of the national folly of being guided by "theorists" and the danger of leaving the shaping of a country's career to those sections of its community who having no ideas of their own are content to follow such monitors.  PASTORAL INDUSTRY  Now let us took at the pastoral industry. Since 1875 the number of sheep in New South Wales has increased by 12.5 millions and the number in Victoria has decreased by one million. On the other hand we have 14 million less cattle and Victoria has a quarter of a million more. On the basis of these figures and by running in some gain in horses and pigs our friend finds himself able to declare that "at the present rate of progress on this side of the Murray and retrogression on the other side the difference now existing will before many years be removed." Here again the genius of the novelist has been well used. The idea of "retrogression" in the position of the pastoral industry in this colony has not yet been entertained by us nor have we contemplated the likelihood of Victoria occupying as important a position as our own in this line but our friend is quite equal to the call upon his ingenuity. He says in effect "Look here I reckon that one bullock is worth thirteen sheep; therefore Miss New South Wales if you have increased your stock of sheep by 124 millions you are worse off because you possess 14 millions less of cattle." One is inclined to quote Lord Dundreary and say that this is a thing "no fellah can understand." In 1885 our flocks and herds had suffered much by drought and even then their value was many millions ahead of the Victorians and all authorities on the subject look for a very great increase in the pastoral industry in this colony within two or three years. During the period 1875 to 1885 both years inclusive we exported chiefly to Victoria and Queensland sheep and cattle to the value of 4.5 millions in excess of the value of similar imports - a thing to be remembered in connection with our pastoral industry. We are told that the value of stock in Victoria is 10.5 millions against only 19 millions here but I cannot accept the valuations of our friend. If I take the valuation of Mr. Bruce the inspector of stock instead of 19 millions our figures would be 21 millions; if I take that given me by Mr. Abbot of Messrs. Mort & Co. Limited it would be 22 millions. I venture to think none but a novelist would suggest the possibility of Victoria occupying as important a position as New South Wales in the pastoral industry.  Our friend now travels a little further and says: "There are a variety of minor industries which with us as the figures will show have been built up by our policy while they have almost died out in New South Wales." He means "died out" as far as export trade is concerned. Now what are these industries? Cheese bacon and hams and candles are the principal. I think you will agree with me that the novelist of the Age in the expressive language of Artemus Ward has here made a capital "goak" for he points the finger of scorn at certain industries as freetrade failures which are really industries that we have permitted to obtain whatever blessings protection can bestow. [267]    MANUFACTURES  Following my leader it is now my duty to draw your attention to the manufacturing industries of the two colonies. That the Freetrade Association should have been so rash as to lay profane hands on Victorian manufactures is bitterly resented. Our friend speaks of "this precious association" and says that "the ignorance of the people (of New South Wales) is so far imposed upon and we may add relied upon that they are told freetrade New South Wales is overtaking protected Victoria in manufacturing industry every year." So greatly has this assertion affected the Age writer that nothing less than a very big word will suffice to relieve his feelings so we are told that it is "entirely Munchausenish" and it takes quite a good portion of a "yard of talk" before his feathers become sufficiently smoothed to enable him to take hold of the subject itself. "Taking" says our friend "such material as is at our disposal the result will leave no doubt as to the relative position of the two countries." Then he dips into figures and he comes to the conclusion that there is a conspiracy in New South Wales which aims to hide from the world the deplorable state of our manufacturing industry. He does not use the word conspiracy but he says that "it is clear that the authorities of New South Wales are determined that nothing shall be done so far as they are concerned to furnish reliable data upon which to base a comparison" in manufacturing industry. Now what is the ground on which this pleasant charge of deliberately hiding the truth is fixed? It is because the return of works and manufactories has been made up in a most stupid manner - and probably no man in the colony has so severely condemned it as myself - the return has hitherto been made to include all the agricultural machines in use in the colony which of course is ridiculous since a machine cannot be called a manufactory. But as a supplementary return is also given from which we can gather the exact number of "manufactories works &c" without the addition of these machines I rather fear that some doubt attaches to the honesty of the indignation of our good friend and that he does not like to find that after all in 1885 there were 3463 manufactories in New South Wales against only 2828 in Victoria. Well all I can say is that a result such as this is very much what freetraders would expect. We always say that protection promotes monopoly. Will anyone dare to tell me that in a colony where a man has to pay 25 per cent. more for machinery than it is worth that it is as easy for him to start a factory as in a colony where freetrade allows every beginner to buy his machinery at the lowest price at which it is obtainable? [268] As the capital of the majority of people is small the proportion of people who can find money to pay for duties as well as for material cannot be SO large in Victoria as the proportion of people in New South Wales who have to pay for material only. Therefore I accept the return as satisfactory and as proving yet again the benefits of freetrade. There are one or two facts in connection with manufactories in New South Wales that ought to be peculiarly gratifying to a democratic community. It is the laudable ambition of workmen to become masters and have business of their own and it will be seen by the figures that have been given as well as by the diagram that in New South Wales there are eight masters to every hundred employés whereas the number is only six in Victoria. In other words the prospects of a man becoming his own master are one-third or thirty-three per cent greater in the freetrade than in the protectionist colony. The reason of this seems to be obvious; it results from the greater cheapness of plant and machinery already referred to and of course also to the greater cheapness of the materials for manufacturing. It is to be noted further that during the last ten years for every five manufactories or works opened in Victoria more than twelve have been opened in New South Wales.  The novelist of the Age is not willing that we should think manufactories in New South Wales can possibly be as important as they are in Victoria and he quotes a paragraph from Hayter to convince us that nothing but important establishments are counted in Victoria. Now I may say that I have taken the trouble to look through Hayter's last list and I find therein enumerated no less than 21 different classes of manufactories in which the average number of hands employed is less than six. The totals of these 21 classes are 341 manufactories and 1535 hands. The average employment in these 341 factories - so called - is only four-and-a-half hands. In view of this fact we may dismiss the idea that the Victorian manufactories that find record are all extensive establishments. There is no doubt that many of our establishments are equally as small as those in Victoria to which I have referred but as evidence that some care is taken I may refer to the fact that the return relating to boot. manufactories expressly stales that those enumerated are those "employing not less than six hands." Under these circumstances I do not feel under any necessity to repudiate our own statistics on this point. Amongst the tables will be found one giving the details of the small Victorian manufactories.    PRODUCT OF VICTORIAN MANUFACTURES  I may remark that though our fined of the Age generally quotes figures for the year ending March 1885 he has given the figures in several cases for the year ending March 1886 showing that he had the latest figures by him. [269] I may therefore point out that he has omitted to give us any explanation of certain facts. In the last year under record the total increase in the hands employed in Victorian manufactories &c. was only 231 representing a far less percentage than that of the increase of population. Further during the same year many of the industries most specially protected distinctly fell off there being a reduction in the hands employed in woollen mills mills soap and candle works furniture works boot clothing and hat manufactories and others. Our good friend might have favoured us with some explanation of these reductions that have taken place under the splendid policy of protection. However we have still some good things put before us. One of the statements he honours us with is to this effect - that in 1865 before protection got a Start there were only 803 factories and that if breweries flour mills brickyards tanneries and other "primitive works" were deducted there would only remain 36 factories "to represent the small Struggling attempts at finding employment for our population at trades to which they had been used and educated;" and then he tells us that Victorian manufacturing industry as it at present stands has all sprung from those "36 infant industries." That is a magnificent hit for it hides from our view the fact that the present statistics also include and are mainly formed by those aforesaid primitive works which have increased very largely. Then we are informed that the Victorian manufacturers are turning out goods to the value of 24 million pounds which represents "what protection has done for the colony and what our people owe to those who through bitter opposition malignant abuse and persistent misrepresentation initiated and still support the system." Now you know when a gardener sets out a delicate plant he often surrounds it by more hardy plants in order to shelter it. Let me tell you that the quotation I have just given contains a very delicate plant and that is the reason why a number of statements are placed around it which I venture to describe as of a thoroughly hardy character. In the first place'we are told that the Victorian protective system has produced the whole of the 24 million pounds worth of manufactures You may judge for yourselves how far this is correct when I tell you that the value of all the gas produced all the wool washed all the bricks made all the beer brewed all the wood sawn all the tallow rendered all the meat preserved not to name crowds of other things is included. In the second place the list of industries just given would prove the term "manufactures" has been strained to include goods that do not naturally come under that heading. In the third place no country gains by manufactures more than the increased value put upon raw materials by manufacturing processes. This increased value is placed by Hayter at £6125000 for 1885. He has calculated on the basis of the census year adding 14 per cent. to correspond with the increase of establishments. [270] I think it would have been allowable to add 30 per cent the increase in the number of hands employed it being the fairer test of production; this would give £6985000 as the result of Victorian manufacturing. In the fourth place the proportion of this gain that flows from industries directly benefited by protection probably does not exceed and may not reach 3 million pounds the bulk of which would doubtless - as in New South Wales - have been obtained without protection. Three millions is a very different matter from 24 millions. I am utterly at a loss to know on what figures or on whose authority this sum of "24 millions" is given. Certainly Mr. Hayter does not endorse the statement. This sum is very far in advance of the real amount and ought not to have been given without the least shadow of data.    VICTORIAN versus FOREIGN MANUFACTURERS  Bearing in mind the great boast of success in manufacturing industry we naturally look for some details showing how the Victorian manufacturer has routed the foreigner but here even the splendid audacity of the novelist fails him and we have to look outside his articles for information to guide us. Strange to say the Victorian Customs returns show that the Victorian manufacturer is in spite of protection being beaten by the foreigner. Between 1881 and 1885 the imports of woollen cotton and similar manufactures increased 16 per cent.; whilst in manufactures of metals the increase was 43 per cent. Two years ago the Australasian Trade Review referring to the boasts of protectionists prepared a table which showed that in 1881 Victoria imported £4472000 worth of manufactured goods in excess of her exports of such goods and that in 1884 this excess had grown to £5953000. In face of figures such as these does vapour or reason predominate in the talk we hear about the independence of Victoria in the matter of manufactures? In this colony we are perpetually being told that we ought to manufacture our own woollens. What is the result of the Victorian effort in manufacturing woollens? Simply that out of every £10 worth of woollens consumed in Victoria £8 worth are imported. These are facts that might be thought vital to the subject but however large a space they may occupy in the mind of our good friend they occupy no space in his articles. He does perhaps all he thinks necessary when he deals with a few articles in which Victoria has a small export trade and he calls on his readers to witness how splendidly they compare with the "beggarly and declining exports" of New South Wales. I may say that the articles quoted are principally those shipped under draw-back and that after the exposures last year of the frauds attending this system the shipments fell off largely. The figures our friend gave for 1885 he cannot repeat for 1886. [271] Before leaving the subject of manufactures I may give one instance of the avidity with which Protectionists in Victoria seize on and circulate any reports about declining manufactures in New South Wales. It has been gravely stated that the number of distilleries has fallen in New South Wales from 52 to two. Wishing to get to the bottom of this report I interviewed Mr. Barney the chief inspector of refineries &c. In reply to my questions he said: "We never had more than one or two distilleries in New South Wales;" and then he explained that there was a law permitting wine producers to keep stills to produce sufficient spirits to fortify their wines. The explanation of the falling-off seems then to resolve itself into the simple fact that these stills had until the error was discovered appeared in the statistics as distilleries. Now that they are removed from the statistics in which they ought never to have appeared all Victoria is asked to take the enormous falling-off in the number of distilleries in New South Wales as a warning of the fate that sooner or later must overwhelm Freetrade industries.  Our principles are easily declared. They are Australian. Whatever will benefit Australia that we are for; whatever will harm Australia that we are against.  We use Australian in its fullest truest broadest sense. To us it conveys an idea which we cannot adequately describe; a something far different from a vain and sectional clamour for the right to run amuck among the brawling nations of foreign lands and to strike for conquests where we cannot rule; a something that may not be expressed in words and that is as yet outlined only by the spasmodic leapings of an embryonic sentiment The Australian national movement is the setting in of one of those periodic tides which change and alter the whole life of the human race it is the first pulsation of another of that series of upheavals which through countless cycles of evolution-phases have uplifted the senseless cell of protoplasmic life to the exalted station whereon the white man stands. It is in Australia that the battle against Nature's brutal laws will be fought out; it is here in Australia that human society will develop itself and that the yet unanswered riddles of the Sphinx will be finally solved.  We are for this Australia for the nationality that is creeping to the verge of being for the progressive people that is just plucking aside the curtain that veils its fate. Behind us lies the Past with its crashing empires its falling thrones its dotard races; before us lies the Future into which Australia is plunging this Australia of ours that burns with the feverish energy of youth and that is wise with the wisdom for which ten thousand generations have suffered and toiled. [565]  We are for Australia for that which will work her weal against that which will work her woe. We yield no other allegiance profess no other loyalty; we recognise no duty as owing to authors we set above all other claims the claims of our own land.  These then are our principles from which we trust to swerve not; these being our principles it is impossible to lay down any hard and fast rules of conduct or any set political course. Party politics to us are nothing for we have no party. We are for measures- not men for such measures as will tend to mould aright the destinies of the Australian people.  Australia is not a sect or a section it is not a caste or a class or a creed is not to be a Southern England nor yet another United States. Australia is the whole white people of this great continent without distinction of sex age or previous condition and the Australian policy is a continuance in that enlightenment which has already proved her while still in the colonial Stage foremost among the states of the earth. This preeminence has not been won by aping the forms and fashions of other climes; it has been gained by disregard regard for precedence and custom and by exercising without trammel the intellect which alone is worthy of heed. It is this untrammelled intellect to which we must look for good to thought that is free from the slightest taint of fear to criticism that does not halt before those who sit in high places and to ridicule that does not weaken because the superstitions it may attack are deeply rooted. And while thus devoting its political efforts to the furtherance of this one all-embracing principle the Boomerang will endeavour in every way to aid the national spirit that is so sturdily developing. Its illustrations will be Australian; its stories and its sketches will be Australian; its humour will be Australian; and its articles and comments will tend to Australianise. Finally its existence will demonstrate that Queensland the youngest and brightest of the Australian group is prepared in journalism as in all other matters to claim at least equality with her sister colonies in the South.  SIR  As there appears to be a general feeling that justice was not done in the recent cases of Sutton v. Deerhurst and vice versa I think the suggestion of your correspondent "Justice" to request the Mayor to call a public meeting in the Town Hall to consider the action of the magistrates is a very good one. In the betting transaction the lord did not act altogether as a man of honor. Sutton gave him plenty of time considerably more than the bookmaker would have got from the lord had the lord been the winner; but Deerhurst after a lot of shuffling winds up by sending an insulting note to Sutton and after some time longer pays the amount into the club because he was compelled to do so or be disgraced. In the trivial assault case which should never have been brought into court one party was as bad as the other anyone who heard the evidence must admit; and consequently both cases should have been dismissed or both parties imprisoned for the same period. Sutton is alleged to be a man of immoral character. Even if that be true is it any reason why he should not receive justice? The young lord's own character will not stand investigation judging by his answer when Mr. Duffy asked permission to question him on that point. This matter should not be allowed to drop. We as free-born Australians will not have our liberties trifled with for the benefit of privileged sprigs of "nobility" who with their arrogant assumption of superiority are not wanted in Australia except by a few grovelling toadies. I believe that in many parts of the United Kingdom it is impossible for an ordinary civilian to obtain justice against one of the privileged class; but our justices must be taught that a lord is of no consequence out here and that there is the same law for the highly and the lowly. It looked very bad for Lord Dudley to Sit on the bench. - Yours &c.  AUSTRALIAN.  To THE EDITOR OF The Age.   SIR  Might I suggest that the least appreciation the noble father of a certain young lord could show of the behaviour of the majority of the magistrates who on Thursday last so abjectly acknowledged and bowed down to caste would be to at once telegraph for them to accompany his son on his voyage home (which I suppose must be on an early date) as a sort of escort. By accepting the invitation they would have the advantage of going to Coventry voluntarily instead of being sent there as they deserve to be by every right thinking colonial. [790] - Yours &c.  C.D.F.  By the term Australian we mean not those who have been merely born in Australia. All white men who come to these shores with a clean record - and who leave behind them the memory of the class-distinctions and the religious differences of the old world; all men who place the happiness the prosperity the advancement of their adopted country before the interests of Imperialism are Australian. In this regard all men who leave the tyrant-ridden lands of Europe for freedom of speech and right of personal liberty are Australians before they set foot on the ship which brings them hither. [801] Those who fly from an odious military conscription; those who leave their fatherland because they cannot swallow the worm-eaten lie of the divine right of kings to murder peasants are Australians by instinct - Australian and Republican are synonymous. No nigger no Chinaman no lascar no Kanaka no purveyor of cheap coloured labour is an Australian. True to his grovelling and lickspittle nature the Chinaman in Australia is a toady and a "loyalist" and at least a pretended worshipper of his friend Missa PARKES who poll-taxes him and of the regime under which thousands of his countrymen have been slaughtered in order that Imperial opium might be stuffed down their brothers' throats.  The Imperialists are striving sans démordre [i.e. without letting go their hold] to efface the Australian sentiment. Once the name Australian was a "red-hot burning brand of shame" the scarlet letters flaming on the breast of every colonist. In those days it was a title written with a lash and the "i" was dotted and the "t" was crossed with the gyves and the gallows. England did not want our company - then. Returned colonists were prima facie more likely to be accommodated with a shakedown in Bow Street or Newgate than to be fed with champagne and pate de foie gras in Royal quarters - without the option of a five-shilling fine for the repair of the Imperial cooking-stove.  When England or the dear Prince or a limited section of England's Tory statesmen - whoever it may have been - awakened to an idea of the importance of colonial co-operation to the successful accomplishment of their little schemes Governors were sent out as Imperialistic scouts. Their business was to foster grovel and give balls; encourage sport and the firing of blank cartridges; sympathise with poverty and suffering in a truly patrician manner; open church-bazaars and grocery stores; flatter wealthy decrepitude and erect a gorgeous popularity in the hearts of pugilistic loyalty generally. These were selected with private means with a view of their attaining the above desirable popularity by a liberal expenditure of the coin drawn from the colonial treasury. So the Imperialistic Governor speedily becomes a patron of rum-begotten wealth and a sort of grand panjandrum and lord high admiral of every species of vested interests in the colony over which he is sent to govern. He has even been known to enter into brotherhood with the gilded whisky retailer and the pious usurer who has constructed his massive pile. The Imperialistic Governor does his work pretty thoroughly. He has been sent out to Australia to perpetuate a system which in some colonies at least had its foundation in convict rum and convict chains. And he does his work - not always wisely or with any considerable amount of tact - but as well as he knows how. [802] It is a beautiful system this which he attempts to hand down to the ages. It is the system of brute force and it is supported in N.S.W. by Orangemen with clubs and with yellow livers; by footballers with hob-nailed kicking boots; and by University undergrads. with walking sticks and the intellects of capons.  Yet the Governor is only one move in the scheme of Imperialism. An English Admiral directs the movement of the Australian fleet and an English General is put forward to command an Australian army. Every important office is filled by a representative of St. Jingo or by a man nominally Australian who looks across the water for advancement and for kudos. The Sons of the old country - the noisy truculent scions of pretentious rascaldom - flock hither and wed their poverty to our prosperity and then strike an attitude of surprise because we object to British Toryism. The Australian native looks upon England not as a mother - we have too much experience of her bumptious children. We are wooed and wedded by her hectoring offspring and even if we do tolerate them as husbands we object to the introduction of our mother-in-law into our homes - we cannot live peaceably in the same political house with England. The Governor England sends us retains his Imperialistic ascendancy by two methods - he stars in "society" and he patronises sport. The latter because he is too often good for little else than to smile approvingly as beasts are being urged past a winning-post. The rule of England is made popular in Australia through the vanity of the women and the "horsey-ness" of the men. If the colony's "boss" social light were to discontinue his receptions and balls at Government House or his attendance at race-meetings he would be contemptuously hustled out of the colony. He flatters the weakness of noodles who are fonder of show than of freedom. We had this admirably exemplified on 24th May last when Lord CARINGTON first ministered to the toy-soldier vanity of the millinery officers who took part in the red-ochre display in Moore Park and afterwards proceeded to the Randwick Racecourse to lend the mellifluousness of the vice-regal smile to a gathering largely composed of that vulgar brutality and brainless vanity which seem ever inseparable from the turf.  These are some of the forces and some of the means by which it is endeavoured to foster a sentiment inimical to the growth of Australian Democracy. But the cause of Australia is anything but hopeless. [...] The cause of Democracy in Australia is gaining strength and every fresh act of repression serves simply to call to the surface the hidden forces that have hitherto been unsuspected. Republicanism in the colonies is as sure though possibly slower in its consummation as are intercolonial Freetrade and Protection against the world. [803]  In none of our larger cities at present is it thought advisable for young ladies to go to balls parties dinners drives or other things of the sort unless in the care of an older lady and the gentleman who meets a girl so unattended feels justified in thinking her either ignorant of the usages of society or much more careless of appearances than it is desirable a young girl should be. Nor at all does a young lady of respectability dine or lunch alone with a gentleman except in extraordinary cases at restaurants or public lunching-places; she would have to run the risk of being thought of Bohemian tendencies if she did and would assuredly be classified in her unprotected state as in a lower stratum of society than she would like . . - Thus the young girl who is in the frequent habit of accepting a gentleman's escort to a place of public entertainment of any kind without the company of her mother or elder sister or some other person of presumed authority can not help placing herself in a wrong light although she does nothing wrong in itself.  The same principle is involved in the matter of driving. On horseback or afoot the parks and highways are as free to her and her escort as another; but driving except with an acknowledged lover is to be done with caution and if the other occupant of the vehicle is a married man it is seldom to be done at all except at the serious risk of reputation.  The universal civilty [sic] of railway and station employees makes obligations to others unnecessary and the young lady who is not able to travel with a maid and has no chaperon had better travel alone always being sure of respect and attention. [104] The tender bloom of innocence is so beautiful in the young that we long to preserve it by any means in our power  For the middle-aged woman the woman of public occupation or even the woman who has declared her intention of leading a single life many of these rules are inapplicable and to such a freedom is allowed that is utterly forbidden to the young and tender daughter shielded by her home from the public and also shielded from much by her youth. About this young and tender daughter people are beginning to think the lines that keep off the rude touch of the world can not be drawn too closely or the safeguards made too many. Less restriction may be hers at an age when she is supposed to be better acquainted with the world and with herself; but in her early youth she is to honor and obey certain rules.   [...] a question which involves not only the consideration of a topic difficult of discussion coram populo but the very right of the public discussion of a subject of great importance to civilised society. The difficulty of dealing with the matter is not lessened. by the fact that the question involved comes for consideration surrounded by all the prejudices with which centuries of ignorance and thoughtlessness have invested it accompanied by fear of the world's censure on points about which all who reverence purity and the ideal life of goodness would least wish to be misunderstood: Apart from the obligation which is cast upon a Judge to declare the truth as he sees it only the love of truth and an earnest desire to benefit mankind could compel anyone in the present slate of the world's education to pronounce an opinion upon a subject with reference to which it is so much more easy to win a reputation for sanctity by declamatory violence against new ideas as to the essential in morality than by a life of virtue and of that service of man which is the true service of God. [402]  A Court of law has now to decide for the first time whether it is lawful to argue in a decent way with earnestness of thought and sobriety of language the right of married men and women to limit the number of children to be begotten by them by such means as medical science says are possible a and not injurious to health. Of the enormous importance of this question not only to persons of limited means in every society and country but to nations the populations of which have a tendency to increase more rapidly than the means of subsistence there cannot be the slightest doubt. Since the days when Malthus first announced his views on the subject to be misrepresented and vilified as originators of new ideas usually are by the ignorant and unthinking the question has not only been pressing itself with increasing intensity of force upon thinkers and social reformers dealing with it in the abstract but the necessity of practically dealing with the difficulty of over-population has become a topic publicly discussed by statesmen and politicians. It is no longer a question whether it is expedient to prevent the growth of a pauper population with all its attendant miseries following upon semi-starvation overcrowding disease and an enfeebled national stamina of constitution; but how countries suffering from all these causes of national decay shall avert national disaster by checking the production of children whose lives must be too often a misery to themselves a burden to society and a danger to the State. Public opinion has so far advanced in the consideration of a question that has become of burning importance in the mother country by reason of its notoriously increasing over-population that invectives are no longer hurled against those who like John Stuart Mill and others discuss its time abstract the necessity of limiting the growths of population; but they are reserved for those who attempt practically to follow up their teaching and shew how such abstract reasoning should be acted upon. It seems to be conceded by public opinion and has indeed been admitted in argument before us that the abstract discussion of the necessity of limiting the number of children brought into the world is a subject fitting for the philosopher and student of sociology. The thinkers of the world have so far succeeded in educating it upon the subject and public attention is so thoroughly aroused to its importance that every reader of our English periodical literature knows it to be constantly discussed in magazines and reviews. Statesmen reviewers and ecclesiastics join in a common chorus of exhortation against improvident marriages to the working classes and preach to them the necessity of deferring the ceremony till they have saved the competency necessary to support the truly British family of ten or twelve children. [403] Those however who take a practical view of life will inevitably ask whether the masses for whose benefit this exhortation is given can be expected to exercise all the powers of self-denial which compliance with it would involve. To what period of life is marriage to be postponed by the sweater in the East End of London earning his three or four shillings a day without any hope of ever being able to educate decently house and bring up eight or ten children? The Protestant world rejects the idea of a celibate clergy as incompatible with purity and the safety of female virtue though the ecclesiastic is strengthened by all the moral helps of a calling devoted to the noblest of objects and by every inducement to a holy life. With strange inconsistency the same disbelievers in the power of male human nature to resist the most powerful of instincts expect men and women animated by no such exalted motives with their moral nature more or less stunted huddled together in dens where the bare conditions of living preclude even elementary ideas of modesty with none of the pleasures of life save those enjoyed in common with the animals - expect these victims of a social state for which the educated are responsible if they do not use their superior wisdom and knowledge for its dress to exercise all the self-control of which the celibate ecclesiastic is supposed to be incapable. If it is right to declaim against overpopulation as a danger to society as involving conditions of life not only destructive of morals but conducive to crime and national degeneration the question immediately arises can it be wrong to discuss the possibility of limiting births by methods which do not involve in their application the existence of an impossible state of society in the world as it is and which do not ignore the natural sexual instincts of mankind.  Why is the philosopher who describes the nature of the disease from which we are suffering who detects the causes which induce it and the general character of the remedies to be applied to be regarded as a sage and a benefactor but his necessary complement in the evolution of a great idea the man who works out in practice the theories of the abstract thinker to be denounced as a criminal? It was only when Jenner ventured to act on the theory which he had founded upon his observations that he was denounced and vilified in language which it is now almost impossible to conceive.  In the domain of morality as of medicine. The teachers who first publicly proclaimed the brotherhood of man his equality in the next world and his right to worship as he chose were persecuted as the enemies of society. Doctrines such as these fit though they might be for discussion by philosophers and a select class of esoteric students were to be put down as dangerous to society when taught to the common people as the fundamental basis upon which society must rest. [404] The history is the same in the growth of all opinion and the perception of all truth whether we read it in the history of the law of witchcraft or blasphemy or any other subject which has been the object of human thought associated with the idea of right and wrong. The current and preconceived opinion which is brought to the consideration of any such question has at first sternly resisted next only tolerated and only at last recognised as a right the free discussion of its foundation in truth. The world having first tortured those who would show a better way has in alter generations venerated as martyrs and heroes those who died for the truth as they saw it or who endured in silence the lifelong persecution of the confessor.  With this growth of public opinion the law has also grown. A prosecution as Lord Coleridge says in his able charge in the case of Reg. v. Ramsay and Foote (8) which was possible for seditious libel because a man decorously discussed the respective advantages of an hereditary or elective monarchy without any reflection upon any part of the existing government and which was carried to a conviction would be impossible under our present ideas of political freedom. In the region of religious discussion it is the same. In an empire the sovereign of which rules over more non-Christians than Christians it has become an obsolete fiction that Christianity is part of the Common Law. Writings which a century ago would have been held by the Judges of the time as blasphemous libels simply because they question the truth of Christianity will as Lord Coleridge points out in the same judgment no longer be so regarded because the dicta of the Judges promulgating that legal doctrine of bygone times cannot be taken to be a true statement of the law as the law is now. As in religion so in morals. The state of modern society with all its complex aspects has provoked the public discussion of questions relating to marriage and divorce contagious diseases over-population and overcrowding which would have shocked the old-fashioned notions of preceding generations with their limited range of thought upon such matters. Upon some of these subjects the necessities of the day have already driven us to legislation which in past time would have been denounced as immoral by all as it still is by a minority and the question discussed in this pamphlet is one of a kindred character. Whilst the law has thus altered with the times in allowing a greater latitude in discussing questions fundamentally affecting religion the government of the country and public morality it has remained the same in insisting upon a respectful grave and decent tone of discussion. Whether this has originated in a desire to protect the innovating thinker from such violence as might be offered by the ignorant multitude to those regarded as publicly insulting the great Ephesian Diana of the day by restraining him from the use of language likely to provoke anger or whether it has proceeded from the exploded fallacy that truth requires the prop of penal statutes to maintain it the law clearly is that Whether the subject of discussion be religion government or morals whilst every latitude is allowed in discussing their fundamental principles no language must be used which is stronger than is necessary for clearly expounding the doctrine or system advocated by the writer. [405] The publication of language which is calculated to destroy respect for religious or moral obligations to incite people to violent and unconstitutional attacks upon the established government to destroy public morality by the advocacy of immoral practices is illegal and if its necessary results if acted upon are such it is no excuse that the person publishing it thinks lie is doing a public good. The law clearly is that though he should be actuated by the noblest aspirations for the public good he must either achieve his reform in a legal manner or be content if his revolutionary course of action is unsuccessful to suffer in the cause of truth and right hereafter like John Brown to be chanted as a martyr in national lyrics when public opinion has changed. A certain number of prosecutions under the law a certain number of victims to the ignorance or superstition of those who framed it a certain number of refusals to convict under a growing sense of its unwisdom injustice and barbarity seem to be in all societies the stages passed through by laws established for the purpose of coercing the opinions of mankind before they become obsolete if Judge-made or if statutes are repealed as inconsistent with advancing knowledge. Were the publication now under consideration prosecuted as an obscene libel all the above questions would be very proper for consideration. The publication however does not come before us an obscene libel at Common Law. The test in this case is not whether the tendency of the books to promote immorality but whether the language itself of the book is obscene.  The objection which has been urged that the means suggested for the prevention of conception might be availed of by the unmarried and immoral for the purpose of enabling them safely to indulge in vice is simply the application to this subject of the exploded delusion that knowledge is a dangerous thing. That nature has formed us with organs and propensities which if abused lead to the ruin of health and the destruction of morals is no imputation upon the wisdom of Cod in so constituting man. The same argument might be urged with equal force against the teaching of writing and the art of photography because they assist people to commit forgery. The time is surely past when countenance can be given to the argument that a knowledge of any truth either in physics or in the domain of thought is to be stifled because its abuse might be dangerous to society. The guardianship of the eunuch and the seclusion of the harem were not necessary to build up the national character of English women for chastity and it is an insult to them to argue that it is necessary to keep them in ignorance on sexual matters to maintain it. [406] Ignorance is no more the mother of chastity than of true religion.  A further argument urged before us as showing that the work was obscene was that its advice as to the adoption of scientific checks to population involved a violation of natural laws and a frustration of nature's ends. The argument that nature intends every woman to conceive as often as is possible would if carried to its logical conclusion result in the Indian custom of marrying every female child upon reaching puberty in order that no opportunity of conception should be lost in all other matters of breeding but the all-important one of the breeding of the human race the aim of man is to defeat the effects of nature's laws of reproduction and to limit the number and kind of animals produced to the amount required for the use of man.  With all respect for the judges who decided these cases I do not think that they are decisions which will stand the criticism of time as they are founded upon a want of confidence in the power of truth and in the right to publish it. there lies at the bottom of them the old delusion that it is not always safe in teaching mankind to let them know the truth. This is the mainspring theory of all prosecutions of innovating thinkers from the time of Socrates to the present day. Allow the young to question the foundations of a popular system invite them to belief in time one great unseen intelligence governing the world surround his teaching with all the high morality of natural religion and the teacher under this theory is but a "corrupter of youth" thought worthy of death in a past age of fine and imprisonment in this. It was not by such hushing up of the abominations of paganism that the gods of Olympus were overthrown and a purer undefiled religion was given to the world. It is only the public reading of the apostolic writings through many generations that has taught mixed congregations of men and women to listen without blushing to their denunciations of the abominable and now nameless vices of antiquity. It is true that attacking the foundations of any system of morals may cause sonic to fall away from the belief in all morality and from the practice of any but that is no reason why the pursuit of truth should be given up or condemned as an offence. The ultimate probable effect of the publication of what is true cannot be prejudicial to general morality and decency if the publication is bona fide made in the interests of truth and in pursuing a legitimate subject of controversy and it is I submit by the ultimate result of the publication that its legality should be tested.  [...] let anyone enquire amongst those who have sufficient education and ability to think for themselves and who do not idly float slaves to the current of conventional opinion and he will discover that numbers of men and women of purest lives of noblest aspirations pious cultivated and refined see no moral wrong in teaching the ignorant that it is wrong to bring into the world children to whom they cannot do justice and who think it folly to stop short in telling them simply and plainly how to prevent it. [407] A more robust view of morals teaches that it is puerile to ignore human passions and human physiology. A clearer perception of truth and the safety of trusting to it teaches that in law as in religion it is useless trying to limit the knowledge of mankind by any inquisitorial attempts to place upon a judicial index expurgatorins works written with an earnest purpose and commending themselves to thinkers of well-balanced minds. I will be no party to any such attempt. I do not believe that it was ever meant that the Obscene Publication Act should apply to cases of this kind but only to the publication of such matter as all good men would regard as lewd and filthy to lewd and bawdy novels pictures and exhibitions evidently published and given for lucre's sake. It could never have been intended to stifle the expression of th9ught by the earnest minded on a subject of transcendent national importance like the present and I will not strain it for that purpose. As pointed out by Lord Cockburn in the case of the Queen v. Bradlaugh and Besant (16) all prosecutions of this kind should be regarded as mischievous even by those who disapprove of the opinions sought to be stifled inasmuch as they only tend more widely to diffuse the teaching objected to. To those on the other hand who desire its promulgation it must be a matter of congratulation that this like all attempted persecutions of thinkers will defeat its own object and that truth like a torch - "the more it's shook it shines".  As it seems to me that this book is neither obscene in its language nor by its teaching incites people to obscenity I am of opinion that the prohibition should go.  AFTER THE CELEBRATION  We have seen tumultuous revel we have seen ecstatic display. We have heard wonderful speechmaking and suffered exquisite headaches from innumerable banquets feastings and corroborees. And what does it amount to? Nothing.  The day just celebrated has been the anniversary - for the hundredth time repeated - of the settlement of these lands by England. What is there therein that we should rejoice?  Our Fatherland! Perhaps somewhat less than a third of our fathers found their origin there - another part in the land of the gallant Scots - yet another in that section which England cruelly and barbarously oppresses - the enslaved and downtrodden Ireland. The statistics may show somewhat differently but of those who left for Australia from an English birthplace how many indeed owed their blood to the steadfast men from the freer and braver clime of the North or to the dashing race from the isle of the West? Is it not from these that England's own failing blood has been recruited for the past five generations?  And why did these emigrants who freely and voluntarily took up their lot in a land which England had stigmatised with the badge of crime (albeit England's self could not escape the just sentence for the greater crime of judicially enslaving nay even murdering and degrading in still worse degree some of these alleged criminals were a Day of Judgment to be at this moment pronounced upon the nations) - why did they take up their lot in the outcast land? Was it not because they sought to escape from the domineering tyranny of England - of the whole English system - for seeking to amend which on the same basis as we in Australia enjoy to-day Chartists and other earnest-souled reformers had been criminalized? The flag of the nation which enslaved these our pioneers came flaunting its vile ignominy to anticipate their path and shut them out from the freedom of a new world just as it is now menacing and undermining their liberties; and for this we are called upon to rejoice. [804]  Rather should we mourn that the new and better world was not left to itself; that its founders could not at once proclaim the Australian freedom - the nation's life that shall sooner or later vitalize the world - at once upon their landing; that those condemned to the chains and the lash for a disregard of the iniquitous claims of landlordism and monopoly could not then have leaped to liberty and proclaimed the overthrow here at least of the monster which degraded them. And that it was not so do we not to-day reap the most bitter first fruits? And what shall it be when the deadly harvest is ripe?  After so many years of comparative freedom what do we find? A servile imitation of England in our Courts of Law - a toadying worship of England's thieves fostered by the English merchants among us who would be squires themselves - an Imperial conspiracy which as we long ago pointed out has for its object the utter shelving of all questions of Australian interest - the subjection of these lands to English naval and military forces - and the cutting off of local possibilities of advancement that by personal ambition the warlike of our population may be bribed to seek their interests in an adherence to the dominance - the soldier-sway of England!  [1] About Ourselves The Dawn  Volume 1 Number 1.   Sydney May 15 1888   "WOMAN is not uncompleted man but diverse" says Tennyson and being diverse why should she not have her journal in which her divergent hopes aims and opinions may have representation. Every eccentricity of belief and every variety of bias in mankind allies itself with a printing-machine and gets its singularities bruited about in type but where is the printing ink champion of mankind's better half? There has hitherto been no trumpet through which the concentrated voices of womankind could publish their grievances and their opinions. Men legislate on divorce on hours of labor and many another question intimately affecting women but neither ask nor know the wishes of those whose lives and happiness are most concerned. Many a tale might be told by women and many a useful hint given even to the omniscient male which would materially strengthen and guide the hands of law-makers and benefactors aspiring to be just and generous to weak and unrepresented womankind. Here then is DAWN the Australian Woman's journal and mouthpiece -  a phonograph to wind out audibly the whispers pleadings and demands of the sisterhood. Here we will give publicity to women's wrongs will fight their battles assist to repair what evils we can and give advice to the best of our ability. Half of Australian women's lives are unhappy but there are paths out of most labyrinths and we will set up fingerposts. For those who are happy - God bless them! Have we not laid on the Storyteller the Poet the Humorist and the Fashionmonger? We wear no ready-made suit of opinions nor stand we on any ready-made platform of women's rights which we have as yet seen erected. Dress we shall not neglect for no slattern ever yet won the respect of any man worth loving. If you want "rings on your fingers and bells on your toes" we will tell you where they can best be bought as well as sundry other articles of women's garniture. We shall welcome contributions and correspondence from women for nothing concerning woman's life and interest lies outside our scope. It is not a new thing to say that there is no power in the world like that of women for in their hands lie the plastic unformed characters of the coming generation to be moulded beyond alteration into what form they will. This most potent constituency we seek to represent and for their suffrages we Sue.   MR WENTWORTH the greatest son of the soil ever born at the Antipodes could not see why if sheep and cattle could not be remunerative by converting their flesh into meat the desired result might not be accomplished by turning their fat into tallow. He was a man prompt in deed as in thought and forthwith purchasing a sheep at a butcher's stall in Sydney had it slaughtered and boiled down when it yielded 24 lbs. of tallow. The experiment was repeated and eventuated in a grand success; such a discovery was not long making itself known - a Mr Henry O'Brien of Yass and others further tested it; and the boiling down of not only sheep but cattle soon spread.  Port Phillip was not slow in profiting by what might be termed an invention the importance of which could not possibly be over-rated. Boiling-down establishments as they were called were opened in several places the first at the Salt Water River by Bolden and Ryrie two squatters who placed it under the control of a Mr R. Forrest possessed of much practical knowledge acquired in Cork the then pig-killing entrepôt for the exportation of pork carcase-meat from the South of Ireland to England. Mr Edward Curr opened another at Port Fairy and Dr Thompson at Geelong. Hunter Somerville and Co. built premises for the purpose in Bourke Street; Brock and Mollison and Watson and Wight had large establishments at the Melbourne swamp (now the Spencer Street Railway Station). Boiling down was soon improved into melting down (the complete antithesis of the meat freezing projects of to-day) and the profitable outlet thus presented for realising on stock wrought such a change that prices immediately improved and manifestations of amendment showed themselves. [199]  On either side of our camping place was thick scrub: a little way back a high sandy bank. When the boat had been thoroughly washed out and got afloat again Bracefell and his Brown's Cape friend went away to look for traces of the blacks. He returned once without success and with his companion set out a second time but soon came back in haste in a stale of no little excitement and alarm. [...]  When within a few hundred yards of the camp astonished to find that the people in it were wholly unconscious of the arrival of a party of whites so near at hand Bracefell told the two men - who were armed - to stop. He crossed a creek in front between themselves and the assemblage with Wallupy; strode into the midst of them before they had become aware of his presence and hailed them with a loud shout of his own name 'Wandi!' The whole mob rushed as if stricken to their spears which were stuck into the ground and piled much in the soldierly fashion on a rest during march. So absolutely surprised that the betrayal of the fact became evident under the suddenness and simultaneousness of the commotion. Hundreds rushed out of the scrub yelling like fiends. We could hear the yells and were made anxious for the safety of our avant-couriers. At the further end of the camp were two men skinning a kangaroo just killed. One of them as soon as Wandi's voice had reached his ears rose - looked at him in a frantic manner and at once catching sight of the white men in the rear rushed past and at full speed towards them. For a while - a few minutes - he could utter no sound but by gesticulation and sign inquired from the poor fellows who were terribly alarmed how they had come there by land or by water? They pointed to the river. Wandi notwithstanding what had been imparted to him by the Cape Brown friend - which he admitted he had not believed - became as astonished and excited as any one of the yelling mountebanks for in this man he recognised one whom he had once known and had thought dead for many a year past. They then confronted each other; Wandi in his rapid utterances made known to him that their white brothers were close by. [240] [...]  Seeing that we should interfere with their arrangements Derhamboi turned lowered his weapon came to the edge of the bank and took a scowling long look at us one by one. He almost seemed to have it in mind to dispute our advance.  Petrie in a tone fitted to the occasion told him to come down: one searching stare at the speaker one moment's hesitation and down he rushed with an impetuosity which marked all his proceedings 'my name Jem. Davis of Glasgow' were the only words he could utter intelligible to us: went off at score in a rapid 'black' speech from which by means of Wandi we could only make out that he had run away from the settlement because the men on his chain were cutting each others' throats or knocking a mate's head in with the pick used on the roads so that they might be tent to Sydney to be 'what they called hung'. Fearing for his own life at the hands of his comrades he had managed to escape and take his chance of mercy among the blacks. Derhamboi was wearing the necklaces and armlets usual among the natives and as he frantically went on in the scream of his excitement seeing that we were unable to understand a word he said and could express himself in no other language: too impatient to submit to the dilatory relief of interpretation: flew off again into a satanic passion wrenched off his bijouterie and set to tearing and clawing up the ground with his fingers sinking his voice from the shrillest howl to a very Bedlamite whisper accompanied by a wicked leer well suited to the change. A long time afterwards he told me that he had never been able to recollect what had passed! I think he was mad.  Bracefell who was standing by said something which at once produced silence and a quieter condition for a few minutes. He told us that Davis - I shall so call him now - had wished to make us know that we should be in great danger if we attempted (for Bracefell had told him our intention) to go up the mountain before us Boppol from which I have said we were only three miles and thus separate from the rest of our party.  Strange I thought that we should be first apprised of the white men's death by a white man from the midst of their murderers! Davis then acted over the whole scene: the 'shaky' creeping through the grass; the cat-like watching; the drawing nearer and nearer to the unconscious wretch; the spring; the rush; the fierce blow; the death and the triumph. Then he told us that as we had seen him do in like manner would these with whom he dwelt do unto us if we did not keep our eyes 'in fear of their coming' all the night long. He said too that his 'father' Pamby-Pamby had a white man's watch wrapped in grass part of the spolia opima after the murder mentioned: it had been passed on from tribe to tribe that 'their hearts might make a wonder at it'; and had come back to his father who was the rightful owner. His respected father could make nothing of it: 'he took it for a stone'; at first he thought it was alive but it had died very soon (inclining his head sideways upon the palm of his hand). [241] Davis himself knew it could be opened but had forgotten how to do it. We promised to give his father a tomahawk if he would bring it to us: Davis promised he should. Then asked to be allowed to return to the blacks' camp for the night: explained - by a figure of speech which will not excuse repetition - that he was afraid for our safety; that he would keep them in fear of our strength and our arms; and watch in our behalf against any attempt to attack. He went back. We were guilty I thought of a very foolish thing that night.  The stream here was not forty yards wide overhung by steep scrubby banks from which a thousand blacks could have speared us without our ever being able to fire a shot from a boat. Yet into the wretched boat - rather I thought to allay our crew's fears than any other prudential reason - it was thought advisable that we should sleep in mid-channel and there we lay drowsily smoking barely whispering nodding and watching in a fashion till gladdened by the peep o' day.  I have said that Davis appeared to be about thirty years of age. This was substantially correct; but how could it be shown? If he had been out as he proved to be with this tribe sixteen years he could have been but in his fourteenth year when he was on the chain from which he had escaped! True enough for it turned out that he was then thirteen years of age! Well: Moreton Bay was a penal settlement to which secondary - i.e. colonial sentences - only had delivered felons already transported for crimes. True again! James Davis of Glasgow had been handed over by a sentence passed upon him in Surrey England to the reforming refuge of a convict ship in the sweet and edifying company of some hundreds of malefactors of all shades in the midst of whom I hope he was the youngest having reached the precocious manhood of eleven years from his birth! Thus he had appeared in Sydney.  At sunrise two musket shots - a signal already explained to Davis - were fired. The poisoning of the blacks the avowed enmity and the natural wish for revenge on whites whoever they were the probable evasion of our crew in their alarm the large concourse of savages had in the meantime made us change our minds about our purpose. We dared not separate our party in any case; we could not leave the boat unprotected: ergo we must give up for time present any further exploring. The only alternative left was to go back again. Poor Jolliffe! hitherto so sanguine of success in finding a run for John Eales' sheep looked disconcerted. I was so.  In a short while Derhamboi made his appearance. We could feel that a large mob of his people were following him and too near us. We could see but one - a scowling square-set ruffian whose very stare and lowering eyebrows told the tale of what he would be and what he would do if he had the chance. And this filthy brute was Derhamboi's revered parent Pamby-Pamby! He lifted no hand in token of peace and good fellowship - not he! His deep-set restless eyes watched every motion took in every object before him in the boat. He seemed for a moment to hesitate upon which his affectionate son made a loud angry remark not respectful certainly - which had the effect of bringing him further forward. [242] We held up a tomahawk the sight of which settled the question. He at once followed Davis into the water drew out of the grass-woven bag over his left shoulder something carefully packed handed it in silence to Davis while Davis received the tomahawk and gave is to Pamby-Pamby who without a word backed away to the bank retreated in the same fashion up it - - too suspicious to turn - and then suddenly disappeared. With eager hands the parcel was torn open and there sure enough was an old-fashioned silver 'turnip'. On a paper fitted inside to the back was the name of the murdered owner - Murray - Thomas Murray I think. I am not sure as to the Christian name. On our return it became the key to the wretched affair.  Davis must have adorned himself afresh after leaving us last night. He had on bracelets and armlets as before but as soon as Pamby-Pamby had retired and he was admitted into our midst he tore them all off again and threw them into the water. I caught and kept them as curiosities. He appeared to be still in a state of doubt and perplexity but the step he had taken - from whatever real cause after his abuse of Bracefell - could not now be retraced. The truth was I think from what passed in the course of our return that notwithstanding real regret at leaving his wild life notwithstanding his dread of what might await him at the settlement he had been so cowed by authority that even after his long spell of freedom and unrestraint the habit of obedience to authority's tone and the fear of our arms had overcome every other consideration. His subsequent admission that he had taken us all for constables was the key I suspect to his surrender. And yet if he spoke the truth at all such an explanation did not quite tally with what he soon conveyed to us. He declared that he had been all the previous night engaged in speechifying: seeing that they were bent on mischief he had described our numbers strength and firearms in a manner so exaggerated as to cool the ardour of the 'fighting men': but went on to assure us that had we stayed another day it would not have been possible for him to dissuade them from attacking us. All this may have been got up in order to curry favour with his new messmates and I still believe that fear alone brought him in.  The last farewell - the last parting with his friends of the tribe of 'Ginginbarah' had been an exhibition of untutored translation of wild emotions - sentiment affection (call it by what name you may) to gesture gesticulation intonation cadences in the lingering cries that he should come to them again too sudden and expressive to need assurance that there was nothing assumed or spurious in the overwhelming burst of regret at losing Derhamboi. No sooner had our oars dropped into the water on Pamby-Pamby's withdrawal than every tree by the water's side in the bush beyond below this side and that side: every hiding place unnoticed but for what it now revealed became alive with natives; some peering round the stout trunks afraid to expose their bodies to a possible 'tolloolpil' (shot): others springing unexpectedly into view from some protecting limb aloft while the dark scrub that out hundreds of heads young and old piccaninnies and gins whose habitual caution and jealousy of being seen by strange people had been put aside on an occasion of such grief and wonder - thrust before our astonished eyes an extemporised tableau vivant of which white man methought shall never see the like of again. [243] The swarming bees on such a business so startled myself - new chum as I was - that the impulse of my hands was towards my rifle the next to taking notice of the position. The god of day still in his birth which had warmed long years gone by these wood-bound children of the sun into welcome rather than war-whoop when the wretched waif the white wanderer wailing through the wilderness and woe-wom wending his reckless way towards some chance refuge from his doom delivered himself to their mercies now so lit up their bodies 'cooché greased' and lithe so glanced aslant upon their glistening limbs never resting ever flitting that I doubted as to any certain service had I been called upon to canvas my eyesight for proof of the precision of my weapon. Up rose a plaintive cry which repeating itself again and again fainted off into the distance in which the more fearful were abiding. Then up rose upon the bank to the right the burly brutish Pamby-Pamby; up rose too from among us his adopted son and heir with lineaments hard-set purposely unobservant but listening. The deep voice of the savage howled out his lament in tones which spoke to me more than words; in the spreading embrace of his arms which added more significance to its yearnings and its claspings than ever the like emblem of recalling love between parent and progeny on the stage of our civilised world had ever in my eyes done before: the shrill reproach so fitted to the fable of enforced flight: off again in other modulations to their hunts their haunts the memory too of many a brave fight in company together: the wide range of Ginginbarah on the fish grounds of their 'Monoboola' - (Mary River) - and then last but not least the love for his son once removed from Beegie's [the sun's] bosom now to be double dead to him among the 'makromme' (dead men). Ouah! Ouah! Derhamboi. Come back!  Ere this appeal came to an end the scattered choir took up the refrain and then shaking in every limb Davis began with a low slow whine. What he said I know not: what he conveyed all could read. 'I came to you when young and driven like a dog from the doors of the "makromme": I told you of all my misery and my torture: I said "do to me as you think best I am yours" and I dropped as one dead again for I was hungry thirsty weak and worn with looking behind for the hated ones pursuing: you came together but all was to me as a fog: your voices were crying kill! kill! but there was little life to stamp out: you Pamby Pamby knew me again: could I tell who I had been? You knew me father: you took me you fed me you gave me tabil (water) to drink you gave me flesh to eat. Was I not your son? Beegie had washed me back to you and I was glad. But the great Commandant (pointing to the south) has sent for me I must go: I will come back; when the moon has come back to you three times I shall be here'.  Of this character was Davis' apologetic hymn. Of course we looked on in silence and new interest in so singularly acted out a play of life in the bush wilds of which the plot had been written and the parts borne by the dramatis personae themselves. [244] The performance died away bit by bit - through exhaustion in part I thought - but as we paddled down stream a large concourse at first for some miles but tailing off by dozens followed and wailed us on towards the water on our way home.  The first election polling day was an event to be long remembered in Melbourne for never in the election annals of the colony was there fiercer animosity grosser provocation or more riotous excesses. The opposition was an intensely factious one started not so much to oust Curr as to glut the morbid appetite of national and religious malignity. To accomplish this the fierce flame of unholy bigotry was lit up alike in the public meeting and the tap-room on the canvassing tour and in the ranting conventicle. The two cliques of which the Corporation was composed were answerable in no small degree for such a deplorable state of things; and the arch-disturber Lang was on the spot stirring up the fires of fanaticism in something of the manner of a stoker raking his furnace. It was providential that the day passed over without loss of life and miraculous that Lang was able to retire that night to his peaceful pillow without sustaining grievous bodily harm.  There was one polling place in each of the four Wards opening at 9 a.m. and closing at 4 p.m. Then and for years after there was no such thing as vote by ballot - nothing but straight outspoken open voting in much the Corporation style. It was done in this way. Each elector on presenting himself received a card on which the names of the several candidates were printed. He erased the names for which he did not vote and after signing returned the document to the Returning Officer who thus read aloud 'John Smith votes for Tom Jones' and if Tom Jones was a popular idol John Smith was greeted with loud cheering; but if not the voter after performing a duty to his country on leaving the room was pushed and knocked about and getting into the street was lucky if he did not meet with even rougher treatment from a half drunken crowd loafing outside; and the hugging and hustling cheering and groaning blessing and cursing according to the humour of the rabble was a source of anything but amusement to the victim of them. Furthermore the receptacles into which the cards were dropped were repeatedly opened the votes counted and the state of the poll issued on slips every hour sometimes oftener. These bulletins would be posted outside the door and so far from allaying only served to increase the excitement tenfold and heated the bubbling passions of the populace to boiling point. The friends of the candidates were to be seen from cock-crow running about buzzing and busying like bees their fussiness encumbering their utility and their verba embarrassing their facto. Curr's adherents worked openly; Condell's to a great extent sub rosa; and yet contrary to general expectation the Mayor led from the start was never collared during the race and was landed at the winning post by a majority of 34 the numbers at the close of the poll being - Condell 295 Curr 261. [293]  Unhappy Love Matches The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 2.   Sydney June 1 1889   MARRYING FOR WEALTH position or any consideration other than love is universally considered to be the Alpha and Omega of half the world's matrimonial infelicities but it would be easy to find a corresponding number of so-called love matches showing equally unhappy results. For who does not among their acquaintances count the unhappy couple whose mating was the result of a love fit - heartily tired of each other yet chained together for life. The woman who cannot give a better reason for marrying than that she is in love is likely to come to grief. It is not that she loves but why or what she loves that is the all important question. Realizing that when two hearts filled with love tempered by respect meet melt and fuse into one with congeniality of mind and purpose it must be to those participating the realization of a perfect union in every sense of the word still lacking the above conditions love matches rank among the unhappiest and saddest marriages of all. Two things also necessary to happy union are perfect confidence and absolute truthfulness. The moment either of these is violated a wall is begun between the two hearts which unchecked will soon become so dense so wide so high that even the grave itself would be less a separation. The advice given by H. Maria George in The Household is sound. She says -   Let every woman contemplating matrimony ask herself if she loves her prospective husband well enough to see the world with his eyes; enjoy its pleasures through his participation; see her ambitions wither one by one or perchance carried on by her sons; to live a life full of petty duties a round for which she has perhaps no aptitude no congeniality to lead a life of self-repression self-sacrifice and buried individuality to exchange her fresh youth and beauty for a mother's look of care; can she quiet every longing pulsation of the throbbing heart and lull her hungry soul to sleep by the thought that she is a wife and a mother?  It is but seldom that a man foregoes ambitions or changes his life plans because he is a husband and a father. The circle of the wedding ring spreading and broadening for him closes in about his wife bringing with it so many new duties and responsibilities that time and hands are so full except in a rare combination of circumstances as to leave her without either time or strength for the cultivation of talents or the pursuing of such a line of thought as will render her companionable to her husband. Whether bread and babies are pursuits lower or higher than those that fall to the lot of the husband is a question not to be decided here. But every woman in average circumstances who cannot with the two satisfy every longing of her soul will certainly find marriage a failure. She must therefore remember that marriage means in these days the acceptance by her of a position full of work restricted by many grievous limitations and implying an abandonment of individuality and that even love has not always achieved final happiness for married couples. In marriage career is offered to women a clear defined but limited career. They should be sure that it is their right vocation before they allow love only to prompt them to the acceptance of it.     Spurious Women The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 3.   Sydney July 1 1889   We take it that anything which is diverted by artificial means from its natural shape and from the natural exercise of its functions is a spurious representative of its kind and we could not therefore select any of the dainty women figures you may see "on the block" as a fair specimen of a woman of the human race because they are really spurious women. Bound padded compressed and laced the modern woman is a highly artificial product made not after God's image but as near as possible to a fashion plate; and if any inhabitant of another planet were curious to see what a real natural woman was like we should have to take him to some of the few women not afraid to use dress for purposes of health and comfort only and beg him to overlook those who by corsets high heels and a score of other inventions have succeeded in constructing in themselves a new variety of woman. It is enough to make any reflecting creature stand aghast to think that the most beautiful creature in the world is not content to stand like any other living being on her inherent merits. As if they had no reason of their own some women follow like a flock of sheep the lead of a milliner-built beauty and offer up their health and comfort to secure an artificial outline. It is true that these things are done with the ultimate hope of pleasing the men for if there were no men it is not to be supposed that women would squeeze themselves into artificial shapes for pure pleasure. Yet the men are not to be altogether charged with the crime of inciting to these shams by their admiration. Taking men in the lump there is sense in them if you wake it and surely if they don't like a natural woman let them leave her alone. It has come to be believed that corsets are really necessary to the due support and bracing together of a woman; is the race then grown so limp and invertebrate? Can we not then stand upright without collapsing at the waist? If anyone is unable to remain perpendicular without a steel waistcoat it is clear that the muscles responsible for her natural support have had no opportunity to develop. Corsets are just as unnecessary as they are injurious at any rate to the woman of average stamina and of average symmetry. To those who are invalided or deformed another rule may apply and we would not for the world restrict the liberty of individual opinion. On the contrary if any honest reasoning woman sincerely believes that it is better to reduce the breathing capacity of her lungs to crowd her internal organs into unnatural and often dangerous positions and to crease her skin into folds by continual pressure let her do so; the law of the survival of the fittest may perhaps weed out her and her offspring in time. Perhaps we shall be giving away secrets too much if we talk of the indented garter-rings about the knee killing the flesh and cutting off the circulation the injuries of high stiff collars high-heeled boots and heavy skirts a drag upon the hips; but it is well known enough how many carry a heavy load of hair strained up and balanced at fashion's dictum on the top of weary heads and it is often enough charged upon us that when dressed for walking we cannot raise our arms above our heads nor stoop to pick up anything from the floor nor throw a ball with any certainty that it will fall before us. The outdoor gait of a large proportion of women is certainly spoilt by lack of freedom and the arms of the majority hang cylindrical and stiff like a bent stove-pipe. All these things make us sigh for a race of clear thinking women who are not afraid whose own judgment is guidance enough and reason enough and who will dress for health  decency and comfort only. It would seem merely reasonable to wear garments which will leave our arms at least as much freedom as a doll's arm on a wire hinge and to refrain from tying our ribs together in a way which prevents respiration and disturbs our anatomy particularly as the only gain we achieve is a counterfeit beauty of an unnatural model. We laugh at the Chinese women with their poor useless bandaged feet and all the while we are tying up ourselves and laming much more important organs than feet viz. lungs. For experiments prove that the average lung capacity without corsets is 167 cubic inches but with the armour plating on it is 134 inches only. Now the first necessity of life is to breathe freely for the blood collects poisons in its course which can only be cleansed from the system by exposure to air in the lungs and if anyone desires to feed her body on entirely pure and well-cleansed blood it is essential that the action of the lungs should be untramelled. When we remember that every minute a quantity of blood equal to the entire amount in the body is passed through the lungs for purification and that it is from the blood that every part of the system from head to foot draws its material of life and replenishment and renewal it is apparent that the least aid we can give to the capacity of inhaling pure air is an aid to the health of every organ and tissue in the body brain included.   It is generally admitted that on the average women are much weaker and much more subject to small ailments than men are in spite of the fact that the anatomy of each is so alike as to require an expert to distinguish between them and it is reasonable to suppose that part of this weakness is due to habitual constriction of the lungs through many generations and habitual compression of the organs which lie below the diaphragm. Few people are aware that women who wear tight waist-bands breathe in a manner that is unnatural and unlike all other human creatures. All natural men and women whether civilised or savage do in the act of inspiration expand both the upper and lower part of the chest but the maximum expansion in all men and in natural women is abdominal. You inhale a full breath the ribs rise slightly the upper part of the chest dilates the diaphragm contracts and at the waist there should be in healthy people an expansion of from one to three inches but there are few women whose habiliments allow an expansion of more than one-quarter or one half-an-inch. Thus the modern woman with a diminished lung-action breathes mainly with the upper part of her chest while all men and all women who breathe freely breathe almost entirely with the lower part. Even if this change were not injurious and we could afford to dispense with a full lung-action the compression of the waist is necessarily hurtful since it squeezes internal organs and prevents the due contraction of the diaphragm a contraction which materially assists the liver in the discharge of blood and bile. Tie a tight bandage round the waist of a man and the functions of the organs affected are impaired he is unable to make more than two thirds of the mental and physical exertion of which he is capable. Is it not probable that women lose nearly the same proportion of their natural ability? But the idea of corsets on a man is ridiculed everywhere. Does it not strike you as possible that the air of amused toleration with which men often regard women is due to her pervading artificiality - this padding and strapping? If one man sees another using the smallest device to improve his features or figure does he not instantly despise the intentional sham? And while men are expected to alter their standard of opinion for woman's benefit and to concede to women the liberty to ingeniously alter and add to their natural figures without the penalty of contempt - "because you know she is a woman" - how can we expect men to place women in their regard and respect on a real equality with any agreeable and wholly natural fellow-man? A writer in Scribner's magazine says regarding the physical development of women:   When we reflect that woman has constricted her body for centuries we believe that to this fashion alone is due much of her failure to realize her best opportunities for development and through natural heritage to advance the mental and physical progress of the race.  Whether women may by acting on rules of sense instead of fashion or habit really advance in the future the physical standard of their children is a thing to be tested but this thing is sure and indubitable that but little progress is possible until we have all learned to reject and expel with abhorrence every species of artifice and the whole brood of shams.     Tea And Bread-And-Butter The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 4.   Sydney August 3 1889   THERE is story of a girl who kept herself alive for some time by sucking a clean pocket-handkerchief. We do not know how many grains of starch a handkerchief usually carries nor can we say if in this case the laundress had mistaken it for a shirt front and had so supplied a plentiful quantity of stiffening but the story true or false furnishes a parallel very slightly extended of the method by which many women are nowadays content to keep themselves alive. A little starch for breakfast dinner and tea is certainly not the rule but a little tea and bread-and-butter for all meals is the staple food of hundreds of women and as sustenance for a healthy body this diet is not very much better than the pocket-handkerchief. When the men are away the wives and mothers starve themselves; whether it is to save trouble in the kitchen or to save time for themselves or from sheer indifference to food the same result ensues - "A cup of tea is all I want!" It does seem as if women in the mass are incapable of regarding good health and a sound body and mind as worth cultivating at the cost of any little trouble. Doctors know well enough that women are the most difficult of all their patients to cure; dietary rules and healthful habits which involve some kind of watchfulness restraint and patience are too irksome for the average woman to obey. Working girls would rather starve themselves and be well clad than preserve a healthy body simply and cheaply dressed. Even nursing mothers and hard-working women are equally indifferent to all health rules; they will not make themselves eat at regular times and in sufficient quantities. For this the children suffer and the whole household indirectly suffers too. Half-nourished bodies produce a score of trifling ailments fatigue strained nerves and irritable tempers. "Laugh and grow fat" is a cheery adage but life is sad to many and to grow fat is a costly ambition. It is not our object to glorify gluttony and extol corpulence but these are unquestionable facts that in any reverse of life you can laugh if you are healthy; that almost everyone can be healthy if they will and that to be healthy it is necessary among other things to eat the right food and plenty of it. If the leanness of your purse cries out against meat at lunchtime (which is properly meat-time) do without those coveted feathers or that much-to-be-desired bodice. Internal health is worth external beauty a thousand times over. What is the chance of a beautifully dressed woman against she who has the even temper and good spirits of perfect health even if you apply no other test than the relative value in the husband market? To have "a sound mind in a sound body" is the first of ambitions. Accomplishments beauty riches dress are insignificant beside health; virtue happiness and rational thoughts build themselves on health and the heights of in tellectual and moral worth are not to be scaled without it. If you lack a profession if you have no defined ambition set yourself to be professionally sound in body; the sound mind will follow. To eat too little is less disgusting than to eat too much but both are equally foolish and in large towns where it is the almost universal custom for men to be away from home during the day and to return for dinner at night the women are habitually guilty of eating too little.   Even the children are often allowed to  eat a meat dinner in the evening perhaps only an hour before they go to bed in order to save the trouble of giving them meat and vegetables at midday which is the right time and the only time when such a meal should be given them. Bush women are not much more sensible in this than their urban sisters indeed some pride themselves on the little they eat and the number of meals they miss altogether. For all these indiscretions nature invariably inflicts a penalty and the doctors chemists and patent-medicine makers receive the fines. It does not pay the doctors to teach health rules to the masses and it therefore behoves outsiders to cry out to the people that they can be healthy if they will study the right methods. The unfortunate children after they are weaned struggle under the sins of their ancestors with remarkable success but it is an obvious fact that the race might be strengthened and improved to an indefinite extent if the mothers would consider health as capable of evolution instead of regarding it as an accidental accompaniment of birth and permanent through life in that state of better or worse in which it was originally inherited. If husbands when they return home ask their wives what they have had to eat in their absence ninety in every hundred replies would be - "tea and bread-and-butter". This may tend towards spirituality and the maintenance of that "dear delicate little woman" variety of the "clinging" species prized by some men but the world would be none the worse for a robuster healthier stronger type of woman; nor should we be sorry if we could see the tea merchants transformed to market gardeners and all the milliners driven into the pro- vision trade.     The Man Question Or The Woman Question Re-stated The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 5.   Sydney September 2 1889   "WOMAN" as a topic for male journalistic pens has been popular ever since the infancy of literature; the little feminine vanities and vagaries have formed a delightful nucleus for descriptive and imaginative literary work in "leaders" paragraphs poems plays and essays. Now and then exceptional tidal waves of controversy occur when "marriage" "woman's suffrage" or similar subjects attract and swell the billows of printing ink but these subside and the permanent currents of the literary ocean carry always the same kind of debris - disquisitions on woman her weakness inconstancy vanity and little failings innumerable. When we read such articles we are reminded of those sermonisers who   "Compound for sins they are inclined to   By damning those they have no mind to  and we should like authors to turn upon men and boys the searchlight of genius with which they have hitherto illuminated the character of women; for a serious examination of modern social affairs renders apparent the significant fact that women and girls in the mass have a higher standard of action and a finer moral tone than men and boys in the mass possess. Begin at the top of English society and go down. Apart from political considerations Her Majesty the Queen has lived a blameless and good life. She may have made political mistakes incident to a difficult public position but she has undoubtedly been a good woman. Consider her feelings as a good mother and decide whether she has found more comfort in the careers of her sons or of her daughters. The Princess of Wales has won affection everywhere and no one doubts that she is well worthy of it. Have the ways of her sons or of her daughters most warmed her heart? Whose rectitude and goodness has reached most nearly to the standard she herself has maintained? This kind of enquiry may be pursued through all grades of society and it may afford the writers on "women" some new and impressive subjects of study. At the foot of the scale enquiries will find the hardworking laundress aided in her drudgery by her daughter while her heart aches over a selfish idle and vicious son it is the daughter who helps to keep the home together who takes one handle of the clothes basket who walks long distances to get the food at the cheapest shop who runs the errands and who misses her schooling in order to aid the old folks. Go where you will among the poorer classes you will see a mother toiling at the tub or mangle or in some way earning a living while one or two of her sons idle about the house. The sons are always ready to eat or to complain they do not hesitate to ask for the few shillings she has while she poor soul is happy to work for them if they will only keep decent and "out of trouble". So also with that weary and overworked woman the boarding-house keeper. She chops the wood in the backyard while a son whom she will not expose "vamps" on the piano or plays cards in the dining room. The sons gamble and drink; if they earn any money it does not help to keep any home together it disappears at races or in amusements. There are hundreds of young fellows able to work yet invariably idle: so long as they have parents they think it the duty of those parents to support them.   There are mothers who are almost content to see their sons idle at home so greatly do they apprehend disgrace and trouble when the boys are abroad and unwatched and though education has in many cases a happily mollifying effect the balance is against the men in all classes. [6] A city man complained the other day that of his six sons he had little hope of either; another mourned the ruin of his only son now a confirmed drunkard. Hundreds of others dare not enquire what is the evening occupation of their sons being well aware that tippling gaming or compassing the ruin of some poor girl form their customary employments. Through all the layers of society there is such a preponderance of evidence on the side of the women that it is possible to make a comprehensive generalisation and say that parents beget sorrow with their boys and comfort with their girls. To this conclusion we invite the attention of all writers upon "women" in order that everyone who studies social questions at all may aid in the effort to level men up to the moral average of women. Consideration might also be well spent on the cause which has rendered prevalent among men though absent as a rule from women such vices as bibulousness gluttony sensual appetite and a morbid taste for gambling. It may seem to anyone newly introduced to the subject a very singular anomaly that drinking low language and gallantry should be considered not altogether derogatory in one sex though utterly debasing in another; but this peculiarity of popular vision which gives two opposite views of the same thing is an ancient habit. We cannot now discuss the cause of the moral inequality we allege; it will suffice to point out that though custom and inherited opinion have habituated us to judge the actions of men and women by different standards the inherited squint does not justify perpetual ignorance as to the side where reform is most seriously and urgently needed.     Boycotting The Dawn The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 6.   Sydney October 5 1889   ASSOCIATED LABOUR seems to be in its own small way just as selfish and dictatorial as associated capital. The strength which comes of union has made labour strong enough not only to demand its rights but strong enough also to bully what seems weak enough to quietly suffer under petty tyranny. We have a notable example of this in the boycott which the Typographical Society has proclaimed against The Dawn. The compositors have abandoned the old just grounds on which their union is established viz: the linking together of workers for the protection of labour they have confessed themselves by this act an association merely for the protection of the interests of its own members. The Dawn office gives whole or partial employment to about ten women working either on this journal or in the printing business and the fact that women are earning an honest living in a business hitherto monopolised by men is the reason why the Typographical Association and all the affiliated societies it can influence have resolved to boycott The Dawn. They have not said to the women "we object to your working because women usually accept low wages and so injure the cause of labour everywhere" they simply object on selfish grounds to the competition of women at all. Now we distinctly assert that we do not employ women because they work more cheaply; we have no sympathy whatever with those who employ a woman in preference to a man merely because they think she will do as much work for a lower wage. We will be the first to aid the formation of trades' unions among working women whether they be compositors tailors or any others so that women who try to earn a living honestly may win as good an income in proportion to the quantity and quality of their work as men can do. In this object we know we have the sympathy of our readers and as to the boycott we only need their co-operation to entirely neutralise its effect. A great many women have written to us at various times wishing to be able to help us and begging to know how. There is now an opportunity to help us and the woman's cause generally with pronounced effect and we can give a comprehensive reply to all our kind well-wishers. The aid can be given by those who have no time to write for us no time to attend women's meetings no time for anything but the duties of their own household. It can be given us in the most powerful form merely in the course of the necessary expenditure of your weekly income whether that be large or small. If it is made clear to your tradesmen that you deal with them because they advertise with us the boycott is immediately defeated. Subscribers alone never entirely support a newspaper: the expense could not be borne without the profit of advertisements. Therefore of course the most effective way to injure any publication is to prevent the possibility of advertisement support. We are told that a Sydney journal on which two women were engaged was recently interfered with and effectually extinguished in this way. Union men personally visited those who advertised in that journal and threatened them with a union boycott if they continued their support.   As a consequence the tradesmen withdrew their advertisements and some newsagents who had also been visited refused to sell the paper producing of necessity the stoppage of the journal and the bankruptcy of the proprietor. [6] This is not likely to be our fate since we possess the sympathy of so many Australian women but we shall need the aid of our friends and we ask them to give it in this way - the most potent and conclusive way discoverable - namely to deal as far as due economy and your circumstances allow with those tradesmen and others who advertise in The Dawn and to tell them that you do so deal with them because their advertisement appears in our columns. We have no bitter feelings of hostility but unjust treatment must be opposed in some way and the method we ask our friends to adopt is both effectual and comparatively pacific. The question raised is not merely a question of the employment of women on a woman's journal for though this is the immediate point of conflict there is a larger principle in the background. Trades' unions would dispute or force out of sight if possible the right of women to enter the labour market at all. But women must have work for there are thousands not depending on any man for support and yet possessing as far we know as good a right to live as any other human being. Men have made the avenues to dishonour (among which we include the mere marrying for support) plentiful and easy while the avenues to honourable competence are few. Of nurses governesses and housekeepers there are already too many and though housework if well done is as honourable as any employment whatever we cannot forget that there are a great many women with abilities leading them in other directions than these. The trades which women can manage easily and well are filled by men: the muscular arms of men are handling postage stamps and millinery big men sit cross-legged on benches sewing. You can see such anomalies as a six-foot Hercules leaning over two skeins of floss-silk matching the colours another in the feather and flower department drawing an ostrich feather over the back of his white hand to display it. In like occupations are thousands of men slowly wasting their physique while the women are crowded out and as far as possible kept out. Setting type is perhaps a less unmanly employment than those enumerated yet an old compositor admitted to us that he was often ashamed to be doing nothing all day but such light-finger work. There are parts of printing work which men must do; but the work of a compositor is both light and healthy and as in our office the girls do no night work we can defend ourselves and ask the support of our reader with a clear conscience certain that in fighting our own cause we are also advancing that which we have quite as much at heart: the cause of all women workers present and future.     Modern Chivalry The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 7.   Sydney November 5 1889   OF the many smaller troubles which women silently endure probably one of the worst is the incivility to which they are exposed at the hands of clerks countermen and officials. The little business a woman may have to do in the city is in general a severe ordeal to her and even in shops where it might be supposed that self-interest would ensure courtesy unless she is an habitual customer or one the splendour of whose appearance foreshadows a large order she cannot be sure of courteous attention and treatment. Of course the behaviour of men towards a recognised champion of "women's rights" does not come within the scope of our comments because it is understood that such a creature is little more than a perambulating vinegar-bottle armed with an umbrella and she being ready to eject acidulous language against any male creature of differing views must expect an occasional exhibition of venom in return. No it is not the treatment of the sour-tempered militant female (if such there be) which excites our indignation; the reservoirs of our wrath and contempt only overflow when we see some little woman too timid to complain wincing under an unprovoked discourtesy. Financial offices and institutions are particular purgatories for women; government offices are by no means clear of the taint; some few shops need an expurgation and into most city offices employing subordinates women enter doubting how heavily their sensibilities will be trodden upon. The worst offenders can probably be picked from that large body of officials who are paid by the public; these repay in return for their salaries a good deal of rough manners indeed there are some who have a low notoriety among the public whom they bully; they rank as chiefs in the hierarchy of bad manners; and men also suffer from the infliction though not so severely as do the women. Before describing the methods of procedure we must admit that beautiful women have no ground for complaint; beauty carries a free pass entitling the holder to the kindest consideration of all strangers and great as are the dangers and penalties of loveliness it has this prerogative at least it may call the nearest adult male to be its willing servant. Even the boor therefore relaxes in the presence of beauty but in the average woman he finds a submissive and defenceless prey. The boor is sometimes in high station; if so he exercises his sovereign right to be a churl in this way;- as the victim enters his official lair he casts on her a momentary and indifferent glance then instantly resumes his work. Possibly a thousandth part of his glance towards her falls on a chair and she understands she is to sit there; she finds her way there at any rate and sits down waiting till he deigns to break the silence. When she has waited long enough to be thoroughly miserable he says "Well?" in a begrudged interrogative tone and recommences his writing or at the best listens indifferently with his eyes on a book or paper before him. Should the worm turn under his treatment and develop powers of remonstrance or should the subject of her story show her to be in some form influential or powerful or unexpectedly strong in arguments or resources she may have the wounds of her spirit healed by the most unctuous affability but to be considerate to all human creatures alike is not natural to him and that affability no doubt has its subsequent reaction. [6] The boor of the office-counter considers it a nuisance to have to do business with women at all. He issues to women his abrupt instructions to do this sign that fill up the other and readily grows impatient irritable and cynical if they seek clearer enlightenment or further directions. He has no courtesy naturally and he is not paid to include it among his acquired accomplishments. It is not inappropriate to mention in connection with this topic that it is a general masculine opinion that the inability to understand business is a natural characteristic of a woman's mind. The number of women successfully managing or working in businesses in other countries should be enough to disprove this but in the cases of unbusiness-like women whom we are considering the incapacity to comprehend business routine at a glance is inevitable.   There is nothing in any part of most women's lives or training to teach the least idea of office methods or formulae and it is only natural to blunder at the first contact with petty regulations of which the necessity and object are not distinctly apparent. Would the masculine intellect prove less clumsy at its first introduction to duties for which men have not but women have received special training? Returning to the boor we must record that when found in a shop or warehouse the individual specimen generally shows the characteristic of the species by intentional neglect rather than open insult. Sometimes discourtesy may take a grosser form but generally the science of the game is to estimate how much the prey will endure and to let her stand or sit expectantly to the furthest limit of her patience. The victim rarely complains since it needs not a little courage to search for and make report to the proper official; besides the inventive unveracity of the boor may produce such a plausible tale as to achieve even in the presence of his employer a second triumph over his victim. These slight and hastily sketched instances of modern chivalry will remind hundreds of our readers of inflictions personally suffered; the details of each case may vary but the generalisation remains true. Whether the boor class is caused by climatic influences injurious to the liver or by some still-existing taint of convict blood it is impossible to decide; we can only hope that the genus will become extinct as the world becomes more generally agreed that as we all consist of the same amalgam of animal and spiritual matter we have all equal rights to the consideration and courtesy of our fellows.     The Root Of All Evil The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 8.   Sydney December 5 1889   IN spite of the popular belief that "there is a woman at the bottom of everything" there are a few who still believe that the "love of money is the root of all evil" and we need hardly say that in our opinion the latter is by far the more fertile cause of misery. During the last few years in Sydney we have seen a long succession of prosecutions for fraud and embezzlement committed by clerks and others in positions of trust. These men did not steal to procure food for starving wives or medicine for sickly children; they were all in receipt of salaries sufficient to procure them the necessaries and the comforts of life. They stole that they might spend more or to enable them to gamble and grow rich with a bound and their histories show clearly enough that crime is a natural outcome of this insensate love of riches and extravagant display. Even with the mass who happily keep honest; the same passion keeps men anxious and chafing because forsooth they are not richer; they may have enough yet they pant for more with as much vehemence as if tickets to Paradise were to be sold to the highest bidder. The amount of physical injury which results from the perpetual haste and friction caused by this starving for superfluities is incalculable; there is not any disease more insidious and exhausting than worry yet how many men can be found who live placidly content that they are decently clad housed and fed and satisfied to be free from the horrors of poverty without craving for the extravagant and dangerous pleasures of wealth? The majority of people rarely look downwards towards the miseries of poverty never reflect on the ills which they themselves escape ills under which millions of their fellow-creatures writhe but occupy themselves in envying those who are better off sighing for some fresh luxury grumbling because they cannot save more chafing under the limits of their income which happily keeps their tastes and comforts within the bounds of untempted simplicity. The effect of this money craze on men and women alike is always disastrous; temper and constitution are worn down by it. Character goes overboard when money is to be won and no sooner does the pocket grow full than commensurate requirements develop to exhaust it. [8] The actual selfishness of being rich the indifference to human agony which is implied in the personal possession and use of a large fortune is what no one seems to recognise yet it perhaps explains why "it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven". It is easy for one who is not wealthy to profess gratitude that he has not committed the crime of devoting to his personal use that which other men not less worthy die for lack of; but it is probably the best of a poor man's unconscious and negative virtues that he is poor and therefore not misusing for his own benefit that wealth which might bring hope into the lives of a hundred necessitous creatures. Of the terrible effect upon the world at large of the craving for wealth the records of crime and of pauperism furnish sufficient examples. In these days of speculation many men are willing to grow rich upon the losses of others; in these times of fierce competition and rapid cheap production many a man climbs to wealth up a stairway made of the living bodies of the poor. The desperate attempts made of late years to lessen the gulf between the very rich and the very poor have only been partially successful. The rich grow richer and stronger the poor weaker and more numerous.   Hundreds of thousands of pounds pour annually through the channels of charity upon the smouldering fires of poverty and the generosity of the few is spread like a veil over the miseries of the many who being honest workers should never need to take aught that they do not earn. The recent gift of a quarter of a million made by one Englishman for the purpose of building homes for the poor is a splendid example of individual generosity yet it is but a bucketful of water thrown on a desert it does not alter the intolerable social conditions of our time for pity and charity should not be needed and that system must be rotten at the root wherein honest labour cannot win enough for common needs. Have we nothing to learn from the story of the London dock labourers strike? that insurrection of the starving. The first simmering of a revolution was there happily checked and moderated by generous help and timely success. It was only by the influence of John Burns that the firing of London in several places was prevented. To the brink of such disaster has the selfish fighting for riches brought the old world! Even the unions of the workers for self protection gives only a temporary relief for the wealthy can unite also. Look at the gigantic "Trusts" and "Combines" in America; the Railway Trust the Telegraph Trust the Sugar Trust the Rope and Twine Trust; all huge monopolies and unions of wealthy men created to make rich men richer regardless of the grinding of the poor. Some day they may grind too fine. They forget past warnings;- the strike of the Illinois coal miners of the New York freight handlers the Chicago strike the railroad strike the Pittsburgh riots. Even America by lust of riches and selfish disregard of the claims of human life has prepared the explosive elements for a great social disruption. In London one person in every forty-seven is in receipt of charitable aid and we have it on the authority of one who has worked fifteen years in East London that for every one of the degraded poor who figure in statistics there are twenty persons honestly toiling long hours for a daily pittance which keeps them just alive but always within arm's length of starvation. Such figures shew us an array of misery which no one can contemplate unmoved. The rich men who from their platform of comfort look on are so many modern Neros. They all fiddle at the burning. They dine sumptuously while within a stone's throw their fellow creatures are sharing a fragment of bread or a bowl of pieces from the charitable "scrap-cart". Over a costly bottle of wine men can discuss the women who earn a penny an hour! Better be a camel struggling at the needle's eye than a rich man expecting rewards after death; there is more reasonable hope of success. In this comparatively young country we have not reached the condition of extremes in wealth and in poverty but our methods our rage for wealth our whole social system being precisely a reproduction of the system of the old world the result here must in the long run be just the same. Nothing but a change in social conditions can save us from the dangers now threatening America and England. We must set ourselves to discover a system under which all who are willing to work can earn the necessaries of life. Spasmodic Christmas time charity is not enough; it is the apparent duty of every man and woman to study the social question and to practise that real charity which sets the good of mankind at large above personal aggrandisement and which makes the happiness of fellow creatures of more value than the social flattery and selfish pleasures which wait upon riches.     The Need Of The Hour The Dawn  Volume 2 Number 9.   Sydney January 6 1889   THE great need of the hour is for men and women who are not afraid to take hold of active practical work against the growing immorality of the age. There are plenty of persons who applaud the good deeds of others and yet what are they themselves doing? Martha K. Pierce LLD in a little tract which constitutes No. 9 of the social purity series issued by the Woman's Temperance Publishing Association asks such persons a number of very pertinent questions which are worthy of most serious consideration. Did you ever think how dangerous a thing it is for us to attend a meeting where evils are talked about and to read articles about them in papers and get into an agonised state of mind over them and yet do nothing? There is no surer way to deaden moral energy. I fear that this is the danger of the hour. We are feeling dreadful about it all but are we doing much to stop it? How can we sit in our safe churches and lecture halls and listen in a perfect ecstasy of indignation to denunciation of faraway evils when we might know if we would that in the next street some work as diabolical calls to heaven for vengeance. How dare we go home and quiet ourselves into obliviousness to disagreeable things with the hope that sometime women will have the power to do something in some safe and effective and eminently proper way to prevent these shocking things? How many of us are contenting ourselves now with praying that somebody else will do whatever it is "advisable" to do at this juncture? If we could only see ourselves as the pitying eye above sees us when we try to put celestial aspirations into the straightjacket of propriety we would humble ourselves in the dust realizing our utter unworthiness to receive those fleeting visitations of the Divine. There is real work before us. Are we watching the train on which bewildered girls are being hurried to a future so terrible that those who love them can have no hope except that Death will find and secure them soon? Are we sure that the pretty sales-woman who waits on us so patiently during an afternoon's shopping is not wishing that she had some good safe friend to go to for advice about some acquaintance whom she half distrusts? Is the servant girl so kindly and justly treated that she does not go to unsafe places for the scanty pleasures that her life of drudgery knows? Has our grumbling at the sewing girl's bill made her wonder as she turns to go to her home whether it would be so very wicked after all to accept the protection of some man who dissipated as she knows him to be is the only person who seems to care whether she starves or not? Have we taken pains to secure the confidence of the silly daughter of our careless neighbour that we may give her an effective word of warning? Is there a place in our town in which any hopeless woman could shelter? And have we taken pains to have its location and purpose so well advertised that no one could fail to know of it? Have we joined hands with every other woman in our neighbourhood who can interested in this work (and what true woman cannot be?) that we may help each other in lines of effort that cannot well be carried on by other individuals? Are the laws against abduction kidnapping and other crimes allied to the traffic by which our sisters are enslaved put in force in our locality not spasmodically as peculiarly distressing cases happen to come to public notice but every time they are violated? Are we trying to gain for womanhood such a direct influence in the body politic that officials will find it to their advantage to enforce those laws and to guard the interests of women as scrupulously in all ways as they now do the interests of the voters upon whose support they depend? And whatever else we do or leave undone do we speak in season the well-deserved and sorely-needed word of praise for the ones who dare to be the first in any line of this work?   Already the Defence Committee has indicated that it regards the lessons inculcated by defeat of more value to the Unions than the victory to their opponents.  What then have we learnt? First of all the necessity for a critical inspection of weapons. In its inception Trades-unionism was merely an instrument for improving the lot of the worker within the lines of modern competition. The overthrow of that system was no part of its business. As time has gone on however the commercial structure itself within which the wheels of Unionism revolve has been considerably modified. Monopoly has grown apace. Rings trusts and combines have menaced Society on its purchasing side and now Unions of employers have come into the field to cope with it in its capacity of worker and wage-earner. Still keeping in View the primary aim of Trades-unions - to get as much wealth for the worker as present conditions will admit of - we have then in the first place to consider the extent to which recent developments have left a margin within which our weapons are likely to prove effectual and in the second place the extent to which the weapons themselves demand improvement. [574]  Now in a mere report we must not wander into the mazes of political economy. All that it is here possible to do is to remind the Trades-unionists of Australia that they have been travelling these many years in a kind of cul de sac or blind alley one end of which is blocked by the conditions of modern commerce and firmly cemented by the laws of the land. That is a barrier which no strike can ever break through and when we find out-selves abreast of it we shall know that Trades-unionism has fulfilled its mission that it has carried us faithfully to the very end of the track. But we are not there yet; and in the meantime there is ample work on the old lines but slightly varied for one and all our organisations. A working day of not more than eight hours an improvement in the wages of the more underpaid workers the retention of those advantages gained by so many hard struggles in the past and threatened now by the united action of employers - these and many other objects come well within the original scope of Trades-unionism and fir their achievement in the light of the late strike too much stress cannot be placed upon the necessity for low entrance fees to individual Unions and of some central power to control the machinery of Unionism throughout the whole of Australia. It is impossible for independent local organisations to conduct a general strike with success. Some form of federation is imperative.  A still more important lesson learnt in the hour of defeat is this: That whilst we must go on ever increasing our capacity for fighting as we have fought before the time has come when Trades-unionists must use the Parliamentary machinery that has in the past used them. We are still some distance - it is impossible to say just how far - from the blind end of our industrial lane. Until we reach that end we shall still stand in need of the strike and the boycott. But the' trumpet notes at the sound of which the barrier itself will fall are essentially political. Once the worker determines - as he has determined - that the very basis of modern industry is antagonistic to his welfare - once he questions the right of any man to interpose a partition between himself and the fruits of his labour - he must set about the work of reform where it seems that reform can alone be obtained - and that is in Parliament. The rule that Trades Unionism must steer clear of politics was a golden rule when there was so much work to be done within our present industrial environment. But that time as we have said before is drawing to an end and ere we can radically improve the lot of the worker we must secure a substantial representation in Parliament. Then and only then can we begin to restore to the people the land of which they have been plundered to absorb the monopolies which society at large has helped to create and to ensure to every man by the opportunity of fairly remunerated labour a share in those things that make life worth living and above all a reasonable chance of developing within him the qualities of perfect manhood. [575]  The Parliamentary weapon is ready to our hand. West Sydney proved that. Too much stress cannot be laid upon its importance. Isolated labour representatives are useless - often worse than useless. The next general election must yield us the balance of power; future contests must give us an absolute majority in Parliament. Strait is the gate and sure only but sure indeed if we hold on our course ignoring the touts of existing parties knowing neither freetrade nor protection and oblivious of sectarian differences. Self-seekers must go. Jealousies must share the fate of the prickly pear least of all to be suffered in the home-paddock. "Politics" is a game we thust decline to play. For us Parliamentary life will be a real and perhaps a bitter warfare at all events a life into which no man must enter who does not love the Cause before himself who does not believe that the only statesmanship worthy of the name is that which enriches a country's toiling citizens.  This then is over and above all others the greatest lesson of the strike - that our organisations must become a means of education and constitutional power. Already it is half learnt. We have come out of the conflict a United Labour Party destined and all the hypocrisy of political life to brighten the lot of our children - if not our own lot.   Some people are sure to regard the concluding chapter of the Story of a defeated strike as a species of verbal trap-door for the more speedy and effectual exit of the Labour leaders. Those who see in the failure of the late strike nothing but a portentous disaster will naturally view this report in that light. But the working men of N.S.W. know better. Their faith in the completeness of their organisations has received a shock; but they have already found out that the very force of that shock has opened to the Labour Party vistas of usefulness through which it may march to ultimate victory. That end will be when it has indeed to use a vague and unsatisfactory expression "re-organised Society" restored the land of the people put an end to the wasteful and vicious System of industrial competition won for every man the right to work and for every man the full fruits of his work.  It is supposed by many that in some mysterious way the dismissal of a man from the steamship Corinna precipitated the general outbreak of hostilities. That is not true. It is a fact however that an old employee was dismissed from the Corinna and that when the Union of which he was the representative on board that ship suspecting under highly suspicious circumstances that he had been "victimized" demanded a reason for his dismissal they were informed merely that the owners had reasons of their own which it was inconvenient to explain. The result was a conflict between the men of that particular Company and their employers; but so far from being the signal for a general scrimmage the dismissal of Peter Mangan from the Corinna ended as it began - with the laying-up of the Tasmanian Steamship Company's fleet.  There were two questions upon which the Unions of Australia were prepared if necessity arose to court the fortunes of war. One involved the boycott of non-Union shorn wool and the other a struggle for the right of the Marine Officers' Association to affiliate with the other Labour Organisations of the Colonies. The non-union wool business was the first to crop up. Less than twelve months previously the Queensland Unions had scored a victory on a similar point. But their fight was waged under conditions more favourable to the men whose principal opponents were a single station holder and one large Steamship Company. In this Colony at least ten per cent of the sheds were shearing under non-Union rules and the pastoralists generally assuming an attitude of aggressive hostility. Indeed notwithstanding the oft-repeated assertion that the employers were in no sense responsible for the strike the public have now the assurance of so eminent an authority as Mr. Edmund Smith President of the Victorian Branch of the Employers' Union that the definite aim of the Capitalists was to force the Unions into the struggle. [764] Labour's demand was simply this: that by uniformly accepting the principles of Trades-Unionism the squatters would give their shearers a reasonable guarantee against industrial oppression; and this they refused to do. As the Labour Party said at the time and as facts have since amply proved the employers (then completely organised themselves) were bent upon breaking the back of other Unions. Still there was no knowing what the result might be. The Labour Unions had been brought face to face with the problem of existence and action was necessary.  So almost simultaneously with the arrival here of the first bales of the season's wool came the President of the Shearers' Union. A conference was arranged between the representatives of the maritime bodies and the Trades and Labour Council. The first meeting took place on the 12th August. The Shearers' President explained his plan of campaign. Persuasion was unnecessary for already the wharf labourers through whose hands of course the wool would have to pass into the ships' holds had decided to load only brands known to be clipped by union shearers and the result of the conference was that every maritime union in New South Wales pledged its support to a general boycott of non-Union wool. It was thus primarily with the object of maintaining the power of unionism in the back blocks that the affiliated societies entered upon the conflict.  Scarcely had the conference met when a fire that had been smouldering for some time broke out into flame in an altogether different direction and what might have been merely a strike of wharf labourers supported by ample funds from the other societies suddenly assumed the aspect of a battle involving all classes of maritime labour throughout Australasia. In the hope of making their hard lives if only a little still a little more endurable the marine officers had twelve months before hoisted their own little flag of reform. God knows there was need for reform. So they gathered within their industrial stockade and demanded concessions the righteousness of every one of which has since been acknowledged by the shipowners. But who are they? A few hundred marine officers out of whose souls it was said the spirit of independence had been long since drained. Their association alone was powerless. The owners were playing with them and they knew it. Possibly still worse. In the light of Mr. Edmund Smith's boast about the deliberate precipitation of the strike by the employers it is more than possible that they were wilfully exasperating them. But gold braid and brass buttons are poor compensation for so many hours of weary responsibility. [765] Human nature enslaved on the bridge contracted a sympathy with human nature striving for freedom in the fo'castle. It brooded over the wrongs of that man strutting about in the pomp of brief authority at sea whilst his wife and child shed out a pinched existence on shore. The great ship did his bidding he was lord of the winds and the waves but he was himself the most pitiful of slaves - an industrial slave - and now he is going to aim a blow for freedom.  Thus it happens that among the minutes of the conference we find in the proceedings of the second day a resolution carried with one dissentient vote; inviting the Secretary of the Marine Officers. Association to take part in its deliberations. From that moment the basis of the impending strike was indefinitely extended and its original pretext to some extent forgotten in the face of such a novel development for although none of the labour unions were as yet pledged to stand by the officers it was generally understood that if the latter proved their good faith they might rely on the support of all organised labour. The officers of the Adelaide were the first to leave their ship. On Friday the 15th August they lodged their notices. On Saturday the 16th they cleared out and the vessel sailed for Melbourne that afternoon a few hours behind time with strange faces on the bridge. Other officers left their ships as they came into port. The Seamen's Union satisfied with the backbone of the new association called upon their members to stand by it. The wharf labourers refused to load ships manned by non-union crews and the strike in all its vastness and complexity began.  Just then a strange scene presented itself any hour of the day and far into the night to anyone visiting the Temperance Hall. The conference convened for the discussion of a possible strike had merged into the now famous Labour Defence Committee. Aptly was it said by one in authority that the labour unions had set up a rival government and that the colony itself was in a state of civil war.  But how was victory to come? Already the strike had lasted many weeks. Still there were funds in hand and so far all that our members suffered was the depression natural to men called away from lives of physical activity to play their part in a waiting game. The employers were losing heavily. How much longer were they prepared to carry on at a loss? On the other hand their strength as a body was increasing with the united action into which a common danger had forced them. From the very first week of the strike when one side was as confident of success as the other the men had publicly expressed their eagerness for an unconditional conference. The employers would only consent to meet them upon the understanding that they first conceded the points in dispute. Now flushed with the victory of Circular Quay intoxicated by the almost unanimous approval of the "classes" and certain of the support of the authorities they rallied with greater force than ever to their original intention of breaking the back of trades unionism. [766] "Prolong the strike to its bitter end - starve the men into submission and re-engage them upon terms making future strikes possible only by breach of law." Those were the tactics of the employers; and with bitter determination they proceeded to carry them into effect.  A counter-move was absolutely necessary. What should it be? Some counselled a strike throughout every branch of industry. "Block the railways lay up the ferry boats turn out the gas in the cities ship no more wool in the country set no more type for the newspapers call out the butchers and the bakers and bring society itself to book." Well undoubtedly society was at fault but how far the recoil of the spring would have injured Trades-Unionism it was impossible to foresee. This was "too large an order" and all that came of it was a good deal of agitation on the part of peaceful citizens with well-lined stomachs and a command for shearers to stand by their gear. Three days afterwards they were called from the sheds and the last shot of the Defence Committee was fired - that is the last shot that the Committee felt itself justified in firing; and even that proved unavailing. The law is of the capitalists' making and the law imposed pains and penalties in many cases threatening with the loss of small homesteads the men who left their work. From this out the result of the strike was apparent. When the shearers were sent back to their sheds the unequal conflict was practically over and all that remained for the Defence Committee was to bring its operations to an end.  Of the attempts at mediation the less said the better. In a struggle partaking to an indefinite extent of class warfare it is almost impossible to find men in whom each side can repose absolute confidence. [767] No one can doubt the genuineness of many of the efforts to bring the combatants together. The Labour Party cannot discredit any of the well-intentioned suggestions in favour of an appeal from force to reason. But at the same time it must be borne in mind that with one or two exceptions it was from the Capitalist ranks that the mediators were nominated and that in some instances the proposed mediators themselves had during early stages of the Struggle carried arms against the Unions. Sir Alfred Stephen had prepared a Bill for declaring strikes under almost any circumstances illegal and threatening with summary imprisonment at the hands of police magistrates those whose earnestness in the work of reform led them into that species of industrial warfare. Mr. Salamons speaking in the Legislative Council had expressed his approval of a measure by which a strike in certain branches of industry would be a crime; Mr. Burdekin even when assuming the character of a mediator was indebted to the better judgment of a newspaper editor for the suppression in a manifesto for publication of sentiments expressing too clearly the Capitalistic bias of his mind; whilst over the head of Mr. Champion hung an action for libelling one of the leaders of the Labour Party in England and endless charges of treachery to the Labour cause there. Was it any wonder then refusing as they did to hear of arbitration when expounded by gentlemen eminently friendly to their interests that the employers should render it simply impossible for the Labour Defence Committees to do otherwise than fight the battle out? And can anyone in fairness say that forced as they were to continue the conflict they would not have been justified in applying the principle of the boycott to its fullest extent?  It is fit and proper that the representatives should express their sincere regret that owing to the unreasonable and antagonistic attitude assumed by labour as directed by the leaders of their unions a strike so far-reaching in its effects and so severe in character should exist. It is nevertheless their duty to assert that the causes leading to the strike cannot in the remotest degree be traced to any actions by the employers. The alleged incidents given as the reasons for the origin of the strike are two in number: - 1st That the captain of an intercolonial steamer dismissed a fireman for reasons to his mind fully justified by the facts of the case. 2. That employers refused to discuss demands made by marine officers of intercolonial and coasting steamers while under duress of those officers being affiliated to labour unions. As to the first it is alleged by the unions of labour that the fireman was dismissed for the reason that he was a delegate of his union. This is contrary to fact; his being the mouthpiece of or delegate from his union was merely a coincidence and the captain would have been wanting in his duty to his owners had he not dismissed him. The fact of a man being a delegate does not raise him to a level higher than any other member of the crew and it cannot be denied that to properly maintain discipline on board of a vessel a captain has a right to dismiss any man whose presence on board is inimical to the discipline necessary to the safety of the ship. [...] As to the second it will be admitted by all right-thinking unbiassed persons that it would be impossible to maintain that discipline essential to safety of life and property if marine officers and men serving under them were allied by union. The marine officers were informed that the owners were prepared to meet their demands by substantial concessions but with the condition that placed as they were as representatives of the owners any association by them in Union with the men serving under them could not be permitted and their demands were rightly excluded from consideration by the owners until their officers dissolved their alliance with other unions. Having dealt particularly with the two alleged immediate causes for the strike it is necessary to notice a cause contributing to it. In the rules of trades unions it is sought by stringent regulations to secure a monopoly of work and to limit membership. [769] This is not only an injustice to the large amount of labour outside their ranks but contributes to the undue interference by labour organisations with the trade of the colonies. The tactics adopted deserve severe condemnation. Foremost is the unjust combination of various unions to boycott trade so as to enforce the demands of the particular union concerned. The means adopted in combination are various and far-reaching in their character. Edicts are issued that the produce of these colonies coal and other minerals wool wheat and other products from the land must not be carried or shipped if at any period of its production or transit labour is employed outside the trade organisations. And as to the internal trade efforts are made to prevent supplies of the raw material to manufactories employing free labour and in the disposal of the manufactured article every opposition is given to legitimate realisation. But still more extraordinary the necessaries of life are in some instances refused to those who withhold compliance with the demands of trades unions. Intimidation is practised by trades unionists. Free labourers are prevented by threats and acts of personal violence from following their lawful occupation. To enforce the edicts mentioned members of labour unions whether directly concerned or not are compelled by their leaders to leave their employment frequently contrary to their own desire and in disregard of their legal obligations. Employers in the course of their trade have also to contend with the fact that labour unions ignore agreements made by them in their corporate capacity with employers if it suits the purpose of the moment to repudiate them. The incidents of the present strike give abundant proof of this assertion. A paper has been delivered to the representatives in conference explaining the breach of agreement made by the miners in the Northern collieries of New South Wales and is published together with a second paper published by the chairman of the Mount Kembla Colliery. [...] The various decisions of the courts in the colonies in respect to the violation by the seamen of their agreements with their employers is further proof. The agreement lately made by the wharf labourers in Sydney was openly violated within a few days of its completion. Sufficient has been said to prove that the present strike has been forced on employers. In opposing it passive resistance only has been offered and while employers have endeavoured to conduct their business by the aid of free labour they have not sought in any way to assail unionism; although they have Striven to counteract its abuses. The proceedings of the conference are set forth in the following resolutions which were unanimously adopted by the representatives present: - First resolution - "That this conference reaffirms the principle of 'freedom of contract' between individual employers and employees and asserts that any infringement of that principle is not only destructive to commerce but is also inimical to the best interests of the working classes." [770] Second resolution - "That any attempt to apply force or the threat of force or any persuasion other than that permitted and defined by law to men who are not unionists or any other form of boycotting should in the opinion of this conference be resisted by united action." Third resolution - "This conference is of opinion that employers should declare that they will not be coerced in the dismissal of any labour that has taken service with them in the present emergency and in the event of any attempt being made to coerce such labour to join any trade organisation or to interfere with them in the discharge of their daily work the combined associations represented at this conference will take all possible means to insure their personal safety." Fourth resolution - "That this conference declares that to maintain discipline and thus protect life and property owners of shipping in the coastal and intercolonial trades should not engage or retain in their employ any captains or officers who may be members of a union affiliated with any labour organisations." Fifth resolution - "That with a view to the extension of the various employers' unions it is desirable to encourage employers and others connected with all trades businesses and interests to join existing employers' unions and form other unions where necessary for mutual protection and defence upon the basis of resolutions passed; that such unions form federal councils for each colony that all such federal councils be affiliated and confederated." The conference desires a speedy termination of the present unsatisfactory state of affairs; and to facilitate a resumption of work employers are urged to proclaim as soon as possible the terms on which engagement will be made.  Of these "public opinion" which in this particular instance meant the temper of the "upper" and "middle" classes was from the first antagonistic to the strike. Nor is the reason very remote. [773]  The nature of the dispute was abstract and technical. Who outside the ranks of the Labour Party cared whether Trades-Unionism merely as Trades-Unionism was strengthened or weakened in the back-blocks? The machinery which the shearers had called into existence had hitherto performed its work well. What if it was now threatened by a hostile power greater than itself? The claims of the marine officers had been admitted by the shipowners. Then what farther use was the affiliation by which they had gained those concessions. It was not to be expected that the majority of people should see that both cases involved another step towards the perfecting of organisations whose perfection is absolutely necessary if labour is to have as much as a voice in the terms upon which it will engage to serve in the station shed or on the steamboat bridge. But the general public knew nothing about that. All they did know was that the Unions were fighting a question of organisation about which they understood little and cared less. It was not enough that the cause of humanity was the very marrow in the bone of contention. Nobody was being beaten to death or even expected to work for five-pence an hour like a London Docker. Our drama was a domestic tragedy and when we appealed to the bar of "public opinion" we were told to go home and shake hands.  Not only had "public opinion" no particular reason for wanting what we wanted but it had the strongest reason for not wanting what we were misrepresented to want. Our opponents ingeniously pretended that the presence of two or three ship's officers on the Maritime Council would be subversive to discipline at sea. Nobody desired that; and without considering whether anything so absurd could possibly be the result the "classes" took alarm and said "At all hazards we will maintain discipline on board ship by keeping the officers away from the Maritime Council." Then with regard to the boycott of non-Union shorn wool most people apparently failed to realize the end to which it was a means. The means itself was but another instance of the "tyranny of Labour". What else could it be? Ignoring the terrible handicap with which the masses began their struggle some half century ago and forgetting to take into account the distance that still exists between them and their "betters" - the good things of life to which they are justly entitled but do not possess - people had been thinking of nothing but the steady progress of the working-class during recent years. The only question asked with fretful repetition was "Will they never be satisfied?" Thus Ignorance mated with Indifference begat the Spirit of Profound Contempt for the Working Man and they all three went to war in Support of the House of Have.  These were the elements against which we had to count. A strong and friendly press might have subdued if not overcome them entirely. But if strong so much the worse for the daily press so far from being friendly was not even impartial. Only a few months previously the question as to who should control its policy - the editor or the capitalists behind it - had been fought out in the office of perhaps the most "democratic" newspaper in Sydney; and as everybody knows the capitalists walking rough-shod over the dead bodies of two editors sustained their point. [774] Henceforward the voice of that most "democratic" of papers was admittedly the voice of an Esau. Its opinions were the opinions of the land shark and the tramway grabber of men responsible for the management of companies working their employees almost double the number of hours prescribed by the rules of Trades Unionism nay of men largely interested in the very steamship companies whom the Unions were fighting. Surely it was not within the region of possibility that we should get impartial treatment at such hands. The proprietors of that particular journal did their worst and the rest of the metropolitan press being similarly under the control of embittered and powerful capitalists was equally determined if less hysterical in its antagonism to the Unions.  The whole artillery of daily journalism opened fire upon us. The few breaches of the peace that occurred so much to the disgust of the Defence Committee were magnified into riots for which the very principles of Trades Unionism were held responsible. The most trivial circumstances perverted into acts of intimidation were gathered like so many rusty nails from the journalistic gutter for explosion in the shape of paragraphic bombs on the following morning. On the other hand when clerks were dismissed from their employment for refusing to parade as special constables when sermons and addresses favourable to the cause of labour were delivered by men in responsible public positions the leader writers maintained an ominous silence. Perhaps the best example of the treatment about which we complain lies in a fact to which we have already alluded. No doubt sincerely desirous of the honour of bringing the strike to an end by mediation the Mayor of Sydney (Mr. Sydney Burdekin) ventured upon the publication of a judicial summary of the case. Even as printed in the two morning papers anybody reading between the lines could form a pretty accurate guess upon which side the author's sympathies lay. That was all right. Mr. Burdekin or any other gentleman had a perfect right to offer his services as mediator whatever his views might be provided of course that he either kept them to himself or explained them faithfully beforehand. But what can be thought of the impartiality of a newspaper editor who upon receiving a statement of the views of a probable mediator and finding them fatally partial takes good care that they are judiciously tempered before publication? [775] The attitude of one journal and one journal alone - the Sydney Bulletin - commends itself to the Committee consistently extreme and extremely consistent its clear cut and thoughtful articles not always commendatory often cold and cynical but uniformly worthy of respectful study have at all times abounded in sound advice for the Labour Party.  If the press fought well for its Master no one can say the same of the church. The newspaper editors did lead "public opinion". The clergy left it to grope amidst the gloom of Sacerdotal clap-trap. Indeed the clergy throughout the strike remind one of the priests who accompanying the Utopians to war withdrew to a respectable distance from the battlefield and there prayed that victory might rest with their own side but that there might not be much bloodshed on either side. The fact is - and it is a matter for deep regret - that the clergy were afraid to speak out. Their office bearers the men upon whom they chiefly rely for pecuniary support the men who lending an air of worldly respectability to their churches are thrust into positions of solemn dignity were arrayed against us often our bitterest opponents. To give Offence to them was to quarrel with the means of grace. So the clergy in their weakness took a middle course and failed to win from the working-classes even the respect accorded to honest opposition. We recognise the stamp of a man in the Queensland Bishop who worked on the wharves with the blacklegs but it is to be feared that the clergy as a body' through their want of straightforwardness during the strike have done much to lose their opportunities of well-doing among the workers of Australia. Our respect is due however to that Queensland Bishop for his manly opposition our sincerest gratitude to Cardinal Moran the Rev. Dr. Roseby the Rev. H. L. Jackson the Rev. George Walters and a few other clergymen for their Christ-like sympathy with the struggling masses.  And now a word about the politicians. It would be hard to say that there are no honest politicians. There must be. But this the Labour Defence Committee recognised from the first: that politics as generally understood when stripped of its drapery is merely a game of self-advancement; and that in one sense or another Members of Parliament are almost to a man "on the make". At the present time both Houses are composed almost exclusively of men directly interested in the supremacy of Capital and of course opposed to any social changes tending to a more even distribution of wealth. Both parties are ready to use the working-classes for their own ends; neither is willing for the working-classes to use it. This was unmistakably exemplified during the strike. The Labour Party had one or two courageous friends on either side in the Legislative Assembly; but the temper of the House itself was antagonistic to the last degree. [776] That the Government selected its special constables almost exclusively from men imbued with class-hatred that they permitted hostile displays of force on the part of our opponents and facilitated undermanned ships in putting to sea is hardly worth comment in the face of the ready approval of the Opposition. True when the fight was over and after he could have been of any possible assistance to the cause Mr. Dibbs found his way to a platform in the Domain. But it all amounts to this: whilst we have no cause for gratitude to the Government for their attitude during the strike we have no reason for believing that the Opposition had it been in office would have acted more fairly.  The last and perhaps after all the most potent of the influences to which we must attribute the result of the strike is the fact that whilst we were not prepared the employers were. True their Union had been in existence for less than two years but with boundless Capital at its hack with the services of capable agitators with the experience of other organisations to guide them and above all with an abundance of unemployed labour (itself an emphatic comment on the industrial condition of the Colony!) to help them in the pinch it proved an unexpectedly well-furnished rival.  Just at this time when new ideas are ripening that if allowed to grow without interference would land the Australian people in the status of a united and powerful nation one set of persons is trying to divert the attention of Australians from the straight course before them to the meshes of the net of Imperial Federation whilst another set which chiefly resides in Sydney is trying its utmost to stop the growth of National ideas by Setting the Australian States at enmity with one another. [791]  Regarding the first of these foes to the National Cause it may be said that their distinguishing feature is absenteeism. If they are not actually absent from their colony their hearts are; but as a rule it may safely be said that the actual absentees are the strongest Imperial Federationists. These persons whilst contributing nothing to the country which protects their properties and from whence they draw the means to live in luxury in foreign countries are for ever prating of what Australia should do for Imperialism - which when closely analysed means for themselves. These are the people who cry out for Australian contributions to maintain mercenary fleets. They pay in Australian gold taxes to the British revenues and the less the cost of Britain's armaments the greater the probability of a reduction of her taxation and consequently of the amount of income-tax required from the London colonials. If the whole of the colonies were to undertake the cost and duty of "maintaining their connections with the centre of the Empire" it is safe to say that Britain's naval expenditure might be immensely reduced - a result which would cause a certain reduction of taxation and hence of the amounts required from the colonial absentees. This no doubt would be eminently satisfactory to those gentlemen and if in decreasing their own expenses they caused an increase of that of the home staying Australian why they would only be forwarding the glorious cause of Imperial Federation whose cardinal principle is that the centre should be nourished at the cost of the extremities! The absentee Imperialists have other games to win in pushing on their Imperial Federation fad. If the country that yields them their revenues - if our Australia - will only behave like a good and dutiful child to her grand old affectionate mother; if she shows that she is willing to spend her blood and treasure in the cause of Imperialism; if she will waste her substance that bondholders may securely draw drawn their interest from downtrodden Egypt; or that the Russians may be kept out of lands in which the Australian people have not the faintest interest; then the Carlton Club will smile on Australia and what is better - much better - on all that boast themselves as being connected with her. Then to be an Australian would be the absentee's best title to the patronage of the British aristocracy. It would give him the entrée to salons where unaided his own vulgar wealth could never aspire to. It would give him influence with the Government and perhaps assist his son to a fat and fashionable sinecure and himself to a ribbon or a star. Looking at the matter with dreams of this kind floating round him can we wonder that the absentee should preach Soudanism and Imperialism. [792]  Let the critic sneer at 1788 It shall yet be a date that the wide world shall honour. What though our land was born in sorrow and shame; yet out of the cradles of poverty and sin empires have emerged and the regenerators of mankind have arisen.  When we think of the teachings of history we can well believe that in the time to come - it may be before this generation has passed away - 1788 will be a date that will be classed in the world's history with the founding of Rome the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers or the storming of the Bastille. There will be but one greater day in our own Australia's annals and that will be the anniversary of the Declaration of her Independence. For that great date now that we are at the dawn of the second century of our existence as a people it is the duty of our countrymen to make preparation. It will be a fateful event and epochs of that character are slow in coming and are not the progeny of chance. Work earnest work must smooth the way and the more the labourers and the more earnest their labour the sooner and the better will the triumph be achieved. Too many of my countrymen give no thought to the morrow. It suffices them that they eat drink and be merry. But empires are not built by muscles and bodies alone. Brains must be exerted. There must be they who will plan and work for other ends than those which are demanded to obtain the wherewithal to eat and drink.  Australians! you are the vast majority of the people of this land. Why do ye not rule it? Wherefore leave to your veteran fathers the task of governing a land for which they cannot have the same affection as you have? Our fathers' hearts must of necessity feel but a divided affection for this land of ours. It is not natural to expect otherwise. We know even those of us who think of little but athletic sports how well we love our native land. We know too that we could never love another as well. How then can we expect our fathers whose native lands are in the northern world to feel for our Australia as we do? They cannot do so and if not how can they be such fit rulers of our land as ourselves who know no other land nor wish to save as a curiosity; who sprang from the soil of this land; who live [in] it; who will die in it and all of whose interests and affections are bound up with it. An Englishman may seek to govern Australia solely for his own purposes but an Australian must no matter how utterly selfish he may he still have at the bottom an earnest desire to serve his country as well as himself.  Then naught have we Australians to gain by the subjection of the Hindoos and Burmese. In the case of another portion of the grand conglomeration we certainly have a very decided gain - of a kind. Through the need of a few fat billets for Englishmen in Hong Kong we have been almost compelled to treat hordes of the filthiest and most obscene race in existence as fellow-"subjects" (how the base word galls). [793] These fellow British subjects can in virtue of the possession by England of one part of the Mongol dominion come among us as a right. Thus England gets a few lucrative appointments and - we had nearly forgotten it - a funnel through which to pour opium poison into the Mongols and we for our share get the Mongols themselves. Britain gets the cash and we get the pollution.  Such are our advantages from those parts of the conglomeration that are nearest to us. If these advantages are worth anything by all means let us stick to them by upholding "The Empire". But if they are in most cases absolutely worthless and in others far worse than useless then he would be a great fool who would advise us to seek them for our own sake and a Don Quixote who would ask the new nation on this soil to exert itself in a cause which only enriches another nation twelve thousand miles away.  The question whether it is an advantage or injury to this country that "the rubbish of the Celestial Empire should continue to be shot on these shores" has already been sufficiently investigated and more people have agreed that it is decidedly an injury to it. Yet they who have so agreed have hitherto argued as if they were mere sojourners in the land whose sole object in being here was to get a living in a comfortable moral and respectable manner. On the other hand there is a minority - chiefly employers of labour - that maintains that though amongst the Chinese who come here certain vices are more prevalent than amongst Europeans yet they are as a rule a peaceable industrious and above all a "Cheap people" and hence a benefit to the country - to the country meaning to the employers of labour. This dictum of the minority from its point of view is apparently unimpeachable though it is really not so. However that is not a point to be discussed at present. The former of these opinions on the Mongolian influx may be aptly described as that of a citizen of the British Empire; the latter as that of a cosmopolite or citizen of the world. But there is another light in which the subject must be viewed by our people and that is from an Australian standpoint.  The Australian cannot look at the question in the same light as a man who is essentially a colonist that is one who goes to a new country to improve his condition in life and cares for that country principally as affording him scope for obtaining an easier and better livelihood than he could expect "at home". But this country is the Australian's home. He knows no other. It is not for him a place for making money or for obtaining a living only. It is his native land where in good or evil report he will live and die; and he owes it no divided allegiance but that sacred and indissoluble attachment due from every man savage or civilised to the land of his birth. It may here be remarked that this attachment is always more perceptible in small or young democratic countries for every native of the soil in such cases feels himself a more important unit in the sum total of his nation than any single citizen of a long-established populous country could consider himself. [794]  It will be evident from the foregoing that the question whether the Chinese who come here are moral or immoral is a matter of comparative indifference to an Australian. Their crime is that they are a cheap race - cheap to a degree that is destructive to the white race. And as we proudly hope that Australia shall one day be the seat of a mighty independent nation of the Anglo-Saxon race to which Britain shall look in the far-off future with eyes full of trustful love and pride it is our bounden duty as loyal and patriotic natives of the soil to use every effort in our power to prevent the calamity which would bring about the one result and so destroy our hopes and prospects of the other. En fact it would be little short of treason to our land to stand by and see a cancer in her breast which though small at present grows daily stronger in vitality taking deeper and deeper root and slowly but surely sending its noxious parasitical fibres hither and thither throughout our land. [...]  So far from thinking a Chinese war would be a calamity to Australia I fervently believe it would be the greatest blessing we could possibly receive. For it would give us an excuse to clear out every yellow alien from our midst; and there would be such an uprising of patriotism in Australia as has seldom been seen in Anglo-Saxon annals; for the Australian is more enthusiastic and excitable than his fathers. At the first threat of approaching danger the youth the young men and the old men of the continent would lay down their pens their tools and their whips and pick up whatsoever in the shape of a rifle or musket was available to their hands and there would be a sound of shooting and of drilling and of martial command in every hamlet township and city of the country. The whole land would ring with the shout of preparation and in the general outburst of warlike enthusiasm the women even would not be idle. Never a girl would look at her lover did he not bear on his arm or breast the badge of Australian defence and in every home in Australia fair women with sparkling eyes and warm hearts would be broidering the colours of the local companies or making the wherewithal to comfort those whom they loved but who soon might lay [sic] cold or wounded on a patriot's field. Yes a Chinese threat of invasion would do all that and it would do more - far more: it would immediately federate our states into one nation; it would give us a permanent national government and baptised with the certain halo of a glorious victory in a truly righteous and holy cause the flag of our new-born nation the blue banner of the Southern Cross would be an emblem that henceforth to all time would inspire the sons of our country with patriotic pride and a firm resolution to live true to her and when necessary to die for her. No longer would our land hang doubtfully on the fiat of others. [795] She would have arisen from the tutelage and the milk of dependence into the clear light of manhood and independence. No longer would the hated word "Colonial" be cast at our heads: but as citizens of the Sovereign and Independent States of Australia our people and their representatives could rightfully claim a free and equal admittance into the family of nations.  As to the virtues of the Chinese as citizens: who has seen them? Wherever the Mongol settles be he rich or poor his neighbourhood reeks of physical and moral pestilence. His house is rarely washed out; the windows are never open and the blinds are eternally down - that is to say unless he has a fresh white paramour who has not become quite accustomed to breathe an 'atmosphere charged beyond Caucasian endurance with human exhalations and opium fumes. Look in the Mongol's back yard and unless the police are constantly watching him you will find pestilence and malaria seething in every hole and corner. In short his house is a den and his yard is a sewer.  In his moral character John Chinaman is like his den and his yard. He has saving a species of ant-like industry but one virtue and that is the effect of the training of ages. He has a kind of regard for his progenitors. That is the single good point in the Mongol's moral side. As against this he has no ideas such as prevail among Caucasian races of what is due from man to man. John Chinaman will leave his comrade to die in a ditch or cast him upon the tender mercies of the whites. He has no wife; but merely a toy or a slave - a thing to gratify his lusts or a creature to be silent and obey. If he has more children than he requires he either kills them in infancy - a practice which is recognised by his Government - or he sells them into slavery without the slightest compunction. John has no ideas in his language which are analogous to sin or morality in ours. If he sins more than usually he never regrets the wrong - but merely the bad policy. In short he has no ideas in common with Europeans on the subject of right and wrong. Everything is simply a question of good and bad taste. In the matter of lying John is without a rival: but he is never troubled about his lies except when they are discovered and then he grieves sorely because he overdid the thing [...] the fact is the "Chinkie" generally knows all the filth that a mind with not a single moral principle in it could possibly imbibe long before he leaves sight of the teeming dens and hovels of Canton or Hong Kong. [796]  Such is the law-abiding virtuous race of citizens that takes the fancy of some of our philanthropists and philosophers. I would advise these kind of gentlemen to take the Mongols to their own bosoms first and to nurse them to be their daughters' husbands and then when they have well tested the matter in that wise I will certainly say they have some right to recommend John Chinaman to others.  No Sydney paper which has of late spoken on the subject appears to be thorough on the Chinese question. The Mongolian proclivities of our leading morning journal are notorious and were never more than flimsily disguised; and the newspaper which while the 'Chinese sailor' dispute was raging from Cape York to Cape Otway took so active a part in aiding white mariners against coolie labor appears to regard the present anti-Chinese agitation as ill-timed and unnecessary. Perhaps there would be little said by the white workman against the Chinaman were the latter to confine his operations to vegetable-growing and potato-peeling for these occupations are comparatively unremunerative and employ so limited a number of persons that a guarantee would by the natural laws of trade be afforded against the supply of Chinamen being out of proportion to the demand for vegetables. However the present agitation results from the fact that the white man sees Chinamen erecting buildings in the main streets of Sydney and perceives that the Mongolian who has long been a cabinetmaker has now commenced practice as a carpenter. The action taken by those who promoted Monday night's meeting at the Temperance Hall is not the less commendable because the speakers and the audience were for the most part men who had personally felt or were afraid that they would soon feel the effects of the Chinese invasion - a dearth of work and a reduction in the rate of wages. [394] The workman may yet be a philanthropist and a sound political-economist but he has not yet learned to regard questions of this kind except from the standpoint of self-interest. The Chinese question is a weighty one and one on which hundreds of pages have been written and will in the future be written; but the conclusion which inevitably and inexorably forces itself on every reasonable white who whether as employer or workman practically studies the question is that where the white man and the yellow stand side by side under the same laws the former must if he is to exist sink to the level of the latter. On the Chinese question there must be no compromise on the part of the people of this country. All the sophistry in the world will not remove these facts - that the Chinaman while living under the protection of our laws and enjoying every privilege accorded to the white contributes hardly anything to the revenue; that the indirect taxes he does pay are imposts levied on the consumption of opium and on other vicious habits; that he invariably removes his realised wealth from the country which as a set-off only gets his cheap labour - the ruin of the white; that the Chinese bring no women with them and foster immorality wherever they settle: that the races should not be allowed to mix; that they are mixing to an appreciable extent in the lowest quarters of the large cities; and that the presence of the Chinaman must ever be a disturbing element in the at all times sufficiently strained relations between capital and labour. The Chinese as a body must eventually be cleared out of all but tropical Australia and it will be well for the community to settle the business as soon as possible by imposing on every Mongolian who lands on our shores a poll-tax so heavy as to prohibit the Celestial workman from competing with the white. The Government which in imitation of the English practice goes so far as to protect the ordinary professional man from the competition of the professional civil servant - whose status here is unfortunately for him utterly different from that of his English prototype - should surely take a lesson from the experience of the United States and protect the white man against the inferior race which under present conditions must in time supplant him. [395] This we say not merely as theorists. The writer has 'humped his swag' through North Queensland the Celestial's paradise and seen how in spite of the advantages given to white men by the mining regulations hundreds of whites were deprived of work in order that thousands of Chinese might fossick for a living. At present the Chinese who properly speaking are not morally physically or intellectually fit to sit down in the same continent with the European are living amongst us as a favored race. They enjoy all the Caucasian's privileges - labor under none of his disabilities. They will if allowed yet starve him out. According to the HERALD they are splendid colonists. We know the Chinaman better than most people. He produces two things - vice and vegetables.  THE POINT AT ISSUE  We want to clearly understand all of us the point now at issue in the industrial struggle which convulses the entire eastern and southern seaboards of Australia the whole coast of New Zealand and the great coal-producing centres of Newcastle Illawarra and Lithgow. Everybody should understand that it is no longer a question of the affiliation or non-affiliation of marine officers with other labour bodies but a question of the very existence of those union principles upon which every union in the world is based and builds. In retaliation for the Jondaryan affair wherein the maritime men successfully maintained for their bush brothers the right to organise and to have their organisation recognised by the pastoralists the shipping companies are endeavouring to shatter the very structure of the maritime unions. When we realise riot only that behind the shipping companies stand the federated employers unions but the pastoralists are making good the losses sustained by the shipping companies in the battle we must see that the attack upon the maritime unions is 'only a prelude to concerted attack upon every union of weight and importance throughout Australia and throughout the civilised world. [427] In fact we have already been warned that the squatters propose to attack the Queensland Labourers' Union next year and that the London dock companies propose locking out the Union dockers directly the bitter English winter sets in and that the British Ship-owners' Federation is trying to pick a quarrel with the British Seamen's Union. Throughout the English speaking world there is a wild effort being put forth by Capitalism to force labour once more into the hopeless servitude from which Unionism alone redeems it.  Unreasoning and unreasonable Capitalism refuses even to discuss the points at issue unless the whole citadel of unionism is first razed to the ground by the unconditional acceptation of a 'free labour' basis. Capitalism desires an agreement that henceforth no unionist will refuse to work with a blackleg or on blackleg goods that henceforth the miners will hew coals for non-union ships and the maritime men handle indiscriminately non-union and union wool that shearers will not fight for labourers or wharf labourers for seamen and that the bricklayer shall work unquestioningly on bricks over which his brickmaking mates are fighting a fight that stirs him to the heart; Capitalism insists on the recognition of a so-called 'free labour' status which means that the necessities and weaknesses of men are to be taken advantage of to prevent any union ever again getting into fighting trim that by hook or crook force of fear or fraud enough non-unionists are to be kept in every occupation to render the workers powerless to resist the oppression of Capitalism. Capitalism refuses to confer on these points; it will not meet Labour in conference to hear Labour's contention and to know that the rival statements will go forth side by side into the world; it insists that any conference held shall be a sham and that unionism shall beforehand be made a farce; and then it prates through the capitalistic organs of the tyranny of unionism and the danger to liberty of the dominance of the labour federation. [428]  It is well to compare the attitude which the Organisation of Labour has always assumed on the conference question with the attitude of employer associations. Before the Brisbane printers' strike a conference was asked for by the old Trades and Labour Council of the Master Printers' Association and refused; before the recent Brisbane bootmakers' strike a conference was requested by the Brisbane District Council and only agreed to after the strike' had begun; almost invariably labour unions have attempted to settle disputes by conference even though they felt themselves strong enough to force their demands without and very usually employer-unions have either openly derided the very idea of meeting wage-earners on an equality or shuffled out of an open discussion which would place them publicly in the wrong. The Melbourne Trades Council attempted to secure a conference at the commencement of this strike Mr. Service intervening and for weeks the united effort of the allied unions through the Intercolonial Labour Congress has been to secure a fair and open meeting whereby the public could impartially judge of the merits of the case which judgment would end in a mutually satisfactory settlement; Capitalism so far shuffles and refuses. And yet unionism is charged with tyranny in the face of the fact that at the shipping office conference which settled the Jondaryan trouble the contention of the labour delegates was so reasonable and moderate that the chairman the Hon. E. B. Forrest himself a representative capitalist emphatically stated that he considered it should be admitted by the squatters' delegates. At Jondaryan the Australian Labour Federation and its allies throughout Australasia practically had Capitalism by the throat and could have dictated for the time being unconditional terms yet all that Capitalism was asked to do was to come to an open conference and treat on an equality with the unions which the Darling Downs squatters had resolved to ignore.  It is very evident that for this peaceful victory of Jondaryan for this first unmistakable indication of the federation of Australasian workers and of the determination of men of all trades and callings to recognise the Unity of Labour and that an injury to one is the concern of all Capitalism has never forgiven its organising employes. [429] It has recognised what We all recognise that if the workers only stand together in a mass the end is certain that if we hold each other as brothers always and fight each others' battles as our own and close up the ranks in impenetrable solidity there is no doubt who will win in the great Labour movement which shakes the world today. It recognises too what is the truth that so long as our inner unionism remains unbroken victory or defeat matter but little that always the constant lesson of unity is being taught and always the ceaseless drill of organisation goes on. And so it seems that in order to secure its weakening grip upon the toiling masses who slave for its profit and live only that it may enjoy it must not only prevent one union from assisting another but break down the stronghold of unionism itself by forcing upon us a 'free labour' agreement. This is the point at issue now. The marine officers' affiliation question only hastened the grappling of Capitalism with the New Unionism and has been thrust entirely out of sight by the new point which Capitalism has raised.  It goes without saying that upon this point unionism can never unconditionally yield. It is a point which must be fought to the bitter end with all the patience and courage of men who see that on it there is a universal consensus of Labour thought. For this the maritime men stood ready to down tools at Jondaryan for this they downed tools rather than work with blackleg officers for this the southern miners have ceased to hew coal and for. this the gold of sympathetic unions is being poured ungrudgingly into the strike-pay coffers. So long as there is a shadow of a chance of success the unions must perforce fight on unflinchingly for this great and necessary principle - combination and recognition. And at the very worst if without competent crews without skilled waterside labour without the usual supply of coal Capitalism still holds to its preposterous demands it would be better and nobler for the unions to go down together and rise together when with the return of good times Labour is in fair demand and unionism is able to renew the fight. This we all know: that such a basis as the employers are offering could not be held to that if the unions agreed to it they would perjure themselves for at the first opportunity they would be compelled by irresistible conditions to defend themselves in the union way. [430]  And things being as they are what can we think of the present situation but as widening still wider the gulf that separates employer and employed Capitalism and Labour? Capitalism will not budge one inch towards Conciliation which it is not forced to budge; Capitalism will not yield a single inch to Labour which it is not forced to yield; Capitalism which has protested against being dubbed 'enemy' by the labour organisations shows itself indeed an enemy bitter and ruthless. And it does so because it cannot help itself because the conditions of our industrial system are stronger than men's intentions and because the spirit of that system is'a cruel and brutal and abominable competitionism the taking advantage of one another's weakness. The Labour movement aims at the changing of those conditions by the reforming of the industrial system a movement which tends steadily through the limiting by unionism of competition among the wage-earners to the securing to all by state cooperation of that opportunity to work without which the right to work and live is null and void. All these labour strikes and capitalistic lockouts and industrial upheavals come because a few capitalists own the chief means of production and because the wage-earners have no place in industry but as mere adjuncts by whose ill-paid assistance wealth is produced for the profit of Capitalism alone. What we want is a co-operative system of industry controlled by a community in which all would be workers conducted not for profit but for use sharing to each worker justly and fairly and not as Capitalism does at present taking advantage of the worker's necessities to squeeze him down to a mere subsistence wage and giving no heed to the unemployed who wander outcast in the midst of our wondrous wealth and boasted civilisation. To get such a co-operation we must maintain unionism intact or we shall be forced to a condition so degrading that the wage-earner will be unable to assist himself to carry on the agitation which must precede reform we must encourage and foster that loyalty to each other without which co-operation is impossible and we must resist at all hazards the frantic efforts of Capitalism to rivet more firmly on our necks the fetters from which we are freeing ourselves. [431] And this we must recollect above all things that it is our duty to keep the Labour movement free from unjust doings and mere seffish considerations; that in it are bound up the hopes of all who suffer and weep and mourn because of man's inhumanity to man; and that what we fight for is not only the trifling gains of the immediate present but the expansion of unionism as we have it to-day into one great industrial Brotherhood in which employer and employed shall join hands employer and employed no longer and from which because all work together want and destitudon vice and crime and poverty shall be banished for ever and ever. J. M.  The Convention of course did a lot of talking and succeeded at last in evolving a Constitution which is at least a vast improvement on the one that our too clever politicians tried to foist upon the colonies six years ago. [438] Some of our readers may think that small praise. But the matter upon which we congratulate the people is the vindication of the principle of popular election. The improvement visible is an indication of the influence of public opinion even upon the most stolid of hide-bound Conservatives. We do not forget that owing to the introduction of sectarianism at the elections in New South Wales the whole of the Labour candidates were defeated; nor that for other reasons the Labour representation in the other colonies was far below what the number of Labour electors in those colonies would have amply justified. The class of men who composed this Convention was the class that furnished representatives in 1891. The quality of the men was generally about the same in some cases actually the same individuals were chosen. Three of the New South Wales men were the same; four of the Tasmanian; five of the South Australians; one Victorian of the 1891 crowd found his way into the Convention.  Yet though the men were the same how different was their tone! The hot breath of Democracy had wrapped them round and their speech was redolent of the hustings. The sense of responsibility to the people was never far away; the fear that after all the great piece of work might be ruthlessly rejected was always present. The principle of direct election by the people received its most emphatic justification and it is safe to say that a reversion to any system of constitution drafting by a select few has become ever impossible. Upon every point of conflict between Conservatism and Democracy Conservatism has gone down heavily; and the advance towards enlightened Democratic rule has been directly due to the influence of popular opinion evolved during the elections. Measuring the possible advance in the future by the progress between 1891 and 1897 it is difficult to set a bound to the developments which the next five years may witness. Our Democratic readers groaning under the rule of the most unprogressive reactionary of Governments may take to heart this fact that the government as provided in the Convention of 1897 is more liberal than the Provincial Government existing in Queensland at this moment.  Take the two points around which the conflict between Conservatism and Democracy has raged and mark the advance made between the two periods; and compare the proposed Australian Constitution with that of Queensland. [439] The Upper House or States Assembly according to the scheme of the wise men of 1891 was to consist of senators appointed by the States Parliaments. The Upper House in Queensland consists entirely of nominees so that under this beautiful scheme the senators from Queensland would be the nominees of nominees. The Upper House of the 1897 Federation is to consist of senators DIRECTLY ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE on the same franchise as the House of Representatives. A very moderate proposal in 1891 to leave the separate States to decide for themselves the method of choosing senators was defeated by 34 votes to 6 Queensland's delegates of course voting on the Tory side; in 1897 the absolute mandatory provision for popular election was adopted unanimously and almost without a protest.  The next - perhaps the most vital question of all: What shall the franchise be for both Houses of the Parliament? There is the palladium of Australian liberties. Compare the concession of the freest franchise in 1897 with the solid fight of Conservatism in 1891 for the preservation of the most restrictive franchise prevailing in any province. Truly the walls of Jericho fell flat at the trumpet blast that proclaimed the will of the people. The greatest effort made in 1891 was embodied in the proposed amendment by Mr. Cockburn which modestly asked that:  No property qualification shall be necessary for the electors of the House of Representatives and each elector shall have a vote for one electoral district only.  Oh! the indignation of the true-blues that the one-man-one-vote 'faddists' should dare to intrude their fads in that august company. The insolent proposal was quietly rejected the voting being 9 to 28. Among the dissentients appear the names: Donaldson Griffith Macdonald-Paterson and Rutledge - four of the Queensland delegates. Of the other three delegates sent by the Queensland Parliament Macrossan had previously died and M'Ilwraith and Thynne did not vote - were probably away at some other sort of picnic.  Now what brought about the complete change of tone in 1897? [440] Why was it that the one-man-one-vote men were masters of the situation who in their turn could pour contempt on the obstinate few who ventured to plead for property qualification and plural voting? It was nothing but the solid conviction brought home to the delegates on a thousand platforms that in this matter the people have won their fight and that no constitution will ever be accepted for Australia which is not broad-based on the principle of equal voting rights. The only point upon which the Conservatives dared to make a fight was the admission of women to the franchise and the contention was settled by the wise compromise that the Federal franchise shall be on the principle of one man one vote but no person having the right to vote in any State shall be precluded from voting for the Federal Parliament. This lets in the women of South Australia and will admit their sisters in the other provinces as the women's franchise movement spreads and is successful in other parts of Australia. Whilst Queensland is gagged by property qualifications and plural voting' the remainder of Australia will be governed under a Central Parliament elected by one man one vote or (we hope generally) by one adult one vote.  Now why does Mr. Tozer want to send down a Queensland contingent? Has he begun to realise that there is some business in it? - and some business not at all pleasing to reactionary black-labour-loving Boodlewraith? Surely Australia has been getting. on very well without the assistance that the Tozer Government would like to send. We know what a government delegation would mean because we have the record of the delegation sent down in 1891 and we can learn from that the views of the Government on all the important questions which have been or might be discussed. All the possible effect that might result from the sending of a Government delegation would be the strengthening of the hands of the Conservative minority on the Convention; and against that every sincere Democrat should fight to the last ditch. The good work already done has been achieved by a convention of men DIRECTLY CHOSEN BY THE ELECTORS. Out of the fifty members present forty were so elected and the other ten (the Western Australians) were Conservatives to a man and nearly always in opposition to the majority. [441] Will the people of this great colony (as important having regard to its potentialities as either of the Southern colonies) supinely submit to allow themselves to be misrepresented and maligned by a government which exists only through the dissensions of his opponents? That is what they will do unless the people stir themselves in time. The trick attempted to be played last session to gain the same end failed only because the plotters in the two Houses disagreed among themselves. Another attempt will certainly be made; and this time probably the discordant elements may be brought into line. The dominant faction know quite well the importance of the fight of Democracy that has been fought and so far won on the floor of the Convention; and what they desire now is to use the name of the people of this colony to help to defeat the aspirations of the Democracy in the Southern colonies.  Is not this an occasion to fire the hearts and minds of the people? New South Wales Victoria South Australia and Tasmania have sent delegations to the Convention DIRECTLY CHOSEN BY THE ELECTORS. The Premier of Queensland gave a promise on behalf of Queensland that a delegation also DIRECTLY CHOSEN BY THE ELECTORS should be Sent down.  He broke his promise because he durst not go to the people and the Acting-premier (Mr. Tozer) since blurted out a confession that such an election might show that the Labour Party counted far more than his Government. It might indeed; but whether or not if Queensland is to speak she can speak only through a delegation so elected. Our Labour Party in Parliament took the right stand the only defensible stand in the last Parliament. Queensland must either be represented by delegates 'directly chosen by the electors' according to the promise of her Premier and the practice adopted by the Southern colonies; OR THERE MUST BE NO PRETENCE OF REPRESENTATION. Out of courtesy to the other colonies and to preserve a spirit of federal concord it would be justifiable to send such a delegation even at the eleventh hour; but any Government-concocted scheme would be a lie and a sham an affront to the peoples of the other colonies and an insolent fraud upon the people of Queensland and it should be stopped here and now.  Last of all the farewell festivities was the complimentary ball to Lady Carrington on 30th ult. in the Centennial Hall [Sydney] when the strange weird element was largely eliminated (as I predicted) though your Sappho did see a lady sharing her chair with a gentleman at the supper-table and one unconventional couple taking a short-cut across the dais while their 'Excellencies' were in possession. [99] Nearly a thousand attended and there was a soothing surplus of men. . - The decorations were arranged on the same principle as the club balls immense palms everywhere festoons of greenery and wreaths of Lady Carrington's favourite actinotus and two little singing canaries were suspended on either side of the dais. An excellent supper was served in the lower chamber and the table decorations - large hearts in cream and crimson roses - were gaspingly nice. And so were some of the dresses. Lady Carrington . - - wore heliotrope silk chiffon and wisteria diamond ornaments heliotrope shoes and immense committee bouquet;. . - Lady Innes wore a charming turn-out - the train of striped buttercup silk the front trimmed and draped with fine tinted lace sleeves and bodice trimming of chiffon caught with yellow bows magnificent diamonds.  Mrs Vanderveer Greene sported a Mephistophiles gown that carried all before it. And let me add while among the 'un-nervers' that a scarlet bag frock trimmed with villainously green fringe; a pink satin green-away gown on a lady considerably over seven and the large imposing creature in slick white satin that increased her width to amazement-point most harrowed the instincts of your slim Sappho. [...]  Quite the newest idea in ball-skirts is the semi-circular hem - in which the floor-end of the garment is cut in a bold scoop frontally rising about four inches on each side just at the ankles - for the purpose of displaying the same to public criticism I suppose though no doubt Mary tells Mamma that the dressmaker says it makes the gown hang better. A lady wore one at Tempe ball. The gown was ecru tulle and emerald-green velvet and the scoop revealed a pair of tiny white satin shoes producing a charming effect even if you did think that the wearer had her petticoats clutched in both hands under the delusion that she was hopping over a mud-puddle. But the skirtal scoop should be adopted lingeringly. Decollete commenced with a little two-inch snip in a high-necked gown and if skirts begin to get hitched up at the sides the modest young man of the future will have to go round in mask. No girl who possessed a special pair of garters would be satisfied to show only to the tops of her boots.  In a certain part of Bouverie-street Carlton there is a sweater's workroom. It is a small apartment indescribably dirty and malodorous located in the back yard of a wretched looking house having a stable on one side and an outhouse on the other. Within this unhealthy place the man employs four or five women and his own wife and family. They have but little space to move about; they work there from 8 o'clock in the morning until 8 o'clock at night taking their meals on the spot. Good buttonhole workers are paid 4d. per dozen for first class making. About two hours would be required to make a dozen. Assuming the women were thus engaged all day they would earn 2s. or 12s. per week. Whatever they do they rarely earn more than 15s. per week of 72 hours which is about one-third of what they would make in a union factory for a week of 54 hours. The girls engaged as improvers in this den get from 3s. 6d. to 7s. per week of 72 hours. The sweater draws from £8 to £12 per week . . - from a Bourke-street tailor.  The occupants of the dens do not as a rule number more than five so that the provisions of the (1885) Factories Act may not be infringed. Were half a dozen persons to be engaged in one apartment the sweater would render himself liable to inconvenient visits from the inspector and would be compelled to keep his purgatorium in habitable condition. [244]  (The reporter then visited another place) where four or five girls are employed by a sweater. Some of them earn only 2s. 6d. per week with a cup of tea and bread twice a day of 12 hours. The effect upon the victims of this wearing dreary life is physically apparent. Most of them are pale emaciated and depraved in appearance. . - In the majority of cases through working unnatural hours by gaslight the sweaters' employes ruin their eyes altogether. Very few of them stand it more than four years.. - The system is responsible also for a great deal of moral ruin. Most of the girls who are employed are almost destitute having no relatives who recognize the responsibility of providing for them.  Their earnings are so small that they are often forced to resort to evil ways to save themselves from hunger. In the end they sometimes seek their living entirely on the streets.  It is curious that with the river so close boating is not one of the chief amusements at Deniliquin; but there are few boats and still fewer people ever go on the water. About September the fishing season begins and then Murray cod are fairly plentiful. These fish if taken from the running water and not from the muddy lagoons are very palatable; and one fish is as a rule ample reward for the angler for they weigh generally from seven to seventy and one hundred pounds while even monsters that turn the scale at two hundred pounds are not unknown. The disciple of Isaak Walton certainly requires some little encouragement for the mosquitoes down by the river are so numerous so aggressive and so voracious that life is only bearable to the most enthusiastic and devoted of fishermen.  The streets of Deniliquin as we have said are usually quiet even to wearisomeness. Occasionally a bullock-team toils patiently down the load dragging some squatter's clip bound for Victoria or stores for his station far out on the plains. Now the little mail-coach from Balranald or Jerilderie dashes up to the post-office with as much bustle and importance as if it were built to carry twenty or thirty people instead of six. A covered wagon driven by a Chinaman comes lumbering through the street; his household goods are behind him; his white wife arrayed in a cotton gown and a sun-bonnet is at his side; while the yellow faces of their numerous progeny peep over their shoulders and through the cracks and rents in the wagon-cover. John too is bound for some station out on the plains where he will be employed as a rabbiter. [290] He is a well-to-do man and probably has a snug little account at the bank for the Chinaman has established himself as firmly in these towns far inland as on the coast. At Deniliquin is a Chinese camp on a small scale and the Chinamen pursue their avocations as market-gardeners and rag-pickers.  About five o'clock in the afternoon the sleepy old town begins to show more signs of life for the event of the day now takes place namely the arrival of the evening train from Melbourne. Then apparently the greater part of the population may be seen wending their way to the railway station there to assemble on the platform to gaze upon the iron monster as if they had never seen a railway train before and feared they might never have the chance again.  Once a year however the town wakes from its lethargy in real earnest and holds high revel. This is in the middle of July the depth of winter though the term winter hardly conveys the right impression. Then are held the races and the sheep show and from all the stations and towns around with that blissful disregard of distance which characterises the Australian squatter strangers pour into the town till it is full to overflowing. The tradespeople reap their annual harvest from the pleasure-seekers and the hotels are full; bar passages billiard-room and dining-room - every corner that can hold a lodger who is not particular as to his personal comfort for a day or two is pressed into the service.  For a week the town is given over to pleasure; and balls races and picnics are the order of the day. The sheep show brings in squatters from the farthest back blocks on the Darling and for one whole week the streets are full busy and bustling; then the strangers return to their distant homes carnival week is over and Deniliquin drops to its normal state of quiet.  After the arrival of the Melbourne train the next daily event of any importance in Deniliquin is the setting-out of the Hay coach which six nights out of the seven crosses the eighty miles of plain that lie between this town and Hay. Punctually every evening at seven o'clock the coach with its five horses leaves the "Royal Hotel" stops for one moment at the post-office for Her Majesty's mails and then dashes on again (sometimes crowded with passengers and luggage sometimes with but the driver and another man) down the road across the bridge and out on the trackless plains to travel there all night till the morning's dawn shall bring into sight the river-belt of the Murrumbidgee on the other side of which is Hay.  Road on the plains there is none; the stock-route is over a mile wide and the crisp salt-bush crackles beneath the horses' hoofs as they swing along at an even steady pace the heavy coach swinging on its leather springs backwards and forwards with a troublous. uncomfortable motion strongly calculated to produce sea-sickness in the uninitiated. It is a weary journey. One mile of plain by day is remarkably like another and by night there is nothing to mark the passing of the hours and to break the monotony save the stoppages for fresh horses which are changed every ten or twelve miles. [291] There is something weird and strange in the notion of receiving one's mails and almost all the news of the outside world at dead of night as the inhabitants of these lonely public-houses miles distant from other habitations do. By day an occasional drover riding slowly behind his flocks or a traveller who prefers to journey by day are their only visitors; but regularly as clockwork every night come the coaches. A sound of wheels is heard from the distance and the whole household is alert and ready; fresh horses stand waiting the door is open and a ruddy light streams out the landlord stands hospitably in the glow and the one or two women the shanty contains peep round the doorpost or fidget over the table roughly laid for tea - for is not the event of the day or rather night about to take place? The sound of wheels comes nearer and is plainly heard on the dry still air the five great lamps are visible and then the lumbering form of the heavy coach itself looms out On the darkness. The steaming horses stop suddenly in the lamp-light and willing hands rush forward to unhitch them "the driver never relinquishing the reins till every strap and buckle is free. Then perhaps if he is in a condescending mood (for the driver of Cobb's coach is an important personage on the road) he steps down from his lofty perch strolls carelessly through the open door warms himself before the glowing fire (for the nights in winter are often chilly on the plains) retails gossip in an affable manner to the admiring women-folk patronises the obsequious landlord deigns perhaps to partake of a cup of tea or a little "something hot" takes charge of a letter and then - time is up - the great man strolls out again climbs to his perch once more gathers the reins in his skilful hands gives a few directions to the lanky stable-helps standing round open-mouthed and envious - a shout of "All aboard" a crack of the whip and the coach is off again for another ten-mile stage.  These little stopping-places on the plains all bear a strong family resemblance to one another. At "Pretty Pine" the first after leaving Deniliquin there is a native pine-tree carefully fenced from which The little inn takes its name. By night of course its beauties are not perceptible nor do they appear specially remarkable by day for to the ordinary observer the "pretty pine" appears a very common-place tree indeed - that is if he come from forest lands. A dweller on the plains would probably be more lenient in his judgment. Wonganilla on the Billabong Creek the next stopping-place is the only place between Deniliquin and Hay that can even be dignified by the name of hamlet. Here there are two public-houses a store and a blacksmith's shop; but spite of this magnificence the Pine Ridge or Booroorban as it is but seldom called thirty miles from Hay is the principal stopping-place. Here the coaches stay nearly half an hour and passengers and driver of the Hay coach make a late supper while those from Deniliquin have an exceedingly early breakfast - somewhere about three o'clock in the morning. [292] There is no such levelling process as coach-travelling. No one of course - not even the Governor of the Colony - could object to sitting down to supper with the driver; an ordinary individual feels it rather an honour than otherwise. He is far the most important personage for miles around. There is no second class - all must pay the same (and pay highly too) for the privilege of riding in the coach and all alike must sit at the same table partake of the same fare use the same black-handled knives and drink from the same coarse white cups - be it dainty fastidious Englishman just fresh from the comforts of the Old Land or lean yellow Chinaman going to join his "cousin" somewhere out on the plains far beyond Hay.  Between Wonganilla and Pine Ridge the event of the journey ought to take place for at "Trotting Cob" resides an Australian ghost. Every night at twelve of the clock a ghastly figure (its bloody head under its arm) may be seen trotting slowly round the little inn mounted on a snow-white cobby horse. It is not on record that any of the passengers by the mail-coach have as yet seen this figure. That the ghost is there is of course an undoubted fact - for has not the place been named after it? And the driver if he be in a communicative mood will tell a long story of the cruel wrong and murder which led to the place being haunted. Unfortunately it is out of our power to give the true story of this most authentic ghost for it varies with the different drivers (sometimes even with the moods of the same driver) and consequently the history of "Trotting Cob" is lost in the mist of many journeys to and fro and much whisky and water.  After leaving Pine Ridge the coach crosses a portion of the Old Man Plain. It is well on in the small hours now and the interest with which the passengers began their journey has given way to an overpowering desire for sleep. Perhaps this is as well for here are no points of interest whatever. Wonderfully silent have they all become. Inside some are dozing in various uncomfortable attitudes. One has betaken himself to the boot and is sleeping the sleep of the just in somewhat uneasy fashion on the mail-bags and luggage while on the roof already more than one man has nodded so perceptibly that the driver feels constrained to call out a solemn warning that "only last week a gent as fell asleep on top of the coach fell off and was picked up a stiff 'un". Very slowly the time seems to pass and to every anxious question as to where we are now comes the same laconic answer "Old Man Plain"; but at length the Sixteen Mile Gums are reached the last stage is begun morning dawns in the east and there before the eyes of the travellers lies the dark winding river-belt of the Murrumbidgee bounding the horizon to the north and the coach has very nearly reached its destination. [293] Sleepily the passengers rouse themselves and compare notes the driver puts on an extra spurt the coach thunders across the bridge dashes up the street (wakening with its clatter the sleepy town) and finally draws up at Cobb's Coach Office.  Hay in all its features remarkably resembles Deniliquin and the description of the one town would do almost equally well for the other. And yet there are radical points of difference. Deniliquin the terminus of the Victorian Railway is essentially a Victorian town having Melbourne for its capital while Hay on the other hand belongs entirely to its own colony is the terminus of its railway and owns Sydney for its capital. Here too dwells the Anglican bishop who though he be Bishop of Riverina makes Hay his headquarters; and greatest difference of all while Deniliquin is on the decline (or at least at a standstill) Hay though as yet its population is but little over 2000 is a rising town destined its people declare to be the future capital of Riverina. The little town is due north of Melbourne and a line drawn from Sydney to Adelaide not only passes through it but is nearly bisected by it. It is situated in one of the most picturesque bends of the unpicturesque Murrumbidgee and is a neat tidy little place. Its streets are wide and planted with trees - quaint currajongs a species of eucalyptus (very like in form to the stiff wooden trees we have all played with in childish days); bright green pepper-trees with their coral berries; and graceful grevilleas which in the spring are gorgeous with orange-coloured blossoms and promise to add greatly to the beauty of the town when they shall have grown to their full size in the years to come.  Hay nestles close to the river hugging the waterside while the railway station is half a mile away surrounded by the bare blocks and pegged-out streets of the surveyed town which as yet but few people have settled upon. There are some two-storeyed buildings in the town but generally as in Deniliquin the houses are seldom more than one storey high are built in cottage form with broad verandas and are usually set in the midst of gardens - hardly trim English gardens (labour is too expensive and water too scarce for that) but pretty gardens nevertheless full of semi-tropical plants and fruits that require the warm sun of Riverina to bring them to perfection. The streets are lighted by gas and so are most of the public buildings but as yet it is so expensive that but few private persons indulge in the luxury. Water as in Deniliquin is pumped into a high waterlower (in this case an iron one) and is thence laid onto the town. The river here is navigable in the spring and early summer when the snows have melted on the far-distant ranges where the Murrumbidgee has its sources; and the little steamers come up far beyond the town carrying stores to the distant stations out on the plains and returning again with the squatters' clip in closely-packed bales before the river has fallen to its summer level. [294] The traffic on the river is always a source of excitement for the Hay people a diversion which Deniliquin lacks for the Edward is not navigable being far too full of snags (fallen trees) and sand-banks. At Hay the state of the river is a constant topic of conversation. It is very low it is rising it is running a banker and then the first steamer of the season has made her appearance - a little steamer whose cabins and deck-houses apparently make her somewhat top-heavy with a big paddle-wheel in the stern and behind her she tows three or four barges destined to carry the wool. Eagerly is she watched as she comes puffing and panting to the long bridge which seems at first to present an impassable barrier but as she approaches the whole of the centre is swung slowly out on a pivot until it stands lengthwise in mid-stream and there is ample room for her to pass on either side. Her crew consists of three or four men - namely the skipper his mate and perhaps two deck-hands who may be seen lounging over the railing idly scanning the view as they pass.  A river-sailor's life can scarcely be counted a hard one. As long as the river is high enough its navigation presents little difficulty and at night almost invariably - always in fact unless the moonlight is very brilliant - the little steamer is drawn close to the bank and firmly held there by a rope thrown round the nearest tree-trunk. Twenty years ago when very few railways were open the river-steamers were extensively used by passengers especially by women and children who dreaded not unnaturally the long and weary coach-journeys. In point of time of course the steamer took longer for one hundred miles by river may mean but three by land; and this with the nightly stoppages made a journey in a cramped and crowded vessel one not to be lightly undertaken more especially as the provisions were humble not to say coarse while the cookery was of an exceedingly primitive order.  Seldom - we might almost say never - do passengers travel by steamer now. The coach is generally preferred even to reach the towns on the Darling in the far west and the steamers owing probably to the uncertain state of the rivers are wholly given up to carrying cargo. There is no doubt that they carry an immense quantity of goods principally station stores - flour and tea kerosene and tobacco blankets and leather and above all pain-killer. The amount of this medicament consumed "out back" must be enormous. The bushman regards it as a sovereign remedy - the panacea which whether applied outwardly or inwardly cures all the ills that flesh is heir to. Far out too where when the whisky has run out it is impossible to procure either that or any other stimulant at a moment's notice there will sometimes come over a man a longing and craving for strong drink which he appeases as best he may and he will even toss off kerosene and water with great gusto. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that pain-killer spite of its fiery nature or perhaps on account of it ranks high as a stimulating drink. [295] The story is told out on the back blocks of a traveller who arriving at a wayside shanty where they were out of liquor called for a nobbler. He was promptly presented with a glass of pain-killer and water. "Surely" said he wonderingly sipping at the milky-white liquid - "surely it's painkiller." "Shut up you fool" cried the landlord holding up a warning finger - "shut up! Why man they're drinking Farmer's Friend in the parlour." And really he should have been satisfied for Farmer's Friend seeing that it is only used for dressing wounds on horses and cattle must be considered much lower down in the scale of drinks.  What has been said above as to the great distinction to be observed as to the cause of strikes necessarily leads to the remark that the same distinction must be observed when treating of their cure. [626] All those disputes which arise from a demand on the part of employees that they should have something more or an effort on the part of the employers to give them something less have their origin in a conviction on one side or the other that the consideration given for labour is not satisfactory. This conviction is either well founded or ill founded or it may have some justification but not so much as is supposed. Obviously the thing to be done under such circumstances is to get at the truth and in doing this it is necessary to get rid of everything that disguises the truth. It is frankly admitted that a great many disputes originate in ignorance in mutual misunderstanding in unfounded suspicions in exaggerated alarms and that very much is gained if all these disturbing accessories can be got rid of and the controversy can be narrowed to its simple issue. No better method of dispersing the mists that surround a controversy of the sort under our consideration can be found than a friendly conference.  A very large experience has shown that the difficulty is often cleared up in this way and reduced to such dimensions as admit of a fairly satisfactory settlement it is this experience which leads to the conclusion that the very first thing to be done in order to promote the settlement of a labour dispute is to try the effect of conciliation. And in using this term conciliation for the first time in this Report it is convenient to remark here that the terms conciliation and arbitration are often employed somewhat vaguely as if they were interchangeable and yet they really represent two distinct things. The function of any conciliation agency is to get the parties to a dispute to come to a common agreement voluntarily without any opinion being pronounced on the merits or any instructions given. The function of arbitration is distinctly to determine the merits and to give a positive decision to be abided by. If the declaration of such a decision can be avoided it is well that it should be because decisions are generally more or less adverse to both parties for even splitting the difference is an equal censure upon both. But conciliation if it is a success allows of a friendly settlement on a mutual agreement and leaves no opening for discrediting the understanding or the impartiality of the arbitrators. That being so the practical question that arises is - how should this primary remedy of conciliation be applied? it may naturally be said that no fresh law no new appointments are necessary for the purpose. It is always possible for people who quarrel to meet together with or without the intervention of third parties. It has been done frequently on a small scale and also on a large scale and with satisfactory results. In different localities too and as respects -different trades as is the case in England Boards of Conciliation have been voluntarily established have lasted for several years have done good work and often very difficult work. But while this is admitted it seems to us that the work of conciliation would be greatly assisted if there were in this colony an established organisation instituted by the State and always ready to be called into action by either of the parties to a dispute. [627] The evidence on this point is not unanimous some witnesses on each side being of opinion that no good would come of any State Board. But the great weight of the testimony is distinctly to the effect that the existence of a State Board of Conciliation would have a wholesome and moderating effect. Such an institution clothed with the authority of the State would stand before the public as a mediatory influence always and immediately available and public opinion would be adverse to those who except for a very good cause shown refused to avail themselves of its good offices.  But though in the majority of cases disputes will be settled by the preliminary process of having them thoroughly sifted before a Board of Conciliation there will remain some cases in which despite all explanation and mediation there will survive an irreducible residuum. Under such circumstances the question arises whether everything that can be done has been done and whether the task of settling the dispute must be abandoned. All the experience hitherto gained goes to show that this need not be. Either under the term conciliation or under the term arbitration Boards have to a very large extent been empowered to give decisions - that is to say have practically exercised a judicial function. When conciliation has failed then is the time for arbitration to begin. It is admitted that in some cases decisions have been given in error and have been practically neutralised even by the consent of the parties. But in the immense majority of cases both in France and England the decisions given have been reasonably equitable and have served to settle the dispute till circumstances altered and raised the same or a similar question again. It is impossible to resist the moral effect of the vast body of evidence which exists on this point. It is a demonstrated fact that decisions can be given as to industrial disputes which practically solve the immediate difficulty. Adjudication therefore is applicable between employers and employed and consequently when conciliation falls short of doing what is wanted the resources of arbitration can be effectively brought to bear.  When this point is taken as settled the next question that arises is whether the Board of Conciliation that is already seized of the matter shall be the adjudicating body and in many trades this custom has been advantageously followed. The Board tries first to settle the dispute without a decision and if required finally exercises its authority to 'give a decision and this plan has met with a large degree of success. The principal objection made to it is that the persons most suitable to act as conciliators are not necessarily the most suitable to act as arbitrators and that the two separate functions will he better exercised by two separate agencies. [628] Two reasons are adduced in support of this view. The first is that conciliators should be selected in virtue of their knowledge of the details of the trade in question - knowledge not so necessary for arbitrators who have to deal only with the residuary difficulty after all minor matters have been disposed of. Arbitrators whose special work is judicial should be chosen mainly for their judicial temperament and ability. Secondly in a Board of Conciliation all the members but the Chairman will he chosen respectively from the two bodies of employers and employed. They will inevitably have the bias of their class and will feel some responsibility towards their associates for upholding their class interests and therefore at the Board will act in the mixed capacity of advocates and judges. On the other hand it must be borne in mind that in the absence of compulsion to enforce the award it is all-important that it should be voluntarily acquiesced in and therefore both sides should be contented with the constitution of the tribunal. It is clear from the evidence that in this colony the Trades Unions will not accept readily the decisions of any Court in which Unionism is not represented. This implies of course that the employer must have a corresponding representation. It follows that the Arbitration Court cannot consist exclusively of independent judges but must consist predominantly of persons chosen to represent class interest the purely judicial function being performed only by the umpire who would decide when the votes were equal. It is true that the members of the Court would be chosen on account of their high character and would be expected to he fair and impartial; still their special function is to see that their class is not wronged. Under these circumstances seeing that an absolutely judicial Court is not possible and that it must to a large extent be composed of the same material as a Board of Conciliation the argument for having two separate bodies is weakened.  It is obvious that the reference of the dispute to a second Court requires that all the details should be gone over again and explained to a second set of persons - an expenditure of time and trouble that could only be justified by results of corresponding value. The expense of adjudication would thereby he considerably increased and there might be some difficulty unless that course were made compulsory in passing the question on from the Board of Conciliation to the Court of Arbitration.  Taking all these things into consideration we recommend that in the first instance at least and until circumstances justify some further differentiation in the constitution of the labour tribunal there should be only one Board but that this one Board should be empowered in some form to discharge as occasion may require the double duty of conciliation and arbitration. That is to say that its first effort should be towards bringing about a voluntary agreement between the parties and failing that that the Board or the permanent part of it should discharge the duty of adjudication and pronounce a decision. [629]  One part of our instructions was to inquire into the cause and cure of strikes. So far as this colony is concerned there does not appear to exist any systematic record of the number of strikes in recent years nor of their causes their duration and the way in which they were settled. From the evidence it appears that until recent times the most frequent causes have been an effort to raise wages or to resist the reduction of wages an effort to secure shorter working hours or to resist any covert or open increase of the hours of work or claims for the intermission of labour for rest or a demand to employ more hands for a given work or to resist the discharge of men supposed to be punished for their positions ifl a Trades Union or their prominent labours in connection with it. All these are matters which affect the personal comfort of the workmen and his status as respects his material interests. The last however is specially in defence of the principles and practice of Unionism. And this leads to the remark that at the present time more important than all the causes mentioned is that which is rapidly becoming the chief ground of contention between employers and employed namely the employment of non-Unionists. The late strike turned almost wholly upon this extremely important point. The incident of the discharge of the stoker Morgan from the Tasmanian Company's steamship "Corinna" though it turned on the dismissal of a man who was a delegate and who was thought to have been dismissed for that reason was comparatively unimportant and arrangements had been made for settling in by negotiation. But the refusal of the ship-owners to allow their officers to affiliate their Union to the Trades and Labour Council was resisted as an opposition to the development of Unionism itself it being contended that the right of affiliation was only an extension of the right to form a Union. The ship-owners took the ground that their officers had the right to form a Union of their own but that the necessity for maintaining discipline at sea made it inexpedient in the owners interest and in that of the travelling public that officers who represented employers should affiliate with other labour bodies because when at sea they could hold no direct communication with such employers and therefore occupied a position that distinguished them from ordinary servants. It is obvious that this distinction raised the question whether the right to form Trades Unions has any limitations and whether the position of ships' officers constitutes one of those limitations. The question was therefore distinctly raised as to the rights of Unionism but it was raised in a form as to whether those rights were subject to the limitation referred to. It was not the question of Unionism in the abstract that was raised but the restraint on affiliation as being a restraint on Unionism. The difficulty with the shearers also raised the question of Unionism and it did so in this form - whether the Shearers Union was entitled to demand the non-employment of non-Union men. This question was raised in a practical way by the declared refusal of the wharf labourers to handle non-Union wool. [762] It is clear from this statement that a very broad and important distinction is to be drawn between all those demands of the wage-getting class which directly affect their comfort and those which are put forward in defence of the labour organisations and in assertion of their right to extend the operations of those Unions and their confederation. This difference will be further emphasised when we come to consider the cure of strikes.  The federation of labour and the counter-federation of employers is the characteristic feature of the labour question in the present epoch. A few years ago each Union was an independent organisation though the sympathy between different trades was strong and showed itself repeatedly in the form of subscriptions to assist other trades when their members were on strike or were locked out. But the union of men in a trade has developed into a union of different trades together and practical sympathy has taken the form of aiding a strike by striking also. This of course has the effect of increasing the area of contest and dragging into it persons not originally involved. It is obvious that there is no limit to this extension of any strike except the limit of the labour organisations themselves and what the colony has already experienced in the way of suspension of industry is only a fraction of what it might possibly experience if a more general strike took place. The difficulty in any one trade may become a cause of quarrel in many trades and employers and workmen in no degree connected with the point at issue and otherwise working harmoniously may be forced into hostility. The effect of this organisation of labour has already been to draw employers together and though their organisations have not at present the mature experience or the proved loyalty of the labour organisations and although from the nature of the case it is more difficult for employers to come together than it is for workmen to do so still the sense of danger is now so keenly felt that jealousies and rivalries are being overpowered by fear of loss. The industrial community is thus being organised into two vast camps jealous and suspicious of each other and preparing for a possible conflict which in a few months may destroy the saving of many years. The extent to which this organisation of employers and employed has now attained gives the whole question its present public and even its national importance.  THE CAPITALISTIC CONSPIRACY  THE CAPITALISTIC GOVERNMENT TRYING ITS HARDEST TO BREAK DOWN UNIONISM  THE last fortnight has seen the climax of the capitalistic conspiracy against unionism. With 1500 or so police and military occupying a few places along the railway lines the Government has felt itself strong enough to invite lawlessness by the wholesale arrest of union officials upon evidently trumped-up "conspiracy" charges. Fortunately private warning had been given of what might be expected and ample arrangements made for the prevention of all excitement among unionists for peaceful submission to arrest and for the filling of all offices as officials were arrested. The Barcaldine arrangements in particular were so perfect that half a dozen or half a hundred committees would have been forthcoming in due order had they been required. The preposterous "conspiracy" charges have thus utterly failed in their purpose and can have no effect but to emphasise the alliance existing between organised Capitalism and the Government. M'Ilwraith and Donaldson are both in the middle of the squatters' association and Griffith will sell himself to either of them if thereby he can hold office.  AMONG THE UNIONISTS ARRESTED  Among the union officials arrested under this fictitious "conspiracy" charge are: Chairman Bennett Secretary Fothergill and Delegates Ryan and Murphy of the Central District Strike Committee Barcaldine; Secretary Blackwell of the G.L.U. Barcaldine; Branch Secretary E. H. Murphy of the G.L.U. Roma; Central District Organizers Taylor at Clermont; Forrester at Roma; Fanning at Charlevilic; Camp-Chairman Griffin at Clermont; while H. Smithbarry appointed by the C.D. Strike Committee to replace Taylor at Clermont was promptly arrested in pursuance of the evident attempt of the capitalistic Government to prevent unionism from having officers. [780] Secretary Chas. Seymour of the F.S.U.S. who with the consent of his union had been representing the General Executive A.L.F. at Barcaldine had just left the Central District on his return to Brisbane when the arrests began. It was expected that he would be arrested on reaching Brisbane Good Friday eve but for some reason or other he was not molested. On Tuesday last Seymour started again for Barcaldine in response to a request to the General Executive from the Strike Committee; his arrest is hourly expected. Besides the abovenamed some 30 others have been arrested whose names will be published as soon as obtainable in order that unionists may know who are suffering for the Cause. It should go without saying that should any man who has anybody dependent upon him be arrested simply for his connection with unionism such cases should be the special care of every union in the country.  THE TWADDLE ABOUT "LAWLESSNESS"  The gross exaggerations of lawlessness which are trotted out by the capitalistic Government to excuse its own lawlessness are beginning to react upon themselves. There is amazingly little disorder or drunkenness in towns filled with unionists and void of police and military; the fairy tale of a mounted messenger being "bailed up" by unionist highwaymen at Northampton turns out to be a pure concoction; most of the grass fires are from squatters' burning off themselves; and in three months only three sheds have been burnt with no evidence that any one was started by unionists if it was anything but a squatter Government in office there would be no excitement to speak of. So hard up is the capitalistic press for sensations that it has had to descend to personal comment upon the appearance of the bushmen. George Taylor is put down as the "worst-looking of the lot" of prisoners. Then the others must be mighty fine looking fellows that's all This howling is all kept up to justify the military terrorism now extending over the country and to keep out of sight the little fact that the Government has not attempted to secure an open conference Actually so barefaced is the support of the Government to Capitalism that French and his troops were actually delayed at Rockhampton upon the strength of the false rumour that the bushmen were going to concede so-called "freedom of contract" It is for this "freedom of contract" which will degrade wage-earners that the Government is fighting - not for the suppression of lawlessness which is mostly on its own capitalistic side. [781]  The abolition of property qualifications the abolition of plural voting the extension of the municipal franchise to all householders irrespective of sex - only householders to be entitled to vote in respect of the premises they occupy. All elections to be held on Saturdays and polling to be from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; the Mayor and returning officer to be elected by the people; upon a requisition signed by 10% of the electors a plebiscite to be taken by the council on any matter of extraordinary or urgent nature arising during the period between the general elections; all assessments for rating purposes to be based on the capital value of the land irrespective of improvements; all buildings and other improvements affected by human exertion to be exempt from rates or taxes; one-half the cost of assessment to be defrayed by the Department of Water and Sewerage; compulsory registration with the local council of all private land improved or unimproved situated within the municipality; the council clerk's receipts for the rates due to date to be a necessary condition of transfer or conveyance in respect of any lands sold within the municipality; all plans of new subdivisions of estates within the municipality to be submitted to the council for approval before sales under such sub-division; no streets to be less width than 90 feet and lanes 22 feet; no lots to be less than 20 feet frontage by a depth of 100 feet; every lot to have a lane at rear and not more than one dwelling to be erected on any one lot; all streets and lanes to be kerbed and guttered before sale by the vendor; every vendor to give guarantee to council's solicitor of certificate of Title to conditional purchases; every owner of land to prove to Council's solicitor his ability to give undoubted title. Cost of kerbing guttering paving and lighting to be defrayed out of the general rates the council to have full control of the means of lighting within the municipality and own their own lighting plant; all licence fees imposed by the municipality to be paid into the funds of the council; all parks recreation grounds and public reserves within the municipality to be vested in the local council in trust for the people for all time no encroachment to be permitted under any pretence whatever and no impediments to the fullest and freest enjoyment of the people to be permitted except such as may be of absolutely necessary character; a free public library and reading room to be provided; the town hall to be let free upon the requisition of 50 householders for certain purposes; all municipal works to be carried out by day labor.  THE WOMEN OF THE WEST  They left the vine-wreathed cottage and the mansion on the hill  The houses in the busy streets where life is never still  The pleasures of the city and the friends they cherished best:  For love they faced the wilderness - the Women of the West.  The roar and rush and fever of the city died away And the old-time joys and faces - they were gone for many a day; In their place the lurching coach-wheel or the creaking bullock chains  O'er the everlasting sameness of the never-ending plains. [132]  In the slab-built zinc-roofed homestead of some lately-taken run  In the tent beside the bankment of a railway just begun  In the huts on new selections in the camps of man's unrest  On the frontiers of the Nation live the Women of the West.  The red sun robs their beauty and in weariness and pain The slow years steal the nameless grace that never comes again; And there are hours men cannot soothe and words men cannot say - The nearest woman's face may be a hundred miles away.  The wide Bush holds the secrets of their longings and desires  When the white stars in reverence light their holy altar-fires  And silence like the touch of God sinks deep into the breast - Perchance He hears and understands the Women of the West.  For them no trumpet sounds the call no poet plies his arts - They only hear the beating of their gallant loving hearts.  But they have sung with silent lives the song all songs above - The holiness of sacrifice the dignity of love.  Well have we held our fathers' creed. No call has passed us by.  We faced and fought the wilderness we sent our sons to die.  And we have hearts to do and dare and yet o'er all the rest  The hearts that made the Nation were the Women of the West.  THE MILDURA COLONY  The Mildura settlement is the scene of the greatest experiment in irrigation yet undertaken in Victoria and the success or failure of irrigation at Mildura must largely influence its success or failure throughout the colony. The Government has not invested money in the Chaffey enterprise as it has done in the form of loans advanced to trusts and in the construction of costly national works in the Goulburn Valley in the Loddon Valley and throughout the settled portions of the dry northern districts; yet it has a distinct right of property in Mildura in virtue of the concessions it has made to its founders. They have been given subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions on their part a block of 50000 acres of land as a free gift with a further area of 200000 acres on very favourable terms. [165] But more than all they have had handed over to them a large share of the colony's inheritance in the waters of the Murray River - a concession practically in perpetuity of so much water as may be required for the complete irrigation of this enormous block of 250000 acres and for the service of the community of it may be 500000 or more of people that will eventually dwell there. These circumstances demand of the State that it should exercise to the full its right of surveillance and control over the progress of the settlement and that it should see that the rights and interests of the settlers are duly cared for by its concessionaries.  The progress of the Mildura settlement may be briefly summarized as follows: - The present population numbers 4000 of whom nearly one-half are actually engaged in the clearing preparation and cultivation of the soil either as land-owners or as workmen. The area of land sold by the Messrs. Chaffey is in round numbers 17000 acres whereof 6500 have been planted 500 are under various kinds of annual or green crops and an additional 3000 are cleared and ready for cultivation or planting. The remaining 7000 are held for future improvement. Of the plantations about two-thirds consist of raisin vines. The others in the order of their importance comprise wine grapes apricots oranges and lemons peaches olives and other fruits. The expenditure by the Messrs. Chaffey on works for the service of the settlement has been far in excess of that provided for by their agreement. These comprise eleven pumping plants (ranging from 200 to 1000 horse-power each) 150 miles of mains and 300 miles of secondary and distributing channels (whereof about 3 miles are lined with concrete made from the local lime) together with syphons flumes bridges and other secondary works.  Viewing the settlement from a financial and commercial aspect so far it has been maintained entirely by the capital brought into it by the settlers themselves and by the expenditure of the firm of Chaffey Brothers and Co. Nothing of what it has produced has been sold to the outside world. The crucial test of competition in the open market upon which hangs the ultimate success or failure of the undertaking is yet to come. Several years must elapse before any such test can be conclusively made. No doubt a material contribution to the support of the settlers has been derived from their own produce. Some of them have earned a few pounds by growing fodder for the horses employed by the firm and in other similar ways and one or two of the more energetic and enterprising have made a living by supplying fruit and vegetables to their neighbours. But all this contributes nothing to the solution of the main problem. Even the few tons of raisins and dried apricots purchased from the settlers by the firm last year or the larger quantity they will probably purchase this year go but a little way towards solving it. [166]  The price the firm will pay for these small lots of first produce is hardly any criterion of what the world will give for the general bulk of the crop when the whole of the land is under cultivation and the limit of the local market has been reached. It is a fact that at the Present moment as much as 5d. per lb. may be obtained in Melbourne for first-class samples of colonial - grown cooking raisins and good currants fetch a price but slightly lower. In the London market however good currants are worth no more than 1.5d. per lb. cooking raisins 2.25d. and the best table raisins 7d. The difference between the Melbourne and the London prices is due to the import duty of 2d. per lb. the cost of freight insurance etc. and the addition of the charges of the merchant and shipper. But it is obvious that the ultimate prices of colonial produce in the London markets will not be affected by any import duties that may be imposed; while the merchants' and shippers' charges will not go to increase but to reduce the prices ruling here. Attention is called to these facts not to discourage the Mildura fruit-growers but to instil caution; and to remind them that they must look further than the Victorian or even the Australian market for the success of their industry.  The wine industry of Mildura is on a somewhat different footing from the dried-fruit business. Victorian wine may be fairly said to have already found its place among the beverages of the world. Ruthergien and Great Western are not so well or widely known as Bordeaux and Dijon but they are undoubtedly in a fair way of becoming so. People who drink good wine and who can afford to pay for what they drink consume the wines of these localities not because they can get no other but of choice. They are drunk under their proper titles in England and to some extent on the continent of Europe; and there is good reason to believe that they are used for blending purposes or in other words for the production of high-priced French clarets. Victorian wine therefore may be said to have passed the ordeal. Its price in competition with other wines of like class is established; and the grower who can live by his vineyard now may assume that he is in possession of a property that will maintain its value and that will provide a living for himself and his descendants in perpetuity. But Mildura will not produce good wines of the claret and burgundy class. Any attempt to produce these in its soil and climate would result in failure. But it will produce good wines of another class - heavy-bodied rich or fruity red wines suitable for the manufacture of port or for blending with the thinner but more delicately-flavoured dry wines will do well here. So also probably will the heavier class of sherries. The results thus far obtained from one of the Mildura vineyards point to this conclusion; and there is every reason to think that the crops will be heavy. The deep soil strongly impregnated with lime the hot sun and the ever available water will ensure a large production of must. [167] For high-class brandy Mildura will in all probability attain a reputation that will be worth money to the vignerons.  One of the questions that still awaits settlement here is the price the cultivators can afford to pay for the water supplied to them. A depth of 15 inches per annum over the whole cultivated area is that reckoned on as necessary by the Messrs. Chaffey and this in addition to the natural rainfall of from 7 inches to 10 inches though during the past two or three years it has been somewhat heavier. The current cost of delivery of this volume - that is the cost of fuel and labour at the pumping Stations and of maintenance and Supervision of the channels and exclusive of interest on the first cost of the works - is about 12s. per acre per annum. This is the rate the company has levied on all the Mildura land-owners for the current year. It has been levied on all alike whether the lands are cultivated or allowed to remain in their natural condition; and as might be expected its imposition has given rise to a good deal of grumbling on the part of the non-improving owners. Anyone at all acquainted with the wine industry in Victoria will agree that it can easily bear a charge of 12s. per acre to secure a certain crop. There is little doubt that the same will hold good of raisins grown on new land and sold at 4d. or 5d. per lb. Whether it will still hold when the land has been cropped for years and the price of the product has fallen to 2d. per lb. is a question that will no doubt receive the most serious attention at the hands of the settlers. Meanwhile they are safe to plant raisin vines. The crop will pay handsomely for some years to come. When the conditions change should the growth of raisins prove unremunerative they can turn their land to other account. Should the cultivation of raisins cease to pay resort must be had to some other description of crop in which there is still money.  The position and prospects of the cultivating land-owners of the settlement is as hopeful and promising as reasonable men will expect. By the outlay of a little capital and a good deal of hard work the industrious may be assured a present livelihood under conditions that to most will prove agreeable. The future promises competence independence fortune to those who are willing to labour and wait.  In common with the rest of the community the Government have of late had their attention directed to the present condition of the sugar industry in Queensland and especially to the difficulty of obtaining labour for carrying it on. It cannot be too often impressed upon our minds that we all directly or indirectly depend for our livelihood on the products of the land of the colony. Any serious falling off in its productiveness from whatever cause is therefore a matter of national concern. It has been urged that a revival of the sugar industry which is at present in a condition of depression and uncertainty would result in a restoration of prosperity throughout the colony. But while I am unable to attribute to this cause alone so much of the prevailing depression as some people are disposed to think many other causes being apparent not only in Queensland but throughout the rest of Australia I have arrived at the conclusion that it is the imperative duty of the Government and perhaps more especially of myself to whom rightly or wrongly much of the blame or credit of the existing state of things has been attributed to review the present position and to state plainly what we think is the right policy to be adopted by the country at this time. The urgency of the case induces me to adopt the present somewhat unusual mode of declaring that opinion.  You are aware that I have been for many years one of the most determined opponents of the introduction of servile or coloured labour into Queensland. My objection has not been on account of the colour of men's skins but I have maintained that the employment of such labour under the conditions to which we had become accustomed was injurious to the best interests of the colony regarded as a home for the British race and principally for the following reasons: [217]  1. It tended to encourage the creation of large landed estates owned for the most part by absentees and worked by gang labour and so discouraged actual settlement by small farmers working for themselves;   2. It led to field labour in tropical agriculture being looked down upon as degrading and unworthy of the white races:  3. The permanent existence of a large servile population amongst us not admitted to the franchise is not compatible with the continuance of our free political institutions.  To these reasons was added so far as Polynesian labour is concerned the discredit that had been brought upon Queensland by the abuses that for some years prevailed in the South Sea Island trade.  I recognise the force of those reasons as fully as ever. It was however answered that tropical agriculture could not be performed by white men and that the employment of coloured labour was therefore inevitable. This statement I always doubted and careful inquiries made from time to time led me to reject it altogether.  My objections to Polynesian labour were however from the first less strong than to the introduction of Asiatics. The people of the Pacific Islands are not so numerous as to be a permanent danger to our social or political institutions and I have always regarded their employment as a temporary and transitional expedient. It was not therefore until 1885 that I was induced under circumstances to which I need not now refer to propose to put a limit upon the time within which they might be introduced And this proposal which was accepted by the Legislative Assembly without division though not without dissent was I believe supported as much on the ground of the scandals which had attended the labour trade as for any other reason.   Let me now invite your attention to what has happened since then.  In the first place the system of large estates worked by gang labour has fallen into disfavour. The owners are not only willing but anxious to sell or lease portion of their estates to farmers who will themselves grow the cane and sell it to the manufacturers. And it is recognised I think generally that in future the culturation of the cane and the manufacture of sugar must be in different hands.  In the second place it has been established by actual trial that sugar is a profitable crop to be grown by small farmers if they can command a sale for it to the manufacturers at reasonable prices.  And this system is already carried on with great success notably in the Bundaberg Mackay and Herbert River districts.  In the third place it has been proved that in Queensland cane can be grown by white labour. [218] I am aware that this position is still disputed but it is admitted by most of the more liberal-minded planters with whom I have been in communication.  These results have not however been attained without the troubles which invariably attend the trying of new experiments. Successive Governments have endeavoured to assist the enterprising experimenters by giving facilities for the introduction of European labour of various kinds and by aid to central mills. But these endeavours have been counteracted from two different directions. While some of the planters have loyally tried to make the best of the altered conditions and prospects - and I am glad to know in many instances with conspicuous success - others for a long time set their faces against any change and did all in their power to compel a return to the old objectionable state of things. On the other hand amongst the working population whose interests I had perhaps too exclusively in view there has arisen a body of men claiming to be leaders of thought who have by their speech and action rendered it impossible that the experiment of the employment of white labour in tropical agriculture should be fairly tried. There are not at present in Queensland a sufficient number of Europeans able and willing to do the necessary work and to take the place of the Polynesians who are gradually leaving the colony and of whom no more can be introduced under the existing laws. Yet every opposition has been offered to the introduction of any additional labour the opinion has been promulgated that field labour in tropical agriculture is degrading and the employment of white labour in that industry has been denounced except at rates of wages which the industry cannot pay. In short these men will neither engage in the work themselves nor so far as they can prevail allow anyone else to do so.  In the meantime the planters as well as the smaller farmers already engaged in sugar culture do not know where to turn for the necessary labour to cultivate and take off their crops while the many others who are anxious to engage in the industry on the new conditions are deterred from doing so for the same reasons. The immediate prospect is that many of the mills will be closed and some removed and the productiveness of the lands of the colony instead of being largely increased will be seriously diminished.  We are then in this position: - On the one hand it is proved that the sugar industry offers a field for the settlement of numberless families upon the land where they can live and bring up their families in comfort. The danger of the aggregation of large estates is past; and it is shown that Europeans can engage in the industry with success when certain preliminary work has been done. On the other hand in many places that preliminary work has not yet been done and where it has been done the necessary European labour is not here and cannot at present nor for some time to come be brought here. [219] And before it can be brought here under existing conditions there is great danger that this means of employment for it will to a great extent have disappeared.  At the last general election the question of the continued introduction of Polynesian labour was treated as settled in the negative and I accept my full share of the responsibility for that result. But in my opinion the altered condition of things not only justifies but demands a reconsideration of the whole position.  And it seems to me that there are only two alternatives - to do nothing and let the sugar industry slowly struggle on until the necessary European labour can be introduced and acclimatised with the possible result that in the meanwhile it may be greatly diminished if not altogether extinguished; or to take some action to bridge over the interval which must necessarily elapse before the change of system can be brought about. This can only be done by making immediate provision for the supply of some labour which is at once available. With such a supply I believe that in a few years the existing large plantations would be divided amongst small farmers while large numbers of farms now held by selectors would be devoted to the cultivation of sugar-cane for sale to central mills. Such a result which is now no longer a matter for fanciful conjecture is I think worth striving for and we ought to adopt the means most likely to bring it about.  The only form of labour that is under existing circumstances immediately available for the purpose seems to be Polynesian labour. And I think as I have said that this labour is less open to objection than any other form of coloured labour. If then the system now happily inaugurated of small farmers is to be carried on to a final success I can see no alternative but to permit for a time at any rate the resumption of Polynesian immigration.  Adequate provisions must of course be made and they can be made for preventing abuses in the introduction of the labourers and for preventing them from entering into competition with white labourers in other occupations and it should be provided that the immigration shall continue (unless of course otherwise determined by the legislature) for a definite but limited period of say ten years. By that time I have no doubt that such further developments will have taken place as will enable the sugar industry to be carried on without fear of our reverting to the former system with its dangerous incidents and consequences and in the meantime I believe that a valuable impetus will be given to the producing interests of the colony.   those who keep steadfastly in view the great end of settling a European population upon the lands of the colony and the maintenance of our free political institutions will not if under existing circumstances this end can only be attained by a temporary change in the means be deterred by the fear of a charge of inconsistency from proposing the only practicable means. I believe that the adoption of this course at the present time will tend to that end and for the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the social and political welfare of the people will not now be imperilled by it. [220]  I should add that while my colleagues concur in the conclusion I am alone responsible for the political retrospect and for the arguments.  Broadly speaking the old Free Trade movement was an assertion on the part of the middle classes of their rights as consumers; while the Protectionist movement of to-day is an effort on the part of the manufacturing classes to obtain privileges as producers.  This difference is illustrated by a comparison of the composition of the Anti-Corn Law League in England and that of the Protectionist party in Australia and America. The League was in its origin a movement of the manufacturers and middle classes which gradually attracted to itself the more intelligent among the artisans In Australia and America however the purses of the manufacturers support Protection and the working classes who were at first inclined to follow their employers are gradually returning to Free Trade. Nor is this the only point of contrast between the new and the old Protectionism. In England it was only the aristocracy of labour which became Free Traders; while the "residuum" under the leadership of Feargus O'Connor furiously denounced the Anti-Corn Law League.  In Australasia and America on the contrary the aristocracy of labour as represented by the Trade Unions is inclined to be Protectionist while disorganised labour leans more towards Free Trade. [272] Lastly - strangest contrast of all- - the farmers and landlords who in England were the backbone of Protection are in Australasia and America its weakest adherents. [What follows is printed as a footnote.] During the last three years there has been a tendency in New South Wales and Tasmania on the part of land-owners of all classes to support Protectionist candidates. But this attitude is not owing to any dislike of Free Trade but to a belief on the part of the great land-owners that Free Trade involves direct taxation with a view to agricultural settlement; and on the part of the small farmers that Protection will enable them to retaliate on the neighbouring colony of Victoria. The Free Trade movement in Victoria is almost exclusively confined to farmers. Out of thirty-five agricultural associations thirty have up to the present date (June 1890) declared in favour of a return to Free Trade. A Free Trade Democratic Association has now been started in Melbourne and will soon make its influence felt in the politics of the colony.  The reason for this change in the composition of the two parties is easily found.  The manufacturers and artisans of Australasia and America look upon a different side of the question of Free Trade from that which was perceived in England. It is not with them a question of obtaining cheap raw materials - these they have always to their hands - but a question of establishing new industries. They desire to create while the Englishman desired to develop what was already created. Consequently the classes which in England encouraged the competition of foreigners because only foreigners could offer them the necessary raw material wish now in Australasia and America to exclude the same competition for fear it may destroy their infant industries.  [In Australasia] Labour is scarce land is cheap capital abundant. The spectacle is consequently presented of the simultaneous existence of high wages and large profits so that the foundation is laid for the misleading argument that such a country cannot compete against another country of low wages and small profits. This at once gives risk to the cry that Protection is required to prevent wages and profits from sinking to the European level. Such a cry attracts the working classes and gains the ear of the philanthropist. The Protectionist appears to be the patriot who is desirous of developing the resources of his native land and trying to prevent a national stagnation. He is the man who would guard the well paid "native" against the competition of the ill-paid European and who by legislative interference would maintain that union of high wages and large profits which is the striking feature of a young country. The activity of the state in a young country is extended so that the idea that legislation can accomplish this result arouses no misgiving in the minds of men who ardently desire it. [273] Nor is it of any avail in a young country where wages are high to urge that Protection must increase the price of Articles in daily use. An intelligent Protectionist would reply at once that he admits this fact but that he is prepared to undergo a private inconvenience for the public benefit. He would say as the Ballarat digger said to Sir Charles Duke that "he preferred to pay dearer for his jacket and moleskins because by so doing he aided in building up in the colony such trades as the making of clothes in which his brother and other men physically too weak to be diggers could gain an honest living."  It is certain that an error has been made by many Free Trade writers in approaching the question of Protection from the wrong side and contemplating it in a different aspect from that which is regarded by Protectionists themselves. Most of these writers deal almost exclusively with the influence of Free Trade upon the production of wealth while the Protectionists chiefly direct their attention to the influence of a fiscal policy upon the distribution of wealth. The consequence has been that the arguments and illustrations of Free Traders have failed to appeal as effectively as they deserve to the mass of Protectionist voters.  The reason for thus changing the point of view is the alteration which has been made in recent years in the centre of political power. In the days of Cobden and the Anti-Corn Law League when the middle classes formed the bulk of English voters it was politic to dwell upon the influence of Free Trade in cheapening the price of goods; but in young countries and at the present time in England where the electorates are controlled by working men the voters wish to understand the influence of that policy in raising wages. Accordingly although the old arguments remain quite true it is desirable now if we wish to arrest general attention to lay them aside for a time and bring out others which are more attractive to working men.   Unfortunately Free Traders have been slow to recognise that under the altered circumstances of an extended suffrage they must change the popular presentment of their views. As a rule they deal only with the figures of production. They tell us for example that the trade of England has advanced by leaps and bounds; that since Free Trade was introduced the income-tax returns are ten times what they were; that the quantity of funded wealth is daily growing larger and the population is increasing with an unsurpassed rapidity. They point to the tables of exports to the growing cities to the decline of pauperism and of crime and to the many signs of English industry and enterprise in every quarter of the globe and rolling out their columns of magnificent statistics they expect the world to be convinced! [274] But working men particularly in Australasia and America know well that this is not the last word upon the subject! 'The matter of concern to them is not so much that goods should be produced in plenty as that they should have an opportunity to use their skill; and even in England the working classes care more for a policy which promises high wages than for one which promises cheap goods. It is hardly reasonable to expect that a man who has but six-pence in his pocket should be greatly moved by hearing that the price of silk has been reduced to half-a-crown!  Accordingly Free Trade must be justified in young countries and to working men in quite another way than by a catalogue of its effects upon production. It must be shown that Free Trade has also an effect in raising wages; that whilst suggesting desires it gives means to satisfy them by cheapening most articles of common use and by bringing about the conditions which are most favourable to a fairer distribution of wealth and most conducive in any community to a lasting rise in the average standard of comfort. In making this investigation the real effect on wages of any fiscal policy will have to be considered and the futility of attempting to raise wages by merely altering a customs tariff ought to be made plain. It is certain that until such an inquiry is attempted the Free trade arguments will fly above the heads of those whom it is intended to convince.  Partly in consequence of having directed so much attention to the effect of Free Trade upon capital and partly for other reasons to be mentioned Free Traders have incurred the charge of being hostile to the working-classes. No one who has lived in a country where the fiscal controversy is active can have failed to notice the strong and bitter feeling with which Free Traders are denounced by those who aspire to a political position by the aid of the working-classes. This feeling is no doubt to a great extent fictitious. It is necessary at times for the "friend of the working man" - and "friendship for the working man" is a recognised profession in most English-speaking countries - to use strong language if he would not have his sincerity suspected. Free Trade and Free Traders offer a convenient object of attack the more so that Free Trade has been identified with an unpopular party both in Australasia and America. The Free Traders in Victoria where the fiscal battle was first fought were land-monopolists and Tories. The Free Traders in America were Southern slave-owners. It has taken a whole generation in both countries to dissociate Free Trade from these unpopular causes.  Independently however of these local causes of ill-feeling there is a more general ground for the popular idea that Free Traders have no sympathy with the aspirations of the working-classes. [275] This arises from the attitude which has been adopted by many Free Trade writers towards the measures of reform demanded by the working-classes.  Most of those whom the public regard as the champions of Free Trade from Ricardo to Professor Fawcett (with the two notable but often unperceived exceptions of Richard Cobden and John Stuart Mill) have been pedantically attached to that declining school of political thought which would restrict the action of the State within the narrowest bounds. In consequence of this Free Trade has come to be identified with the general principle of "Laisser faire." Indeed so deeply rooted is this confusion of ideas that it is not uncommon even in Radical journals to find Trade Unions denounced as a violation of Free Trade principles and a system of unregulated competition between masters and men justified by an appeal to the same authority.  Rightly or wrongly however working-men have believed that their condition could never be permanently bettered until the Government should interfere actively and widely upon their behalf; and they have accordingly demanded and obtained a long series of Acts of Parliament to regulate and protect labour of which the Factory Acts are the best-known examples.  All these measures have been opposed in the name of Free Trade although (as will be shown later in these pages) Free Trade is an influence which works in the field of Production and offers no argument either for or against the interference of Government within the field of Distribution. What wonder then that workingmen when they have found Free Traders confronting them at every effort to alleviate their lot by law have ceased to take an interest in the promised benefits of Free Trade and have regarded it as a middle-class doctrine comforting enough to the well-to-do but offering no help to them in their especial needs.  If therefore we would justify Free Trade to working-men we must break away from the ancient argument and show the true relation of Free Trade to a general scheme of government. This will be attempted later in these pages. At present the misconception which exists upon this point is only mentioned as one reason for the prevalent mistrust of Free Trade doctrines and as a special reason for their discredit among working-men.  Not less dangerous to the influence of Free Trade than its supposed hostility to the interests of the working classes has been its supposed indifference to the evils of the competitive system.  Philanthropists and writers of the type of Mr. Ruskiff have exhausted themselves in denunciation of the immorality and narrowness of the Free Trade system. .  It is needless to say that these denunciations have been for the most part ignorant and misdirected. But they have had so much influence on a large class of benevolent people who do not reason closely or at all on economic questions that it is necessary to give them a passing attention. [276]  It is said that Free Trade is indifferent to everything except material wealth and that its last word is "to buy in the cheapest and sell in the dearest market."  This is a charge which from the modicum of truth which it contains has been peculiarly destructive.  The last cause which may be mentioned as having had an influence in the revival of Protectionism is the discontent with existing industrial conditions which is a prevalent sign of the times.  It is not easy to trace this cause in actual operation but no reader of Protectionist literature can fail to recognise its presence. The jealousy of wealth the dislike of "laisser faire" the pressure of the competitive system all give rise to a profound dissatisfaction with existing social conditions. The evils of the day are felt to be intolerably irksome until it seems as if the wished-for blessing might be found in any change of policy. There can be no question that as the labour party in America under the leadership of Henry George is turning against Protectionism so in England and Australia discontent creates antagonism towards Free Trade.  It ought to be needless to point out that the remedy for the evils which create this discontent lies altogether outside the influence of Protection or Free Trade. Neither Free Trade nor Protection is a panacea for industrial evils nor will either policy satisfy the wants of working men. Irregular employment crowded homes an existence without pleasure an insecure old age - these are causes of complaint which cannot be removed by any changes in a fiscal policy. No mere tariff reform will give the poorer workmen regular employment nor build them healthy dwellings near their work nor find them openings for secure investment nor relieve the monotony of their dull existence. All that can be done by the agency of taxation is to mitigate as far as possible the evils which exist and to guard against creating others. Free Traders hold that under their policy the remedial agencies will work with the greatest force; but they do not say that Free Trade has of itself the power to remove industrial grievances.  The question as to whether any other colony may choose to elect its own Legislative Assembly on a basis of equal electoral power or not does not matter to us it being entirely the business of each colony to decide for itself whether every man should have one vote and one vote only or some have none some one and a few twenty.  But when we are asked to take part in a Conference to draw up a scheme of Government which must affect for good or evil every man woman and child in Australia and millions yet unborn we have a right a duty to insist that the members of that Conference or Convention shall voice the opinions fairly and equally expressed of the great masses of the people and not have the results of their labors distorted and biased by the class feelings and ambitions of those elected by the plural votes of Conservative property holders.  Therefore until every Australian Province grants to its inhabitants exactly equal elective power commonly termed "one man one vote" which is only simple justice the people should decline to have anything to do with Federation.  It is no use New South Wales and South Australia having the One man one vote system in force if we are ruled by a Federal Parliament in which the plural voters of Victoria Queensland and West Australia will make laws which we single voters will be compelled to obey.  Of one thing we may be perfectly sure that if all the Australian Provinces do not secure Electoral Reform before Federation they will stand a poor chance of getting it afterwards.  They say now that if we had Federation the Federal Parliament would abolish Black Labor in Queensland and all over Australia. [495] Don't you believe that; it is only a catch-cry. If every white man in Queensland had one vote and no one any more than one vote the Queenslanders would simply sweep away Black and Yellow Labor too in one short and glorious act.  My advice to the workers is not to accept Political Federation for Australia until we first establish a Federation of Labor right through the land. Then let the best men from all the colonies or provinces appointed by ballot of the Labor Federation members draw up a list of conditions and safe-guards against possible tyranny.  Instruct all Labor Members in every colony to insist upon those conditions being embodied in any scheme of Federation.  If refused the Labor Members in Parliament and the Federation members outside can simply wreck any scheme brought forward.  The conditions would require the most careful consideration but right here I will give a few rough ideas of my own on the matter.  First. No standing army to be instituted because armies are only required by Monarchies and Aristocracies in order to cow the people into submissiveness and make them find the money to pay some of their own mates to shoot them down if they strike against injustice or robbery. For instance remember the Great Maritime Strike.  Secondly. Have no titles or distinctions of any kind hereditary or otherwise granted to Australian citizens as they are only used to gratify vanity and ambition and often to buy the leaders and betray the people.  Thirdly. Give every State the absolute right of Secession On a certain proportion say three-fourths of the adult inhabitants desiring it and agreeing to discharge all joint obligations. Voluntary Union is the only Union worth having and if any State has the right to refuse to join it should have the same right to refuse to remain. Have only one House in the Federal Parliament on a population basis and submit all questions of importance back to each State. The people or Parliament of each State to approve any such law before it can become operative in any such State. Do not have any Federation "under the Crown". Let us separate quietly and in a friendly spirit from the Mother Land and then we can manage our own affairs in our own way and keep free from the quarrels and wars of the Old World.  Some people imagine that if we put off Federation some disaster may occur such as a Russian invasion which will compel us to federate hurriedly and that in the event of such happening we might make great mistakes which it would be difficult to remedy afterwards. [496]  I think this idea is made too much of. In the event of any such danger we could come to terms with each other on the understanding that the agreement arrived at should be thoroughly revised when peace was restored.  Again many want to know how we would defend ourselves against outside interference without a standing army.  Well drill everyone - boy and man and woman too! (why not?) - and let the people get a chance to bring about such a condition of things as will make life worth living our homes worth fighting for and our country worth dying to defend and you will find that when danger threatens every man and woman too if need be will die to preserve their rights and liberties. No foe could conquer such a nation as that and few would care about trying.  In conclusion my advice to the Workers of Australia at the present time is not to take any heed of appeals made to their patriotism. If an enemy should invade our shores we have a brilliant chance. Let us say to the capitalists: - "This is not our country at present; you own it nearly all in times of peace so you can fight for it now - we won't." GO ON STRIKE BOYS! Make terms; it wouldn't take long. Demand nationalisation of the land coalmines and all minerals and machinery; the only compensation would be our assistance to fight for their retention.  If the Capitalists refuse stand neutral. Swapping bosses can't hurt us much and may do us good. Remember it would be good fun to see the Capitalists fighting for their own property for the first time in the history of the world.  What has this to do with Federation? Well simply this that if we take up the attitude indicated the ruling class must come to our terms; if we federate hurriedly we will have to take theirs. All the difference in the world. Strike for liberty first - greatness next or any time.  HANK MORGAN.  P.S. The only real first-class thing about that Federation Scheme was the name the Commonwealth of Australia. Commonwealth means common weal or the general good the well-being of the community. Republic is only the Latin term for nearly exactly the same thing. Let us keep the good homely pure English word "Commonwealth" and make Australia the first nation in the world to work and legislate for the good of all not of a privileged unscrupulous minority. H.M.  The ball given by a number of the bachelors belonging to the Melbourne Club last Friday . . . at the Masonic Hall Collins-street was one of the smartest and most perfect balls in every respect ever given in Melbourne. The hall and approaches were completely transformed by exquisite and artistic adornments. Nothing so complete and perfect in the way of decorations has ever been attempted in Melbourne and a lady recently returned from a visit to England declares that she saw nothing more perfect at the houses of the leaders of London society. The long corridor one has to traverse en route to the ballroom was a scene of almost Oriental splendour. Numerous mirrors lined the walls - . - and crimson and gold Oriental curtains draped in a most artistic style covered the intervening wall space.. . The walls [of the ballroom] were completely hidden by mirrors and draperies overhung with garlands of greenery and flowers . . - The whole of the front of the platform was concealed by mirrors which reflected every movement of the gay throng of dancers. Behind these was a perfect forest of palms ferns greenery and masses of flowers among which fairy lights twinkled like the firefly of tropical forests. Herr Plock's full band was quite hidden by this alcove of green - . . Supper was served at twelve o'clock in the large supper-room the long ascent to which was handsomely adorned the landings on the stairway being perfect little bowers of greenery.  After the reception dancing was at once proceeded with and kept up far into the 'wee sma hours' - . - The programmes will no doubt be kept as souvenirs by the guests. They were in the form of tiny books with covers of crimson morocco the pencils attached by gold cord and tassels. The gowns worn on this occasion were most handsome scarcely one having been seen before. The following were a few of the most noticeable: - Mrs F. Fitzgerald white brocade the front of petticoat being covered with honiton lace. Mrs T. Fairbairn beautiful shade of pale heliotrope satin relieved with gold. Mrs Alexander Landale wore a handsome gown of gold coloured brocade with petticoat of satin trimmed with gold passementerie.  LEVI - SANDERS. - The marriage of Miss - - Sanders second daughter of Mr Lewis Sanders of Albert-street East Melbourne and Mr John Levi son of the Hon. N. Levi M.L.C. of 'Liverpool' Princes-street St. Kilda was celebrated at the bride's residence on Wednesday afternoon November 2 at 2 o'clock. The Rev. Dr Joseph officiated and Mr Sanders gave his daughter away. The Hon. N. Levi and Mrs Joseph Levi supported the bridegroom. After the ceremony a reception was held in the drawing-room round which garlands and festoons of greenery were arranged. The guests then adjourned to the handsomely decorated marquee where breakfast was served to a large number of guests. The bride's gown was composed of white ivory duchesse satin. The bodice was cut low but the neck was covered in by a fichu of richly embroidered chiffon edged with a fringe of orange blossom which fell to the waist in front and was finished off at the back under the large silk bow of the Watteau train. The skirt was bordered by a double box-pleat of silk. The veil worn with this gown was an embroidered Brussel's lace which had been worn by the bride's grandmother and mother in turn and was fastened with a diamond star the gift of the bridegroom. A chatelaine posy completed a most becoming toilet. There were five bridesmaids - the Misses Minnie Carrie Estelle and Zara Sanders (sisters of the bride) and Miss Florrie Davis. The Misses Minnie and Estelle Sanders were attired in eau de nil silk gowns made with the bell skirt edged with a kilting of silk and short bodices bordered with a fold of silk and having vests over which were drawn graceful fichus of chiffon. In a similar way the shell pink silk gowns of Miss Carrie and Miss Zara Sanders were made and the daffodil dress of Miss Florrie Davis. Each maid wore a hat to correspond with her gown the hats being black crinoline straws trimmed with knots of ribbon grass roses and velvet to match the gowns. They carried pink posies with streamers and wore crook brooches at the back of which was the name of the bridegroom (who presented them). Mrs Sanders wore navy blue silk with black lace; black bonnet with yellow roses; and posy of yellow roses. During the afternoon Mr and Mrs Levi left on their honeymoon. The bride's travelling dress was grey tweed (tailor made) grey tweed cape with pink ribbon and black hat with grass and velvet. The presents which the bride received were numerous and costly the following being the list: - The Honourable Nathaniel Levi M.L.C. house and furniture. Mr and Mrs Sanders (parents of bride) chest of silver (complete) and house and table linen. Mr and Mrs Joseph Levi set of entree dishes. [102]  Mr and Mrs S.O. Nelson handsome afternoon tea tray . . . Masters [sic] Cecil Nelson entree dishes - . - Mr Nat. Levy tea and coffee service. Mr E. B. Levy set of dish covers. Mr Nat. Levy (London) bank draught. Mr Albert Levy (Edinburgh) bank draught . . - Mrs L. Isaacs (London) set of silver salt cellars. Mr Benjamin (London) silver card case. Sir and Lady Benjamin boot-hook and shoe-horn (silver). Mr and Mrs Arthur Snowden handsome photo stand. Dr and Mrs Hewlett set of fruit spoons (silver) - . . Mr Edward Cohen two handsome fruit dishes. Mr David Benjamin dessert service (Limoges). Mr Alex Marks (Consul of Japan) handsome fruit service - . - Mr E. L. Zox M.L.A. gong. Dr and Mrs Joske card receiver . . - Mr and Mrs John Jacobs royal Worcester Vase. Mr and Mrs Sim Cohen two elegant Doulton jugs. Mrs M. Michaelis pair of royal Worcester vases. Mrs Bloomington elegant ornament. Mr and Mrs A. D. Hart handsome lamp and shade. Mr and Mrs Charles Cohen (Bendigo) costly lamp. - . Mr and Mrs Fred. Michaelis Majolica vase. Mr and Mrs Abrahams fruit knives and forks - Mrs M. Moss (Sydney) large Doulton urn. Mrs Levinson pair of hall brushes. Mrs Charles Jacobs jug. Mr and Mrs A. Levi liqueur stand. The Misses Anthony pretty photo. frame. Mr E. Hart handsome Japanese ornament - - - Mr Klisso pair of ornaments. Mr Lionel and Mr Arthur Hart silver butter cooler. The servants of the house three cameo cut vases.  My Dear Madam - Your husband's political prominence and your own social obscurity is the cause of this letter. I hate cant; so do you. I detest mock modesty; so do you. We both abhor that combined hypocrite - 'good society'. The successful stock and share gambler the fortunate commercial speculator and that immaculate trades-unionist the lawyer are the constituent elements of the bon ton and they refuse you the right to associate with them notwithstanding Sir Henry's political entity. And why? Because you had the courage to do openly what hundreds of them have done and are doing by stealth and the great redeeming point in your husband's character is his utter contempt for the society that ignores the woman who has loved him so fearlessly.  Your sympathies are said to be with the women workers of this and all other countries. Why don't you step into the breach that is waiting agape for women leaders; and irrespective of caste or creed help to ameliorate the condition of your sisters in the factory and ill-paid worker's home. Such action might bring abuse from the well-to-do; they would as a matter of duty to their class be compelled to rail against you but you owe them no consideration. How have they treated you? Cast away from you as your husband has done the vale of fear and mantle yourself in the garb of determination. The oppressed are waiting for leaders. The beacon fires are burning; it only wants some prominent courageous women to lead and victory - woman's social and political emancipation - is theirs and yours. [139]  Your suffering through social injustice should be enough to spur you on to help to alter the conditions of society so that your children and the children of other wronged women should not suffer the same humiliation at the hands of an immoral self-created aristocracy. The daughters of a high police official are allowed to dance at midnight in the street and yet are not ostracised from that society which compels you to absent yourself from its luxurious and mocking delirium...  Mr. Edward Maxted (the manager) read the following report on the desertion of wives and children: - 'I have the honour to again submit for your consideration certain matters bearing upon the ill-treatment and desertion of wives as I find that this popular vice had become of such magnitude as to warrant special prominence and consideration with a view of inducing legislation for the relief of the unfortunate victims whose offspring through destitution are becoming expensive charges upon your institution and the State generally. [174] The matter was first brought under your notice in May 1890 when in response to a request from the institution the Inspector-General of Police was good enough to cause special efforts to be made to capture deserters whose families were receiving relief but unfortunately the results were unsatisfactory. The law as at present constituted affords but meagre relief - frequently none whatever - to the large number of women and children annually deserted by those who are legally and morally responsible for their support. The failure of parental responsibility is of course of serious moment inasmuch as it is a great factor in the augmentation of the pauperism and misery of the community. It will be seen from statistics herein quoted that our floating population of deserting husbands and fathers has now attained appalling dimensions; and unfortunately the legal remedies at hand are most inadequate to meet what is required in the matter of preventing pauperism as it is affected by these desertions. For instance the deserter who cannot be traced by the police and the deserter who has been captured and imprisoned are equally useless as bread winners for their families. Indeed many wives having this knowledge of the matter refuse to prosecute their husbands for desertion or where they have prosecuted and the men have been captured consent to live with them again and give them another trial - generally however (so far as our knowledge of the matter goes) to endure a repetition of the brutality and neglect previously suffered for years and subsequently ending in fresh desertion. The large number of cases dealt with by your asylum from time to time has familiarised me with the drunkenness and cruelty of these men before the desertion of their helpless children and I would therefore venture to suggest that the penalty for the crime is not sufficiently powerful to act as a deterrent. It may be said that the shortcomings of wives frequently influenced desertion by the husbands and some of the women admit that trouble has been caused through their own unfortunate propensity for argument with the men at a time when the minds of the latter were unhinged through drink. Whatever allowances are to be made however there can be no possible excuse for men to permanently leave their children in want or dependent on charity as is done in hundreds of cases to which I am referring. . . The figures relating to the number of processes issued from the local police courts against men for maintenance are of considerable significance. Records show that not less than 623 warrants and summonses were issued against men who had failed to carry out the ordinary responsibilities of married life.  This is a serious matter but I venture to say that the figures quoted convey but a limited idea of what actually takes place as women are SO reluctant to seek aid through the police courts. But apart from the question of expense to the charitable institutions and the State caused by the delinquencies of deserting married men the question of the previous ill-treatment of their wives might fairly be taken into account with a view of meting out to these men a fitting and special punishment when violent assaults have been resorted to before the desertion. The statements of hundreds of deserted and ill-treated women who appeal from time to time at the asylum women who are found to be truthful respectable and good mothers disclose that their married lives constitute a period of suffering and wretchedness which would lead one to infer that they had been living with savages rather than with civilised beings. [175] [176] And although these statements are ex parte a large amount of credence must be given to women of undoubted respectability. On the other hand it is surely reasonable to assume that men who would deliberately leave their children in want would be quite capable of the other atrocities attributed to them by their wives. Taking haphazard a few of these cases relieved by the institution (and they are typical of hundreds) we find that in one instance a wife had been maintaining three children for nine years. During this term her husband (who had deserted) sent her in all £40. He was last heard of in 1889 when in reply to letters from his wife and children he coolly writes complimenting her on the maner [sic] she is bringing them up; mentioning incidentally that the 'way he is placed at present is very expensive as it costs him at least £5 a week to keep himself'. He has not since been heard of though he has been sought for by the police. The next case relates to a young woman brought to the asylum for confinement. She had been married some eight months. The husband is of the larrikin type and has frequently been in gaol. The police report that he would blacken his wife's eyes exhibit her at his door and triumphantly announce to the neighbours that she was 'black and blue all over alike'. Finally she endeavoured to end her sufferings by taking poison but the police called in medical aid removed her to the hospital and she subsequently recovered. Before taking the poison she wrote to her husband 'I was only going to live with you till my child was born but you have tortured me to this. You said you would treat me like a dog and so you have. Look after my poor old mother; tell her not to fret I am better off'. - - The eighth case is of equal atrocity with the preceding. The wife has three children. While she was pregnant he kicked her downstairs and also kicked her about the body with such violence that she became seriously ill for three months. Case No. 9 is that of a homeless wife received into the asylum for confinement .  The twelfth case is that of a deserted wife and six children. The husband is described as a drunken lazy man the eight persons being kept by the woman through laundry work. When she had no money to give him for drink he would in fits of temper throw out into the street the little food that might be in the house and if no money were forthcoming for tobacco he would take the children's tea put it in his pipe and smoke it - . - With a view of dealing with deserters the recent conference on charity suggested to the Legislative bodies in each colony that maintenance orders made in any one colony against deserters be enforcable in any other colony on the original order. And with the object of identification the director of asylums suggests that people going from one colony to another apart from their families should be registered in some manner  The Chairman said that the best course would be to give the report as full publicity as possible and to forward a copy of it to the Colonial Secretary so that the Government might be acquainted with the existing state of affairs and be in a position to take steps to bring it to an end. [177] He was quite satisfied that the statements contained in the report were within the bounds of truth. It seemed horrible that such things should exist...  The Chairman contended that the matter could easily be remedied by having an intercolonial act in all the colonies dealing with these people and in the next place by the Government compelling them to do work to support their wives and families whether they liked it or not.  It was decided to forward the report to the Colonial Secretary.  CHAPTER I. - Why Nellie Shows Ned Round. NELLIE was waiting for Ned not in the best of humours.   "I suppose he'll get drunk to celebrate it" she was saying energetically drying the last cup with a corner of the damp cloth. "And I suppose she feels as though it's something to be very glad and proud about."   "Well Nellie" answered the woman who had been rinsing the breakfast things ignoring the first supposition. "One doesn't want them to come but when they do come one can't help feeling glad."   "Glad!" said Nellie scornfully.   "If Joe was in steady work I wouldn't mind how often it was. It's when he loses his job and work so hard to get - " Here the speaker subsided in tears.   "It's no use worrying" comforted Nellie kindly. "He'll get another job soon I hope. He generally has pretty fair luck you know."   "Yes Joe has had pretty fair luck so far. But nobody knows how long it'll last. There's my brother wasn't out of work for fifteen years and now he hasn't done a stroke for twenty-three weeks come Tuesday. He's going out of his mind."   "He'll get used to it" answered Nellie grimly.   "How you do talk Nellie!" said the other. "To hear you sometimes one would think you hadn't any heart."   "I haven't any patience."   [2] "That's true my young gamecock!" exclaimed a somewhat discordant voice. Nellie looked round brightening suddenly.   A large slatternly woman stood in the back doorway a woman who might possibly have been a pretty girl once but whose passing charms had long been utterly sponged out. A perceptible growth of hair lent a somewhat repulsive appearance to a face which at best had a great deal of the virago in it. Yet there was in spite of her furrowed skin and faded eyes and drab dress an air of good-heartedness about her made somewhat ferocious by the muscularity of the arms that fell akimbo upon her great hips and by the strong teeth white as those of a dog that flashed suddenly from between her colourless lips when she laughed.   "That's true my young gamecock!" she shouted in a deep voice strangely cracked. "And so you're at your old tricks again are you? Talking sedition I'll be bound. I've half a mind to turn informer and have the law on you. The dear lamb!" she added to the other woman.   "Good morning Mrs. Macanany" said Nellie laughing. "We haven't got yet so that we can't say what we like here."   "I'm not so sure about that. Wait till you hear what I came to tell you hearing from little Jimmy that you were at home and going to have a holiday with a young man from the country. We'll sherrivvery them if he takes her away from us Mrs. Phillips the only one that does sore eyes good to see in the whole blessed neighborhood! You needn't blush my dear for I had a young man myself once though you wouldn't imagine it to look at me. And if I was a young man myself it's her" - pointing Nellie out to Mrs. Phillips - that I'd go sweethearting with and not with the empty headed chits that - "   "Look here Mrs. Macanany!" interrupted Nellie. "You didn't come in to make fun of me."   "Making fun! There have your joke with the old woman! You didn't hear that my Tom got the run yesterday did you?"   "Did he? What a pity! I'm very sorry" said Nellie.   "Everybody'll be out of work and then what'll we all do?" said Mrs. Philips evidently cheered nevertheless by companionship in misfortune.   "What'll we all do! There'd never be anybody at all out of work if everybody was like me and Nellie there" answered the amazon.   [3] "What did he get the run for?" asked Nellie.   "What can we women do?" queried Mrs. Phillips doleful still.   "Wait a minute till I can tell you! You don't give a body time to begin before you worry them with questions about things you'd hear all about it if you'd just hold your tongues a minute. You're like two blessed babies! It was this way Mrs. Phillips as sure as I'm standing here. Tom got trying to persuade the other men in the yard - poor sticks of men they are! - to have a union. I've been goading him to it may the Lord forgive me ever since Miss Nellie there came round one night and persuaded my Tessie to join. 'Tom' says I to him that very night 'I'll have to be lending you one of my old petticoats the way the poor weak girls are beginning to stand up for their rights and you not even daring to be a union man. I never thought I'd live to be ashamed of the father of my children!' says I. And yesterday noon Tom came home with a face on him as long as my arm and told me that he'd been sacked for talking union to the men.   "'It's a man you are again Tom' says I. 'We've lived short before and we can live it again please God and it's myself would starve with you a hundred times over rather than be ashamed of you' says I. 'Who was it that sacked you?' I asked him.   "'The foreman' says Tom. 'He told me they didn't want any agitators about.'   "'May he live to suffer for it' says I. 'I'll go down and see the boss himself.'   "So down I went and as luck would have it the boy in the front office wasn't educated enough to say I was an old image I suppose for would you believe it I actually heard him say that there was a lady if you please wanting to see Mister Paritt very particularly on personal business as I'd told him. So of course I was shown in directly the very minute and the door was closed on me before the old villain who's a great man at church on Sundays saw that he'd made a little mistake.   "'What do you want my good woman?' says he snappish like. 'Very sorry' says he when I'd told him that I'd eleven children and that Tom had worked for him for four years and worked well too. 'Very sorry' says he my good woman 'but your husband should have thought of that before. It's against my principles' says he 'to have any unionists about the place. I'm told he's been making the other men discontented. I can't take him back. You must blame him not me' says he.   [4] "I could feel the temper in me just as though he'd given me a couple of stiff nobblers of real old whisky. 'So you won't take Tom back' says I 'not for the sake of his eleven children when it's their poor heart-broken mother that asks you?'   "'No' says he short getting up from his chair. 'I can't. You've bothered me long enough' says he.   "So then I decided it was time to tell the old villain just what I thought of his grinding men down to the last penny and insulting every decent girl that ever worked for him. He got as black in the face as if he was smoking already on the fiery furnace that's waiting for him below please God and called the shrimp of an office boy to throw me out. 'Leave the place you disgraceful creature or I'll send for the police' says he. But I left when I got ready to leave and just what I said to him the dirty wretch I'll tell to you Mrs. Phillips some time when she" - nodding at Nellie - "isn't about. She's getting so like a blessed saint that one feels as if one's in church when she's about bless her heart!"   "You're getting very particular all at once Mrs. Macanany" observed Nellie.   "It's a wonder he didn't send for a policeman" commented Mrs. Phillips.   "Send for a policeman! And pretty he'd look with the holy bible in his hand repeating what I said to him wouldn't he now?" enquired Mrs. Macanany once more placing her great arms on her hips and glaring with her watery eyes at her audience.   "Did you hear that Mrs. Hobbs had a son this morning?" questioned Mrs. Phillips suddenly recollecting that she also might have an item of news.   "What! Mrs. Hobbs so soon! How would I be hearing when I just came through the back and Tom only just gone out to wear his feet off looking for work? A boy again! The Lord preserve us all! It's the devil's own luck the dear creature has isn't it now? Why didn't you tell me before and me here gossiping when the dear woman will be expecting me round to see her and the dear baby and wondering what I've got against her for not coming? I must be off now and tidy myself a bit and go and cheer the poor creature up for I know very well how one wants cheering at such times. Was it a hard time she had with it? And who is it like the little angel that came straight frem heaven this blessed day? [5] The dear woman! I must be off so I'll say good-day to you Mrs. Phillips and may the sun shine on you and your sweetheart Nellie even if he does take you away from us all and may you have a houseful of babies with faces as sweet as your own and never miss a neighbour to cheer you a bit when the trouble's on you. The Lord be with us all!"   Nellie laughed as the rough-voiced kind-hearted woman took herself off to cross the broken dividing wall to the row of houses that backed closely on the open kitchen door. Then she shrugged her shoulders.   "It's always the way" she remarked as she turned away to the other door that led along a little narrow passage to the street. "What's going to become of the innocent little baby? Nobody thinks of that."   Mrs. Phillips did not answer. She was tidying up in a wearied way. Besides she was used to Nellie and had a dim perception that what that young woman said was right only one had to work especially on Saturdays when the smallest children could be safely turned into the street to play with the elder ones the baby nursed by pressed nurses who by dint of scolding and coaxing and smacking and promising were persuaded to keep it out of the house even though they did not keep it altogether quiet. Mrs. Phillips "tidied up" in a wearied way without energy working stolidly all the timeas if she were on a tread-mill. She had a weary look the expression of one who is tired always who gets up tired and goes to bed tired and who never by any accident gets a good rest who even when dead is not permitted to lie quietly like other people but gets buried the same day in a cheap coffin that hardly keeps the earth up and is doomed to he soon dug up to make room for some other tired body in that economical way instituted by the noble philanthropists who unite a keen appreciation of the sacredness of burial with a still keener appreciation of the value of grave-lots. She might have been a pretty girl once or she might not. Nobody would ever have thought of physical attractiveness as having anything to do with her. Mrs. Macanany was distinctly ugly. Mrs. Phillips was neither ugly nor pretty nor anything else. She was a poor thin draggled woman who tried to be clean but who had long ago given up in despair any attempt at looking natty and had now no ambition for herself but to have something "decent" to go out in. Once it was her ambition also to have a "room." She had scraped and saved and pared in dull times for this "room" and when once Joe had a long run of steady work she had launched out into what those who know how workingmen's wives should live would have denounced as the wildest extravagance. [6]  RECONSTRUCTION  Which - Society or Banks?  Right at the opening of parliament the two opposing forces the one representing the people - the workers on the stations in the shops and factories and the farmers and storekeepers - and the other the soulless money-bags - that simply run banks the stock exchange commission agencies and deposit societies confront each other in battle array. The "reconstructors of society" join issue with the "reconstructors of smashed banks" and will fight to a finish to put an end to the present anarchy and oppose to the bitter end any attempt at its continuance by bolstering up an institution that has vampired the country dry. [306]  For years past the men of discernment who understand the economic laws operating in civilised society have pointed out in season and out of season at street corners in parliament in the workshops and wherever anybody could be got to listen the self-evident truth that: civilisation run on the principle of an idle or predatory class getting something for nothing - and as much of the valuable commodity as possible would inevitably break down through its own inherent weakness. The clowns in public places of course made grimaces and cracked their stupid jokes: wrote leading articles in the daily papers preached sermons delivered electioneering speeches sat in the Treasury Buildings and insulted deputations and as far as was possible trumpeted their selfish ignorance to a wondering world. To them the "reconstructors of society" were ignoramuses or worse: didn't understand history and were entirely ignorant of economics politics and "sound" finance. Were dreamers one day and rascals the next and only wanted to be scoffed at to be put to utter rout.  The pancake browed type of man such as is found in the Government the Legislative Council and daily newspaper editorial chair hasn't the faintest notion that we the foremost nation of Western civilisation are on the threshold of a new era. He can't imagine it. He - simple child that he is in everything but years and commercial trickery - simply remembers that his father was dressed in a plug bat and frock coat and never talked of anything but a ledger and buying and selling and making profits and receiving divs.; till he supposed that the world must have started so. In fact that Adam as soon as he got out of the Garden of Eden must have set up business as a bank director or company promoter. In short that human society with its ever-warring interests and blind production of wealth was always as it is to-day and that it is impossible for us to evolve to a higher social state.  Such is the conception of Man and the State by the "Reconstructors of the banks" and little did they dream that a society run on the strength of banking institutions with high sounding titles - Royal this and National that - paper money embossed windows cedar counters and Government deposits would inevitably come to smash. How could it be otherwise? Banks are private commercial concerns governed by laws precisely similar to those of the importers of pianos hats boots or galvanised iron - with this important difference that when they haven't got a stock of their commodity - money - (gold or silver) on hand they can manufacture a fictitious article in the form of notes and put it on the market as a genuine article of commerce. They are not allowed a mint to coin their own money but may turn out paper by the ton. It is supposed of course for every £1 note there is issued there is a sovereign in the bank to meet it; in fact the law is supposed to demand it but as the law is invariably administered by bank directors the "law is an ass." So long as bank-notes represent gold of a standard value and the notes issued are not in excess of available coin and merely used as a convenient medium of exchange there is stability in the concerns - but the moment that principle is departed from (and generally it is) that instant with the help of overdrafts and boom valuations the banks enter on a career of insolvency. [307] And as in the case here in Queensland - where there is no State bank and politicians are bank directors and share-holders - they drag down thousands of innocent people with them in their headlong gallop to ruin.  Did the "reconstructors of society" propose the continuance of any such state of anarchy as now obtains and as will recur again and again till Socialism outgrows the present system no words could be used strong enough to condemn them. But they do not. They point out that the staple industries of this colony are controlled by the banks to everybody's detriment - even to the gamblers who fattened on the game. Every Queenslander needs work - not too much of it - and the reward of his labour should assure him a home and the requirements of modern social life. He should be mated if he wishes; should be able at all times to be well fed comfortably clothed and not denied any of the refinements possible to civilised people. Does our present mode of life enable all worthy citizens to secure this essential necessary to the realisation of our manhood? Will the reconstruction of the banks effect it? It is idle to suppose it will. Yet that right should be the inheritance born with every mother's son that comes into the world.  By the size of a giant's toe you can tell the strength of his wrist. In like manner by glancing at what is passing in our midst in Queensland to-day we can accurately take the measure of the whole capitalist world. On receipt of the news of the closing of the Q. N. Bank in Ipswich the municipal employes were immediately discharged; at Croydon mines were shut down as no wages were forthcoming and exemptions claimed in consequence; factories and shops in Brisbane have been closed and workers discharged; even the hospitals are tied up and the mass of the people crying out in despair. Bad as all this is and attributable as most of it is to the maladministration of public affairs by men who should long since have been impeached and deposed it is common to the system under which we live. It is a necessity of it and were all the banks "reconstructed" to-morrow the evils would substantially remain.  Until we the working people - and we all every healthy adult man and woman should be workers - establish the principle of cooperative production and equitable distribution of all wealth we shall be at the mercy of solvent and insolvent capitalists bank smashes and Panama swindlers. To do this we must combine in unions and send Labour members to parliament. And don't let us forget that the break-up of the banks and return of Labour members to the legislatures of the world is to Commercialism what the down-fall of the barons and the rise of the trading class in the sixteenth century was to Feudalism. [308] It marks a new epoch - and we are going to realise it - if not in all its fulness yet a good part of it - before the close of the century. A.G.Y.    Hints to Depositors.  Like a gigantic sponge the Q.N. Bank has for a long time past been sucking up the loans so generously provided by the people of Queensland. Lately too it has been absorbing unusually large sums from the Savings Bank. Timid depositors have been drawing their money from solvent banks to place it in the Savings Bank whence of course it was taken daily to the Q.N. Yet in spite of these advantages and in spite of the confident assertions of the Ministerialists that M'Ilwraith's return had made its position impregnable it has now suspended payment.  Depositors who are invited to vote for reconstruction should bear in mind that every penny of the money due to the Government must be paid in full before they can get a dividend. At the reconstruction meeting the directors having propounded their scheme will of course expect depositors to tumble over each other in their eagerness to sanction it. They will also no doubt have much to say about their arduous and responsible work and will expect depositors to pass a vote of confidence amidst enthusiastic cheering. But at this juncture caution is a much more reliable quality than confidence.  Depositors should be particularly wide awake in seeing that all losses are not thrown upon them. The £5 still due upon every share should be called up before the depositors are asked to lose a single penny. For years the shareholders have been receiving a 10 to 13 per cent dividend. If then the shareholders have received all the profits why should they not bear all the losses? Monday's Courier after speaking of possible objection from the English depositors to reconstruction insinuates that the Government may use its enormous voting power to carry a scheme of reconstruction against their wishes. But when the Government is paid in full (as of course it must be) it would be a gross abuse of power on its part to vote at all. Such interference would be a mistake. It might perhaps even lead the depositors to believe that the object of the Government was to conceal certain big overdrafts.  Before blindly adopting the directors' scheme the depositors should hold a separate meeting from which overdraft holders should be rigorously excluded. The depositors from among themselves should then appoint a committee to investigate the affairs of the bank and bring up a report at a later meeting. This committee should be specially told to give answers to some such questions as these: Have any prominent politicians large overdrafts on insufficient security? [309]  Have the partners of prominent politicians large overdrafts?  Have companies in which prominent politicians are shareholders large overdrafts?  Have advances of £12 per share been made on Mount Morgans now worth about £2 per share?  Did any directors withdraw their deposits or part of them during the last month?  Was the last dividend of £47000 to shareholders paid out of profits?  Had any run on the bank started before that dividend was paid? Upon what mission was Glenny the former manager of the bank sent to London?  The committee seeing that a most careful examination of the securities is an essential to a thorough understanding of the position of affairs will also find it necessary to ask: What weight can be given to valuations made during the boom times?  The committee will likewise bear in mind that although the bank say holds a mortgage over 60000 sheep the stock may have aged or died since the money was advanced. The depositors may have boundless confidence in the directors but confidence cannot bring dead sheep to life.  Even if after paying the Government in full the assets were not sufficient to pay 2s. in the £ who would expect the directors to volunteer such information at the first or succeeding meetings of depositors? A Queensland bank director no matter how honest is generally as sanguine as the insolvent who after promising 15s. in the £ pays a dividend of 3.5d.  It is not suggested that the answers to the above questions will be against the directors or that there is any ulterior motive for asking them but only that the depositors will find it a good policy to seek for information. An impartial investigation is what is needed not an investigation influenced by overdraft men. One such person in a Victorian bank (so it is rumoured in Melbourne) shouted and cheered for the "reconstruction" of the bank in which he was interested so loudly that he won over the depositors who little dreamed that he owed the bank no less than £250000.  The position of the Q.N. is very different from that of other banks. It must pay the enormous Government deposits before it gives the depositors a penny of their money. And it is hopeless now to expect even M'Ilwraith to float another loan - even for the benefit of a suspended bank. The daily papers however assert that he intends to call parliament together on the 25th instant for the purpose of guaranteeing Q.N. notes. Unless the object is to conceal certain big overdrafts it seems extraordinary that the Government should not itself issue the necessary notes instead of guaranteeing the notes of a bank that has temporarily suspended payment. [310] Suppose that the Government guarantees the Q.N. notes for twelve months: During the twelve months the notes will be accepted readily enough; but if at the end of that time it happened that the Q.N. was not in a position to pay there would be a rush to the Government for gold in exchange for the notes to demand payment under the circumstances supposed would be to compel the bank to suspend payment a second time. The only honest alternative therefore is for the Government itself to issue the notes. if the Government is really desirous of facilitating banking business and restoring confidence to the commercial community it will receive sums for deposit at the Government Savings Bank cash cheques drawn on such deposits and generally transform it into a State bank with all its Security and reliability.  But will the Treasurer do this? or will he rather select as the Government bank of the future another private institution with all its liability to a repetition of the present condition of things thus compelling Queensland citizens to use a semi-public bank for the purposes of their business with none of the security accompanying it that a State department alone can give.  As M'Ilwraith's financial operations as public treasurer are always failures the chances are that if he selects another bank it will be some local institution whose shares are below - very far below - par. It is therefore a very serious matter for Parliament to consider whether proposals he may submit to it can be entertained with advantage to the State. Speaking of banks it is hard to say how much M'Ilwraith's incompetence has cost the colony. Certainly not less than £10000 a year. Indeed but for the Courier no one would ever have dreamt of giving M'Ilwraith credit for a knowledge of finance. For years it has continued to assert that he is a heaven-born financier till some people have really come to believe the statement. He was financier enough however to get most of the elections over before the bank "temporarily suspended payment." Z.  The topic of the evening was to consider the desirability of a customs union between the whole of the colonies. It was a subject outside the Employers' Union but during times of depression it behoved every man to find possible ways of escape. There appeared to be a unanimous feeling in favor of adopting a customs union between the colonies and in regard to this particular matter it was important that they should be in accord with each other. Employers were federated with each other and ship owners associated together and agreed with each other. In New South Wales they regarded the establishment of a customs union more favrably than this colony. That was due as he believed to this colony supporting protection too selfishly. He had always been a supporter of protection but there was a limit beyond which he did not think it was judicious to go. If they could only get from an interchange of duties between the colonies it would be an incalculable benefit to the colony. [sic] There were many articles that could be manufactured in this colony instead of importing them from other countries. The encouragement that would be given to local industrial enterprise if a customs union were arranged between the colonies would be almost incalculable.  Mr. B. Cowderoy president of the Chamber of Commerce said the bringing up of the question of establishing a customs union between the colonies was due to the Chamber of Commerce. The matter had gone on somewhat like a snowball gathering as it rolled. The Government of this colony had communicated with the Governments of other colonies and the Chamber of Commerce with other kindred bodies on the subject. A conference of representative bodies should be brought together to try and work the question out in a practical manner. If the principle were adopted each colony instead of having its markets confined within its own limited area would have a market as large as the whole of Australia. The advantage of this must be obvious. He was astonished at the ignorance displayed by some of their leading statesmen when the question was being considered in Sydney some time back. The point raised by some of them was - how were they going to stand the loss of revenue estimated at £2000000 in the event of a customs union being established. [503] Evidently they had given very little study to the matter for otherwise it would be seen that the difficulty they raised was only a "bugbear" and had no existence in reality. If intercolonial free-trade were adopted the loss to this colony based upon the revenue two years ago would be less than £400000 and if based upon the present revenue would be considerably less than this sums And although there would be an apparent loss it was not a loss because if they looked at the losses of the colonies in the aggregate if would only be the loss of duty between one colony and another and upon colonial products only. (Hear hear.) The same revenue would be received by each colony from duties upon imported goods in the same proportion to each other as under the present systems. Each colony would continue to import the same goods as they imported now. The loss of revenue therefore would only be upon goods passing from one colony to another that did not come from a foreign market. What they should propose to do would be to exchange freely among themselves. A central authority could be appointed to distribute the duties on foreign imports in proportion to the population in respect to each colony. A customs union was considered the readiest mode of bringing about federation of our colonies. (Hear hear.)  Mr. N. Levi M.L.C. as president of the Chamber of Manufactures desired to say that it was the unanimous wish of the chamber to see a customs union established between the colonies. He in company with the late Mr. Steinfeld when in Sydney had thrashed out the question. He regretted to say the question was not so far advanced now apparently as it was some five years ago. He was quite sure that the arguments brought forth then would convince them that if they hoped for future prosperity they would establish a customs union. If they had a larger interchange between the colonies a much larger trade would be opened up. If they were to adopt a suggestion made some years ago to bring under the notice of the people of the mother country the resources of the colony they would do much to improve the position of the colony by attracting population to these shores. There were matters affecting the establishment of a customs union that required the best ideas of the best statesmen of this country.  PART I.  THE ART OF LIVING IN AUSTRALIA  CHAPTER I. THE CLIMATE OF AUSTRALIA. AUSTRALIA forming as it does a vast island continent in the Southern world lies to some extent within the tropical range for the Tropic of Capricorn traverses its northern part. At present however its most densely populated portion lies just outside the tropics and it is this semi-tropical part of Australia with which we have mostly to do. And apart too from the mere fact of Australia being between certain parallels of latitude which makes its climate tropical or semi-tropical as the case may be its position is peculiar in that it forms this enormous ocean-girt continent already described.   One of the most extraordinary circumstances in connection with the Australian people is that they have never yet realized their semi-tropical environment. It would naturally be supposed that a dominating influence of this kind would have from the very first exercised an irresistible effect on their mode of living. But on the contrary the type of the Australian dwelling-house the clothing of the Australian people and what is more significant than anything else their food habits prove incontestably that they have never recognised the semi-tropical character of their climate all over the rest of the world it will be found that the inhabitants of different regions adapt themselves to their surroundings. For instance the Laplander and the Hindoo live in such a widely different manner that one can scarcely believe they belong to the same human family. [4]  It has however been reserved for Australia strange even from the first to prove an exception to this universal law. Yes strange even from the first! For did not the earliest arrivals find that the seasons came at the wrong time of the year; that Christmas-tide came with sunshine and that the middle of the year was its coolest part? Were there not found in it curious animals partly quadruped partly bird and partly reptile? Were there not discovered also other animals who carried their young in a pouch? Moreover did Dot these first settlers see that the trees shed their bark and not their leaves; and that the stones were on the outside not the inside of the cherries?   But even admitting these peculiarities of season of fauna and of flora it may be asked How is it that the people of Australia have never adapted themselves to their climatic surroundings? The answer or rather answers to such an interrogation must largely consist of matters of opinion. This being the case therefore I can do no more than attempt to give my own explanation of this singular anomaly. It must be remembered that the one great impetus to colonisation in Australia was the discovery of gold in 1851. Up till that time settlement had been proceeding steadily it is true. Indeed one may go so far as to say that the development of the country was progressing although slowly on safe and natural lines. But the announcement of the finding of gold which was continually being corroborated by successive reports acted as an electric stimulus throughout the whole civilized world. As a consequence shipload after shipload of new comers flocked to Australia all aflame with the same ardent desire - gold. Amongst them were certainly many of the picked men of the earth whose spirit will leaven the whole of Australasia for all time to come. Yet even at the present day we still see the influence of this gold period at work in the readiness with which men are caught by any plausible mining prospectus. They have only to be told that a company is being formed to extract gold out of road metal and they are ready to believe it and what is more prepared to put money into it.   But far better than all this eagerness to amass wealth by some fortunate coup would be the natural development of the country. Agriculture and market-gardening vine-growing and wine-making the deep-sea fisheries and all the other comparatively neglected opportunities only await their expansion into vast sources of wealth. What wonder then that a continent with so much that is wanting in connection with its food life should be living in a manner distinctly opposed to its climatological necessities! In the case of America there is a far different history. Settlement began there in a small way at first to gradually expand as time went on. There was no sudden event with the exception of the short-lived Californian gold rush of 1849-50 to set men flocking to its shores in countless legions. No in America the inland territory has been peopled steadily and slowly at first but in after years by leaps and bounds so that its development has been on a perfectly natural basis.   But there must be something even more than this to explain the want of adaptation to climate shown in Australia and it is I think to be found in the following. It must be remembered that Australia has been peopled chiefly by the Anglo-Saxon race. In such a stock the traditional tendencies are almost ineradicable and hence it is that the descendants of the new comers believe as their fathers did before them. It's in the blood. For there can be no doubt but that the Anglo-Saxon thinks there is only one way of living in every part of the world - no matter whether the climate be tropical semi-tropical or frigid. Those in the old country live in a certain manner and all the rest of the globe have every right to follow their example. [6]  These two facts that Australia was peopled in part by the influx which followed the discovery of gold and that its inhabitants belong essentially to the Anglo-Saxon race have unquestionably exercised a great influence over our Australian food-habits. But notwithstanding these powerful underlying factors there still remains that most extraordinary circumstance to which I at first referred namely that the Australian people have never realized their semi-tropical environment. In order to assign to this latter the prominence it deserves it seems desirable to make special inquiry into the peculiarities of the climate in its different parts. With that object in view therefore I wrote for certain information to the observatories of the four principal Australian metropolitan centres namely Sydney Melbourne Adelaide and Brisbane. As has always been the case I received the fullest answers to my requests from Mr. H.C. Russell Government Astronomer of New South Wales; from Mr. R.L.J. Ellery Government Astronomer of Victoria; from Sir Charles Todd Government Observer of South Australia; and from Mr. Clement L. Wragge Government Meteorologist of Queensland. And it is with a feeling of considerable indebtedness to these gentlemen that I acknowledge their uniform kindness. And yet it is important to remember that the annual temperature by itself of any given locality may afford no indication whatever of its climatic peculiarities. Take for instance the climate of the North-Eastern portion of the United States. That region is characterized by intense heat during the summer and extreme cold in the winter. In New York for example the mean summer temperature ranges as high as 70.9° while the mean winter temperature is as low as 30.1°; yet the mean temperature of the whole year is 53.2° affording no indication of these extremes. The mean annual temperature alone therefore would be entirely misleading as it would give no idea of these alternations of heat and cold. Such being the case the actual character of any climate will be far better realized by placing in juxtaposition the mean annual temperature the mean temperature of the hot and the mean temperature of the cooler months. First of all then I purpose showing the mean annual temperature and also the mean temperatures for the hot and cooler months of the four largest Australian centres. [7]  TABLE showing the Mean Annual Temperature and also the Mean Temperatures for the Hot and Cooler Months of Sydney Melbourne Adelaide and Brisbane.   Capital. Mean Annual Temperature Mean Temperature for the Hot Months Mean Temperature for the Cold Months  Sydney 62.9 70 58.7  Melbourne 57.5 64.9 53.8  Adelaide 63.1 72.4 58.4  Brisbane 67.74 75.2 64.3  Much will be gained by a comparison of these temperatures of the Australian capitals with those of some other cities in different parts of the world. A contrast of this kind will in my opinion help to a truer understanding of the climate of these capitals than any other. Accordingly I made a successful application to Mr. H.C. Russell for the corresponding temperatures of the following cities: London Edinburgh Dublin; Marseilles Naples Messina; New York San Francisco New Orleans; Bombay Calcutta and Madras. [8]  TABLE showing the Mean Annual Temperature as well as the Mean Summer and Winter Temperatures in twelve different cities.   City. Mean Annual Temperature Mean Summer Temperature Mean Winter Temperature  United Kingdom-London 50.8 62.9 39.5  Edinburgh 47.5 58 38  Dublin 50 61.1 40.7  . . . .  Southern Europe-Marseilles (France) 58.3 72.9 45.2  Naples (Italy) 62 74.4 47.6  Messina (Sicily) 65.8 77.2 55  . . . .  United States of America-New York 53.2 70.9 30.1  San Francisco 56.2 60 51.6  New Orleans 69.8 82 55.8  . . . .  India-Bombay 78.8 82.6 73.8  Calcutta 78.4 83.3 67.8  Madras 82 86.4 76.6  It has been said that Australia is practically Southern Europe and to a very great extent this is perfectly true. It will be seen however on reference to the preceding tables that the Australian climate is more equable than that of Southern Europe for there is not such a marked difference between the hot and the cooler months. In the New England States of North America as exemplified by New York there are intensely hot summers and extremely cold winters - to which fact attention has already been drawn. And lastly in India the thermometer stands at such a height winter as well as summer that we can only be thankful our lines are cast in more pleasant places.   [9] Having thus compared the summer and winter temperatures of the Australian capitals with those of other cities in different parts of the world it will be advisable to direct our attention to some details connected with the climate of these capitals and of the corresponding colonies generally. Commencing with Sydney we find that the climate is characterized by the absence of very violent changes of temperature owing in great measure to its proximity to the ocean which in winter is about 10 ° warmer than the air. Its summer climate is marked by the absence of hot winds which do not come more than three or four times and the are short-lived seldom lasting more than five or six hours. For a short time in the midsummer of each year Sydney is visited regularly by moist sea breezes which are enervating to many persons. While these continue the temperature seldom rises to 80 ° but there is so much moisture that they are very oppressive. Otherwise the climate is one of the most enjoyable in the world. In other parts of New South Wales towns may be found varying in mean temperature from 45.8 ° at Kiandra to 69.1 ° at Bourke. Speaking generally it is a fact that for the same mean annual temperature in New South Wales the range between summer and winter temperature is less than it is in Europe.   The climate of Melbourne is characterized by a low average humidity moderate rainfall and moderate winds strong gales being of her rare occurrence. The most marked feature is the summer hot wind. A hot wind is always a northerly wind and the highest temperature generally occurs a little before the win changes to west or south-west. When this takes place a sudden drop to a comparatively low temperature sometimes follows within a few minutes. These hot winds however are not frequent only averaging eight or nine per annum. These characteristics will apply to all Victoria except the mountain ranges where all the climatic elements vary with the altitude. [10]  The climate of Adelaide is certainly healthy and with the exception of the extreme heat occasionally experienced in summer the weather may be described as enjoyable. It must be remembered however that these high temperatures are always accompanied by extreme dryness the wet bulb thermometer usually reading at such times from 30° to 35° or even more below the temperature of the air. The heat is therefore more bearable than if it was combined with the humid atmosphere. When the thermometer stands perhaps at something over 100° the wet bulb thermometer will show 65° and it is this which enables persons to bear the heat of the summer and carry on their usual pursuits with less inconvenience and discomfort than is felt in tropical and damp climates though the temperature may be 15° or 20° lower but nearly saturated with aqueous vapour as at Port Darwin where during the rainy season of the north-west monsoon the thermometer may stand at only 88° whilst the wet bulb at the same time indicates 86°. Such an atmosphere it need hardly be said is far more enervating than the hot and dry air of the Adelaide plains. The summer which may be termed warm and dry usually extends over say five months; and during the remainder of the year the climate is simply perfect. The temperature in mid-winter over the Adelaide plains rarely if ever reaches the freezing point although there may be sharp frosts and on still clear nights so frequently experienced copious dews. On the ranges and on the high lying plains 150 miles north of Adelaide lower temperatures are reached indeed in some years there have been falls of snow.   The climatic features of Brisbane are as a mean expression decidedly semi-tropical. The months from October to March may be classed as tropic when vegetation makes luxuriant growth especially if the rainfall prove abundant. The rest of the year from April to September is marked by a dry bracing "continental" climate during which the westerly wind often proves very cold bleaching and searching accompanied by great dryness accumulated during the passage of this current from southern-central Australia. Many settlers affirm that they feel the peculiar searching character of the dry cold "westerlies" more keenly than the more "honest" frost of the old country. Yet vigorous constitutions thoroughly enjoy the bracing nature of the westerly weather of winter. Hard ground frosts not unfrequently occur in the Darling Downs and Maranoa districts especially during May June and July in connection with the westerly type of climate; and moreover ice has at times been observed in the water-jugs of bedrooms &c. As before intimated the westerly winds are marked by great dryness so that (saturation= 100) a percentage of relative humidity below 33 per cent. may occur during the prevalence of such phenomena not only in Brisbane but especially in the more western districts above mentioned. Such conditions are characterized by great diathermancy of atmosphere and hence are frequently followed by days of considerable heat. Even in the tropics in inland districts ground frosts are known to have occurred owing to this extreme diathermancy of the atmosphere far from the coast and the consequent attendant factor of active terrestrial radiation. In coast districts or that fringe of country bordering the ocean north from Rockhampton frost is of very rare occurrence and the prevailing winds are between south-east and east-north-east with a rainfall far more abundant than that obtaining in other parts of Queensland. The climate of the country surrounding the southern end of the Gulf of Carpentaria is very hot and trying from November to March but genial thenceforward. It is certainly not unhealthy and the fevers suffered from in the northern and gulf districts of Queensland are largely brought on by reckless or needless exposure. [11] [12]  In addition to the foregoing which has been obtained from head-quarters certain questions were submitted by me as to the climatology of the different colonies. As it will be seen these interrogations are somewhat extensive in their scope and supply knowledge upon points which is not ordinarily met with in my descriptions of Australian climate. In drafting them everything which had a bearing on health was included as far as possible and consequently in a work of this kind they unquestionably deserve a prominent place. In arranging them I purpose placing the different replies after each question in the following order namely New South Wales Victoria South Australia and Queensland. And in the different answers it should be borne in mind that Mr. H.C. Russell is responsible for New South Wales; Mr. R.L.J. Ellery for Victoria; Sir Charles Todd for South Australia; and Mr. Clement L. Wragge for Queensland.   Is it not a fact that the temperature and barometric pressure are exposed to sudden and marked changes? Have you known the temperature to fall say as much as 22° in 15 minutes?   New South Wales. - The temperature sometimes changes rapidly in the summer coming with a change from a hot wind to a cold southerly although the instances are rare. Once in 30 years I have known such a change to amount to 20° in 15 minutes. Under ordinary circumstances the change in temperature from hot to cold wind takes several hours to amount to 20°. The fluctuations of barometric pressure are moderate seldom amounting to half an inch in a day or an inch in a week. In England on the other hand the pressure sometimes varies quickly to the extent of two inches. [13]  Victoria. - Yes; the temperature much more so than the barometric pressure; it has fallen from a high temperature to 20 and even 30 degrees sometimes in as many minutes when a hot north wind has suddenly changed to a cold southerly one. But such sudden and great changes occur very seldom and then only in the hot summer months and are known as "the change." On several occasions in the last 30 years it has fallen from 105° in the shade to 70° and 65 ° in the shade in less than an hour.   South Australia. - Yes in the summer; but especially as regards temperature rarely in the winter. One notable example occurred on February 9th 1887 when during a heavy thunder-storm the temperature fell 25° in 10 or 15 minutes followed by a rising temperature. In other instances the fall of temperature has been almost equally rapid. From this it will be seen that we are subject to large and quick falls of temperature following extreme heat. The approach of hot weather is usually gradual and the fall abrupt. The barometer has been known to show a rise of 6 / 10 of an inch in 24 hours; this however is exceptional.   Queensland. - There is no record of a fall of as much as 22° in 15 minutes. But on the other hand a rise of 30° in three hours is a common feature over the Darling Downs after sunrise. Owing to the diathermancy of the atmosphere already referred to it is a fact nevertheless that in the " continental " or inland districts of Southern Queensland the temperature in winter is subject to sudden and marked changes. Barometric pressure owing to the comparatively low latitude is not exposed to sudden and marked changes except during hurricane conditions which usually affect the central coast-line in February and March.   [14] As a corollary to the preceding would you say that the climate is marked by great variability?   New South Wales. - No; just the opposite. Indeed as regards Sydney itself. there are few cities in which so much uniformity of temperature and slow changes are to be found. The cause of any great change is the hot wind and as that seldom comes more than three or four times in the year great changes are infrequent. The mean diurnal range in Sydney is 11 1/2 ° and taking a series of years it is very unusual for the range on any day to reach 25°.   Victoria. - No; because these are exceptional phenomena. In the late Spring and during early summer the climate may be said to be occasionally subject to sharp and sudden changes which give it the character of variability. But the deviations from mean temperature except for short periods are not remarkable.   South Australia. - Yes in summer; but not in winter.   Queensland. - Certainly not; with the exception of the wide diurnal range of temperature in winter in the southern "continental" districts as at Cambooya and Thargomindah. The changes are according to my knowledge far more sudden and marked in the southern colonies (as during a "shift" from N.E. by W. to S.W. for instance at Melbourne and especially at Adelaide) than in Queensland and its coastal districts.   With regard to sustained prolonged or continued high temperatures during the summer months for how many days have you known the temperature remain continuously at a high level? This is a very important question as it concerns infantile mortality in no small degree; I shall be grateful for your experience?   New South Wales. - Much depends upon what temperature is deemed a "high level." If we assume that 90° and upwards is a high level then such periods are very rare in Sydney; in fact during the past 24 years there have only been three. In 1868 there were three consecutive hot days of which the mean temperature was 91.8°; in 1870 a period of four days with a mean temperature of 91.3°; and in 1874 a period of four days with a mean temperature of 90.2°. Since then although sometimes near it the temperature has never been for three days over 90 °. Taking a lower level we have one period of nine days in 1870 the longest on record during which the mean temperature was 82.6°. It must however be distinctly understood that what is here taken is not the mean temperature of each 24 hours but the highest temperature reached during the day and which would not as a rule last more than three or four hours if so much. If the mean temperature of the day were taken these temperatures as given would have to be reduced at least 10 per cent. [15]  Victoria. - It is very unusual to have a hot period lasting more than three days; when it does happen it is generally in February or March. In the majority of cases high temperatures (over 90°) do not last more than one or two days. The exceptions generally occur in February or March and have sometimes extended to four or five days hot weather with a temperature of over 80° with a maximum of about 90° has on a few occasions during the last 30 years extended from five to ten days; and in 1890 a memorable instance to 12 days (the only case for 37 years).   South Australia. - The longest stretch of continuous heat noted was in January and February 1857. On January 28th 29th and 30th the temperature exceeded 100° and during the whole of February it was over 90° on 25 days and above 100° on 12 days the mean being 107°. In January 1858 there were 10 consecutive days over 90° of which eight consecutive days were over 100°. In January 1860 there were in the beginning of the month seven consecutive days above 100° (maximum 107.5°). In the middle of the same month seven days were over 90° of which five exceeded 100° two days reaching 113.7°. These are however exceptions to our usual experience. Although there are several other instances of great heat yet the foregoing will suffice to show what we occasionally suffer without much harm being done. [16]  Queensland. - During the period February 17th to February 23rd 1891 the shade temperature at Townsville ranged between 81° and 62° but at Cairns a range between 82 ° and 70° is of frequent occurrence within at least fortnightly periods.   Any information with regard to humidity of the atmosphere also will be of great value. All physicians are of opinion that a high temperature combined with moisture is very irritating to the lungs of those affected with pulmonary disease.   Before setting forth the different answers in response to this it will be desirable to refer briefly to the term "humidity." The humidity of the atmosphere is defined as the degree of its approach to saturation. Air completely saturated is represented by 100 and that absolutely free of vapour by 0. As a matter of fact however the latter never occurs; even in the driest regions of Arabia a humidity of 10 per cent. is almost unknown. For its estimation the Wet and Dry Bulb thermometers are employed. These consist of two ordinary thermometers. One has its bulb exposed so as to register the temperature of the air. The bulb of the other is covered with muslin; this latter material being kept wet through its connection with a cotton wick dipping into a vessel of water. The water ascends from this vessel by capillary attraction spreads over the muslin and evaporates quickly or slowly according to the dryness or moistness of the atmosphere. Thus when the air is driest the difference between the two thermometers will be greatest and on the contrary when it is completely saturated with moisture the two readings will be almost identical. [17]  New South Wales. - A considerable part of the colony forming the western plains is subject to great heat caused no doubt by the sun's great power on treeless plains and the almost total absence of cooling winds; yet although in summer the temperature here frequently rises over 100° and sometimes up to 120° owing to the cold at night and in winter the mean temperatures are not greater than those of corresponding latitudes in the northern hemisphere. This region of the colony is remarkably dry and stock of all kinds thrive well and are very free from disease. At Bourke the driest place in the colony the humidity for a long series of years is - in the spring 51° in the summer 49° in the autumn 61° and in the winter 74°. At Sydney the humidity in the Spring is 69° in the summer 70° in the autumn 79° and in the winter 79°.   Victoria. - The humidity of the air of Melbourne is low the average being 71 per cent. In the summer it falls to 65 and on hot days is generally very low. The characteristic of our hot weather is that it is usually extremely dry; the exceptions are very few and occur in the late Spring and early autumn during thundery muggy weather. On the hottest days with north winds the dryness makes the heat much more endurable and the humidity frequently falls to between 30 and 40 per cent.   South Australia. - Attention has already been drawn to the fact that the hot dry air met with on the Adelaide plains is far more endurable than a lower temperature in which the atmosphere is surcharged with aqueous vapour. [18] A damp atmosphere is a rare thing in South Australia during the summer though in March there are at times some warm and humid days. In the winter the air for the most part is dry although the nights are often damp. The Mount Lofty Ranges close to Adelaide afford a cool retreat; they have a very large rainfall in some years over 50 inches. The climate at Mount Gambier in the south-eastern part of the colony is cooler and damper; it has also a much heavier rainfall than the Adelaide plains.   Of what duration are the different seasons and to what months would you apportion each season?   New South Wales and Victoria. - Spring - September October November; Summer - December January February; Autumn - March April May; Winter - June July August.   South Australia. - Spring - September October; Summer comprises the five months from November to March inclusive; Autumn - April May; Winter - June July August. Practically in South Australia the year may be divided into two seasons namely Spring the seven months from April to October inclusive; and Summer the five months from November to March inclusive.   Queensland. - With regard to Southern Queensland the seasons may be provisionally apportioned as follows: Spring - August September October; Summer - November December January February Autumn - March April May; Winter - June July.   What are the prevailing winds and what particular role do the hot winds play?   New South Wales. - A general statement is not sufficient for the winds vary much at different places; but taking the colony as a whole its prevailing winds come from some point between north-west and south-west and hence the dry climate. In Sydney no less than 39.6 per cent. of the wind comes from this quarter. The winds known as southerly bursters are generally to be expected from November to the end of February; they are always attended with strong electrical excitement a stream of sparks being sometimes produced for an hour at the electrometer. The approach of the true burster is indicated by a peculiar roll of clouds which when once seen cannot be mistaken. It is just above the South horizon and extends on either side of it 15° or 20 ° and looks as if a thin sheet of cloud were being rolled up like a scroll by the advancing wind. The change of wind is sometimes very sudden; it may be fresh N.E. and in ten minutes a gale from S. Hence vessels not on the look-out are sometimes caught unprepared and suffer accordingly. When a southerly wind commences anywhere south of Sydney it is at once telegraphed to its principal coast towns and a signal put up indicating its approach. As to the hot winds they are so insignificant in number that it cannot be said they play any particular rôle. Their effect is to raise the temperature because they flow from the heated interior of Australia; but they do not last long. and for the majority of people are dry healthy winds. Indeed they are by no means so oppressive as the warm north-east wind so charged with moisture which comes in the summer. [19]  Victoria. - In summer the N. winds blow to the extent of 8 per cent. the S.W. winds 24.1 per cent. and the S. winds 201 per cent. Northerly or warm-quarter winds in summer are 20 per cent. and southerly or cool-quarter winds 64 per cent. The northerly winds in winter however are bleak and cold like easterly winds in England.   Continuing our journey on the borders of these flats four or five miles we came in sight of the river now a fine broad and rapid stream with a gravelly bottom when we encamped for the night close to what was the township of Gundagai. On the banks of the river on the roadside was a public-house such an one as is usually seen in the interior built of split timber and roofed with bark. And this was the only house to be seen in Gundagai. It was one amongst the very few stationed on the line of route to Port Phillip and no situation could be better for the sale of 'drink' as parties were often detained here with stock on account of a sudden rise in the river so the men had little else to do but spend their time and money in 'drink'.  All was life and bustle on the river banks there being four more parties with stock besides ourselves and all bound for Port Phillip. The days when practicable would be spent in swimming the stock over and the nights with most of them carousing at the public-house. Of course there was no bridge nor boat of any kind. The following day we tried to force the sheep to swim over but found that to be impossible so we moved about two miles down the river to where it spreads out into a broad gravelly bed with two or three small islands on which grew the graceful swamp oak. One of these islands was a larger one and nothing but a bed of gravel and boulder stones. To this island we decided to make a bridge; cross the sheep over to it then break down the bridge and force them to cross the stream between it and the opposite bank.  The river in its windings had approached close to a point of the range of hills which border it. At the foot of this range we encamped until we had completed our task and a very picturesque place it was. We soon had a number of the natives (blacks) join us and we persuaded them to help us to cut logs and strip bark for the making of our bridge. I had hitherto seen but few of the blacks until I saw these which were of a far superior class to those I had previously seen. They were strong active and well-made and degeneration from contact with the white man was scarcely perceptible; but I have no doubt that long long ago their degeneration is as complete as it is in other parts of the colony if they are not as a race totally extinct. [65] What we call civilization has been no boon to the black natives of Australia and to their mind must be associated with gunpowder poison hunger disease and extermination.  Numerous fires were to be seen scattered over the rich flats of the river the watch fires of the men encamped with stock or the fires of the many natives making this their temporary abode. Sometimes some of our men would take a stroll to these different parties to hear what news they had to tell etc. But my chief pleasure consisted in visiting the native encampments. I had seen so little of them previously to this that everything respecting them amused and interested me.  One night in particular I had the opportunity of seeing that which I much wished to see - a grand corroboree or native dance. This word corroboree is pronounced like the English word 'corroborate'. It took place at night about two miles from our camp; all the white fellows in the neighbourhood were there to witness it and a very novel and extraordinary sight it was. Taking place as these corroborees always do in the night-time when all nature it still for even if the days have been stormy the nights are almost always calm makes the performances more interesting.  The moon shone brightly and numerous fires (small in size) formed a line in front of the performers across which line the white spectators never intruded. The singing of the women (who are out of sight) formed the orchestra of this primitive theatre; who also beat time with sticks on out-stretched skins. All this combined with the wonderful precision and regularity of movement in the various figures of the dance seldom fails to interest all lookers-on.  I had seen one corroboree before and have seen several since but none ever pleased me so much as this one owing chiefly to the great number of those taking part in it for I should estimate there would be near three hundred of them.   After some delay and the loss of a few sheep carried away by the stream and drowned which was a great boon to the black fellows for they made use of them for food we crossed the river and encamped on the opposite side. We were not sorry to get that troublesome business over. Next day we moved on in the usual quiet way for the space of two days near the bank of the river the road then diverged to the left bringing us into an extent of flat country which preserves that character nearly all the way to the Murray river a distance said to be 140 miles from the Murrumbidgee.  I may as well state here how we conducted our camping operations. As near as I can remember it was the early spring of 1840 (for my journal of 1845 has unfortunately very few dates) when we commenced our journey. Grass was abundant the natural grasses of the country everywhere green and beautiful so we had no difficulty as regards food for the stock. The road all the way to Port Phillip was a wide and well-beaten track but a bush-road only. Rivers and gullies and deep beds of creeks had to be crossed in whatever way we found practicable. We always encamped for the night where there was food and water making easy stages about twelve or fourteen miles a day sometimes more sometimes less. On arriving at our camping ground the sheep would be allowed to spread out and feed. The bullocks would be unyoked some of them hobbled in the fore feet one or two having a bell round their necks and allowed to feed also. Our cook would make a fire of the dead wood lying about of which there was always plenty. One man would take charge of the sheep whilst the rent of us would cut down sapling gum trees and with them make a temporary bough yard. Into this yard the sheep were driven at night and although it was but a slight fence they seldom left it particularly after we had been some time on the road.  After all this work was completed our supper was made ready and eaten and after the usual yarns and smoking we would lay down our beds in different places some outside the bough yard and others near the drays the dogs as a matter of course lying anywhere and so we passed the night. All these arrangements had to be carried out mainly on account of the dingoes or native dogs which if allowed to rush into the sheep-fold would have scattered the sheep for miles and in other ways committed terrible havoc among them. When it rained which it seldom did we had to make temporary shelters of sheets of bark lay our mattresses on the top of broken boughs or on sheets of bark and generally we remained at that station two three or more days until the rain had passed over. [208] Old bushmen know well how to meet these contingencies. Sometimes we would have white frosts in the night and on the following morning our blankets would be covered with frost. Yet the days following these frosts were sure to be bright sunny and cloudless and an hour after sunrise it would be a pleasant summer's morning. Breakfast would be got ready and dispatched after which the sheep with two men would travel on whilst we who were left behind would dry or partially dry the bedding in the sunshine pack them on the drays and follow the sheep.  We often hear in England of the disastrous consequences resulting from sleeping in damp beds. I have known when we have had a continuance of rainy weather our bedding would never be dry. That was an uncomfortable time but never so far as I know left behind any bad effects.  We had plenty to eat plenty of salt beef and often fresh mutton bought at the stations we passed. Plenty of tea which we used lavishly whenever we had the opportunity to make it. Our bread was 'damper' the name given to the bread used by travellers when made in the bush. [209] Thin cakes baked on the top of the hot charcoal beaten down flat for the purpose. No yeast or barm was wanted only a little salt. And 'damper' when made from colonial wheat was the Sweetest bread I ever ate unless it was Spanish bread which many years after this time I have eaten in Southern Spain. And it is made from similar wheat and made in much the same way.  Our drays were travelling stores and contained except fresh meat everything that we wanted. Bushmen are great tea-drinkers and no old bushman will dispense with his tea if possible to obtain it and we were when encamped always making and drinking tea. [210]  I enjoyed the life we led uncommonly and all the journey was in excellent health and spirits. Nearly every day would bring us to a fresh scene. And the freedom and independence of such a life the total absence of carking care and the almost daily succession of bright skies and cheering sunshine made the journey thoroughly enjoyable by all of us.  Seeing a log fire by the roadside where someone had encamped the night previous I thought I would take up my quarters there for the night and after making a shelter of boughs on the windward side to ward off the frosty night air I sat down to my customary pot of tea and supper. Whilst thus engaged a fellow-traveller walked up and came and stood by the fire and after chatting some time with me I asked him to have some refreshment of bread and cheese and tea. This he agreed to and also proposed stopping the night with me. I was glad of that as I wanted company and I also thought he would be able to give me some information about Use part of the country through which t was about to travel.  But in the course of our conversation I asked him some questions respecting the police located in the township which lay on my route and his answers convinced me that I should very probably meet with an overhauling there. But he proposed that we should start next morning to the hut where he lived which was within half-a-mile of the township where I might remain the night free from all annoyance from the police and proceed on my journey the following day by way of Liverpool Plains which route he recommended as being a place where I was least likely to be troubled by them.  Being guided by his counsel we arrived at his hut before the middle of the day where I intended staying the night. [249]  There were three of us altogether the old man my companion and another an immigrant a very agreeable fellow and he and I sat up a considerable time chatting on various subjects until we both went to bed. I had been but a very short time there when there was a rap at the door and the old man getting up to see who it was ushered in the chief constable who asked; in a solemn pompous manner: If any strangers were there? And on my telling him that I was one he put the usual question to me. If I was a free man? But not having any document to show that I was free the thing was settled at once and after being ordered to dress I had a pair of handcuffs put on me and was told that I must go along with him.  Previous to my leaving for the lock-up a strict search was made for firearms supposed to belong to me; my carbine I had with me which I shewed to him but he pretended to think there were more and even the roof of the hut did not escape his scrutiny. Whilst this was taking place the owner of the establishment came in. There were now five of us He and the chief constable seemed particularly gracious to each other. The one congratulating the other on his good fortune in capturing me. Then the chief constable edified the company by telling them I was the very man he wanted he having my description to a hair in the Government Gazette. Then it was the turn of the owner of the place to speechify. Addressing the old man who brought me there he asked him what he could be thinking of to pick up with such an acquaintance because said he you might have known by his looks what he was I should have liked to give him a dig in the eye for this speech for his own looks would generate suspicion were he amongst strangers for he was no beauty. The whole affair was rather a subject for merriment to me than anything else.  I knew I had nothing to fear yet I could not imagine what there was so very auspicious in my looks. My appearance was certainly very different in dress and everything to what it is now. I was very much bronzed by the sun and exposure and my beard and moustache had grown but nothing extraordinary; I was too young for that. Bearded faces were not customary in those days except with bushmen. But after all my appearance was only like that of hundreds of others in the interior.  The fussy officiousness of the chief constable disgusted me and in answer to the questions he continually put to me evidently for nothing else but to shew his authority I told him I would answer no more. I would answer to the magistrate not to him and that a night in the lock-up was what I cared not a straw about His opinion was that I might have a good many nights there and with that we walked on together to the station house.  I had several interviews with this chief constable before I got my discharge. He was evidently puzzled to know what to make of me. I could tell by his manner that he was coming to the conclusion that he had made a mistake.  On arriving at the lock-up I was searched and everything I had taken from me with the exception of my pair of blankets after which I was shewn into a room strongly secured with bolts and bars where I was to pass the night. [250] This was the place appropriated to prisoners and was built very strongly of wood with one grated window. In the nest room between which and ours was a narrow passage was the lock-up keeper's apartments. The door of the prison part only opening half way owing to a chain which was fastened to it and the door jamb. As there was no light I could not see how many were inside beside myself; but on groping about I found the whole of one end occupied by the usual plank-bed and two men occupying part of it having leg-irons on them and chained to a large iron ring at the foot of the bed. One of them had an old coat which he laid down beside him telling me I might make use of it for the night which I was very glad to do as there was nothing but the bare boards to lie on.  There was no smoking allowed in these places but 'old hands' like these generally contrive to get both tobacco and a light and I soon discovered that they had both as one of them held up to my face a long coil of rag lighted at one end which he blew into a brighter heat to give light sufficient to enable him to make out who I was. (Let it be remembered there were no lucifer matches in those days.) This he was not able to do but after filling a pipe with tobacco he gave it to me to smoke but I did not want it I had had my usual allowance of smoking before coming there and I had my own pipe with me. Then he asked:  'What the devil had brought me there?' After telling him the whole story he replied that some one had been 'coming it on me' (informing on me). This I doubted but he was positive and that I should find what he said to be correct when before the magistrate. I then thought it was my turn to question him and began by asking what brought him there.  'Why you must know' said he 'I and my mate are in for murder.' This somewhat startled me and I began to wonder what would happen to me next. I had had to associate with very strange characters but this was the climax of all.  After a little more conversation we both fell asleep which on my part was sound enough until about two hours before daylight when I was awakened by the cold it being the month of April corresponding as it does with our October the air was in the early morning clear and frosty and our grated window allowed free access to it. Frosts at this time of the year were unknown on the low lands near the coast but I was now near the Table Lands where the winters are much more severe not during the days for those were bright and warm like an English summer but the nights were frosty.  About eight o'clock the lock-up keeper put into our cell part of a damper (bushman's bread) and a bucket of water our allowance for the day being one pound of bread and water of course as much as we wanted.  On this I was going to make my breakfast when my two companions told me not to eat that stuff as I should have a better breakfast if I would only wait This I found to be correct as shortly after their friends outside sent them in a large supply of beef-steaks and tea and I was invited to go shares with them. [251] This I did not only then but three times every day whilst I stayed there. My being a 'jimmigrant' one would have thought would have prevented them from being so hospitably inclined towards me ('old hands' as a rule are not favourably inclined to 'jimmigrants'). But I was now one of themselves the victim as they considered of the police and owing to that had entitled myself to their sympathy.  The early morning being so cold it was not until the sun had been risen two or three hours and by continually walking up and down the room that I got sufficiently warm. Our time was chiefly spent in smoking; occasionally amusing ourselves feeding some fowls with the ration bread out of the grated window.  The next day my companions were unchained and taken before the magistrates to undergo an examination after which they were again returned to their confinement but ordered to be at liberty whilst there that is without the leg-irons.  In the meantime there were two others sent in to join us. One man could scarcely talk only sufficiently to be understood. The account he had to give of himself was that he had had his tongue bitten off and done by a woman. How any woman had managed to do that was a puzzle to all of us and caused some merriment. He certainly had lost his tongue by some means for he shewed it to us apparently about half of it gone.  On the third day I was taken out and after being securely handcuffed was marched off under a guard of two policemen to the magistrate's office and placed at the bar. The chief constable being my accuser stood up and stated that owing to information he had received he had arrested me suspecting me to be a bushranger. That I had a carbine with me but no ammunition and that he had been informed that I intended travelling through Liverpool Plains in order to avoid the police. I was then asked what I had to say in my defence. To which I replied that it was perfectly true what the chief constable had said respecting my wish to avoid the police at the same time I wished to know why that should cause me to be suspected. Would not anyone be justified in doing the same thing to prevent being sent down to Sydney handcuffed in order to be identified merely because he had not an authorized certificate of freedom which the Government refuse to give to any immigrant. The answer of the magistrate was that what I had said might be all very true but they had only my bare word for it; that the case did look suspicious and under these circumstances they had no other alternative than to send me down to Sydney. And with that I was marched hack to the lock-up.  This was really to me a disagreeable business. To be marched down to Sydney instead of progressing in my journey. And the manner in which suspected persons were forwarded down being the most humiliating to anyone who had any self-respect left in him. Each person being handcuffed to a chain and then forwarded from one lock-up to another till arrived in Sydney. And then should the authorities not be able to identify them with any run-away convict or other person illegally at large they were set at liberty without any recompense or compensation whatever Such was the law in those days. [252]  The prospect of my journey to Sydney the inconvenience and loss of time it would put me to were occupying my whole thoughts when I was interrupted by one of my old beef-steak-and-tea companions who said on hearing the result of my trial: 'I told you I told you some fellow had been "coming it" on you and that old fellow who took you to his hut was the one who did it!' And I believe he was right. According to the evidence it could be no other. And that man was a Scotsman: the only one of his nation in the colony who served me a treacherous trick and I met with hundreds. There is that much to the credit of the nationality.  As our conversation was going on the lock-up keeper put in his head through the doorway and told me that the magistrates wanted to speak to me; the purport of their visit being: that they had reconsidered their verdict passed upon me and had decided to set me at liberty  This imprisonment had taught me a lesson which I did not fail to profit by. On thinking the matter over and also from what one of the magistrates told me I came to the conclusion that I had myself to blame for being imprisoned at all. Had I gone straight on my travels without asking so many cautious questions about the police a hundred to one if I should have been interfered with.  This advice I saw the wisdom of following and in consequence this was my first imprisonment and the last. I was never troubled by the police again to cause me annoyance.  My greatest want was something to read in the matter of books or newspapers. To a person fond of reading it is no small deprivation to be two or three months or more and never see a book or newspaper. Sometimes but rarely we got a newspaper perhaps months old but no matter how old it was always welcome. Going one day to the sheep station opposite I found they had by some means got possession of a book. And what sort of book does the reader think? Not a pleasant novel but 'Watt's logic or the right use of reason'. This I borrowed thinking it better than none; but fond as I was of reading and although I had so much leisure time so little did it suit my taste that I have taken it in hand I may say scores of times and I do not think I ever had the patience to read it for half an hour before laying it down again. It was the driest book without exception I ever read in my life. Its tendency seemed to me to so bemuddle the intellect that it could not reason at all.  Curious to see how my companions would like the book I spent about half-an-hour or more one night and for the fun of the thing in reading portions of it to them. They had quite enough of it and never wanted to hear it read a second time.  This was the only book I could get for about three or four months. I tried the head station but Mr B. our employer never seemed to have a book. What books he had were generally borrowed from some distant station. But at last one of the men rode in from the head station and with a joyful countenance handed to me Charles Dickens's 'Nicholas Nickleby' all the more welcome because I had never read it.  Now we were happy; and that night I commenced reading it to my companions who were delighted; but to shew that there was an innate good nature in these fellows they advised that the reading should be stopped until the men of two or three stations near us had been invited to come and hear it read. [327] So the next day the news of our good fortune was passed round to the stations and the men invited to come and readily did they respond to the invitation.  The book as a matter of course was always read at night and the hut was full of attentive listeners. The nights were cold and frosty but we always had a glorious log fire and our only light to read by was the usual one a piece of twisted rag stuck into a pint tin full of melted fat. It would have delighted the heart of a philanthropist to have seen how these fellows enjoyed the reading of this book. If I could have read till daylight they would not tire. To see the close attention they gave to the reading and to hear their remarks at the finish was interesting and amusing also. To them it was a real life history and their sympathies were all with the honest and good characters in the story. Two of the listeners came from a station seven miles distant but as all could not leave their stations I agreed to read it a second time in order that those who were by necessity prevented from hearing it the first time might experience the same enjoyment.  After the reading there was always an animated conversation on the incidents and characters before the men would disperse to their several homes.  I began my return journey to Molonglo staying the night at an inn. The next day I made a long journey but camped out this time in company with four men attached to three or four bullock drays going to Sydney. That was a mistake on my part for here I was robbed of all my money. The men and I got on very amicably together; but as I lay sleeping in my blankets one of them coolly took my trousers from under my head emptied the pockets and then returned the trousers to where he found them which last act I saw him do. On pondering over the affair and seeing that for once I had got into a den of thieves and seeing the sort of men I had for companions I came to the conclusion to put up with the loss; I knew I should never see my money again. At breakfast I told the man that he had robbed me and that I saw him do it. He answered as I expected he would; he denied point blank that he had ever been near me much more stolen anything from me.  I found my horse which had been tethered out where food was plentiful saddled him and started on my journey but penniless and reached Berrima towards evening. [328]  Berrima had then a few houses and a new Court House and jail and a very good inn for Berrima was the centre of an important Police District and at this inn I purposed staying the night. I intended to tell the innkeeper the fix I was in and did not doubt on promising to remit the cost of my providing as soon an I reached Molonglo that I should get all my wants supplied. For strange as it may seem to English readers and even colonial ones of today an innkeeper in those days seldom or never refused food and shelter to a belated traveller even if no payment was promised. They knew well the risks that attended travelling in the interior and never knew how soon they themselves might be in the same predicament. Let a man give his name and the name of his employer and that was enough. Every settler was well-known to the innkeepers for hundreds of miles. Arriving at the inn who should I see standing at the door but a man I had known in Queanbeyan Cooper by name his real name. We recognised each other at once I telling him the fix I was in. 'Never mind' said Cooper 'I will find you all that you require both for yourself and horse and money to go away with in the morning.' And Cooper did so. I had the best the inn could supply and money to carry me on my journey. Before we parted in the morning I said to Cooper: 'How am I to repay you what you have so freely lent to me? I am going to Port Phillip and in all probability we shall never see each other again.' 'Don't talk' said Cooper 'about paying what I have given not lent to you you are an old friend of mine and I like you and am pleased to have the chance of helping you; I wish you well and a pleasant journey'; and so we parted.  And yet Cooper although still young was transported for seven years to Botany Bay for night poaching but was at this time free. When I knew him in Queanbeyan I once said to him: 'Cooper I wonder a man like you fond as you were of poaching in the old country do not take your gun and range about the forest here where game is plentiful and there are no game laws to trouble you.' His answer was characteristic of a poacher. 'Oh no! I care nothing about following game here. There are here no game laws I know nor mantraps and spring guns which I was well acquainted with in the old country and what is more no gamekeepers. No! There is no devilment in it now.'  By Reef And Palm  Challis The Doubter The White Lady And The Brown Woman  FOUR years had come and gone since the day that Challis with a dull and savage misery in his heart had cursing the love-madness which once possessed him walked out from his house in an Australian city with an undefined and vague purpose of going "somewhere" to drown his sense of wrong and erase from his memory the face of the woman who his wife of not yet a year had played with her honour and his. So he thought anyhow.   You see Challis was "a fool" - at least so his pretty violet-eyed wife had told him that afternoon with a bitter and contemptuous ring in her voice when he had brought another man's letter - written to her - and with impulsive and jealous haste had asked her to explain. He was a fool she had said with an angry gleam in the violet eyes to think she could not "take care" of herself. Admit receiving that letter? Of course! Did he think she could help other men writing silly letters to her? Did he not think she could keep out of a mess? And she smiled the self-satisfied smile of a woman conscious of many admirers and of her own powers of intrigue. [13]  Then Challis with a big effort gulping down the rage that stirred him made his great mistake. He spoke of his love for her. Fatuity! She laughed at him said that as she detested women his love was too exacting for her if it meant that she should never be commonly friendly with any other man.   Challis looked at her steadily for a few moments trying to smother the wild flood of black suspicion aroused in him by the discovery of the letter and confirmed by her sneering words and then said quietly but with a dangerous inflection in his voice -   "Remember - you are my wife. If you have no regard for your own reputation you shall have some for mine. I don't want to entertain my friends by thrashing R---- but I'm not such a fool as you think. And if you go further in this direction you'll find me a bit of a brute."   Again the sneering laugh - "Indeed! Something very tragic will occur I suppose?"   "No" said Challis grimly "something damned prosaic - common enough among men with pretty wives - I'll clear out."   [14] "I wish you would do that now" said his wife "I hate you quite enough."   Of course she didn't quite mean it. She really liked Challis in her own small-souled way - principally because his money had given her the social pleasures denied her during her girlhood. With an unmoved face and without farewell he left her and went to his lawyer's.   A quarter of an hour later he arose to go and the lawyer asked him when he intended returning.   "That all depends upon her. If she wants me back again she can write through you and I'll come - if she has conducted herself with a reasonable amount of propriety for such a pretty woman."   Then with an ugly look on his face Challis went out; next day he embarked in the Lady Alicia for a six months' cruise among the islands of the North-west Pacific.   That was four years ago and to-day Challis who stands working at a little table set in against an open window hammering out a ring from a silver coin on a marline-spike and vyce whistles softly and contentedly to himself as he raises his head and glances through the vista of coconuts that surround his dwelling on this lonely and almost forgotten island.   "The devil!" he thinks to himself "I must be turning into a native. Four years! What an ass I was! And I've never written yet - that is never sent a letter away. Well neither has she. Perhaps after all there was little in that affair of R----'s. . . . By God! though if there was I've been very good to them in leaving them a clear field. Anyhow she's all right as regards money. I'm glad I've done that. It's a big prop to a man's conscience to feel he hasn't done anything mean; and she likes money - most women do. Of course I'll go back - if she writes. If not - well then these sinful islands can claim me for their own; that is Nalia can." [15]  A native boy with shaven head save for a long tuft on the left side came down from the village and seating himself on the gravelled space inside the fence gazed at the white man with full lustrous eyes.   "Hallo tama!" said Challis "whither goest now?"   "Pardon Tialli. I came to look at thee making the ring. Is it of soft silver - and for Nalia thy wife?"   "Ay O shaven-head it is. Here take this masi and go pluck me a young nut to drink" and Challis threw him a ship-biscuit. Then he went on tapping the little band of silver. He had already forgotten the violet eyes and was thinking with almost childish eagerness of the soft glow in the black orbs of Nalia when she should see his finished handiwork.   [16] The boy returned with a young coconut unhusked. "Behold Tialli. This nut is a uto ga'au (sweet husk). When thou hast drunk the juice give it me back that I may chew the husk which is sweet as the sugar-cane of Samoa" and he squatted down again on the gravel.   Challis drank then threw him the husk and resumed his work. Presently the boy tearing off a strip of the husk with his white teeth said "Tialli how is it that there be no drinking-nuts in thy house?"   "Because O turtle-head my wife is away; and there are no men in the village to-day; and because the women of this motu I have no thought that the papalagi may be parched with thirst and so come not near me with a coconut." This latter in jest.   "NayTialli. Not so. True it is that to-day all the men are in the bush binding fala leaves around the coconut trees else do the rats steal up and eat the buds and clusters of little nuts. And because Nalia thy wife is away at the other White Man's house no woman cometh inside the door."   Challis laughed. "O evil-minded people of Nukunono! And must I thy papalagi be parched with thirst because of this?"   "Faiaga oe Tialli thou but playest with me. Raise thy hand and call out 'I thirst!' and every woman in the village will run to thee each with a drinking-nut and those that desire thee but are afraid will give two. But to come inside when Nalia is away would be to put shame on her." [17]  The white man mused. The boy's solemn chatter entertained him. He knew well the native customs; but to torment the boy he commenced again.   "O foolish custom! See how I trust my wife Nalia. Is she not even now in the house of another white man?"   "True. But then he is old and feeble and thou young and strong. None but a fool desires to eat a dried flying-fish when a fresh one may be had."   "O wise man with the shaven crown" said Challis with mocking good nature "thou art full of wisdom of the ways of women. And if I were old and withered would Nalia then be false to me in a house of another and younger white man?"   "How could she? Would not he too have a wife who would watch her? And if he had not and were nofo noa (single) would he be such a fool to steal that the like of which he can buy - for there are many girls without husbands as good to look on as that Nalia of thine. And all women are alike" and then hearing a woman's voice calling his name he stood up.   "Farewell O ulu tula poto (Wise Baldhead)" [18] said Challis as the boy still chewing his sweet huskwalked back to the native houses clustered under the grove of pua trees.   Ere dusk Nalia came home a slenderly-built girl with big dreamy eyes and a heavy mantle of wavy hair. A white muslin gown fastened at the throat with a small silver brooch was her only garment save the folds of the navy-blue-and-white lava lava round her waist which the European-fashioned garment covered.   Challis was lying down when she came in. Two girls who came with her carried baskets of cooked food presents from old Jack Kelly Challis's fellow-trader. At a sign from Nalia the girls took one of the baskets of food and went away. Then taking off her wide-brimmed hat of fala leaf she sat down beside Challis and pinched his cheek.   "O lazy one! To let me walk from the house of Tiaki all alone!"   "Alone! There were two others with thee."   "Tapa Could I talk to them! I a white man's wife must not be too familiar with every girl else they would seek to get presents from me with sweet words. Besides could I carry home the fish and cooked fowl sent thee by old Tiaki? That would be unbecoming to me even as it would be if thou climbed a tree for a coconut" - and the daughter of the Tropics laughed merrily as she patted Challis on his sunburnt cheek. [19]  Challis rose and going to a little table took from it the ring.   "See Nalia I am not lazy as thou sayest. This is thine."   The girl with an eager "Aue!" took the bauble and placed it on her finger. She made a pretty picture standing there in the last glow of the sun as it sank into the ocean her languorous eyes filled with a tender light.   Challis sitting on the end of the table regarding her with half-amused interest as does a man watching a child with a toy suddenly flushed hotly. "By God! I can't be such a fool as to begin to love her in reality but yet . . . Come here Nalia" and he drew her to him and turning her face up so that he might look into her eyes he asked:   "Nalia hast thou ever told me any lies?"   The steady depths of those dark eyes looked back into his and she answered:   "Nay I fear thee too much to lie. Thou mightst kill me."   "I do but ask thee some little things. It matters not to me what the answer is. Yet see that thou keepest nothing hidden from me."   The girl with parted lips and one hand on his waited.   "Before thou became my wife Nalia hadst thou any lovers?"   [20] "Yes two - Kapua and Tafu-le-Afi."   "And since?"   "May I choke and perish here before thee if I lie! None."   Challis still holding her soft brown chin in his hand asked her one more question - a question that only one of his temperament would have dared to ask a girl of the Tokelaus.   "Nalia dost thou love me?"   "Aye alofa tumau (everlasting love). Am I a fool? Are there not Letia and Miriami and Eline the daughter of old Tiaki ready to come to this house if I love any but thee? Therefore my love is like the suckers of the fa'e (octopus) in its strength. My mother has taught me much wisdom."   A curious feeling of satisfaction possessed the man and next day Letia the "show" girl of the village visiting Challis's store to buy a tin of salmon saw Nalia the Lucky One seated on a mat beneath the seaward side of the trader's house surrounded by a billowy pile of yellow silk diligently sewing.   "Ho dear friend of my heart! Is that silken dress for thee? For the love of God let me but touch it. Four dollars a fathom it be priced at. Thy husband is indeed the king of generosity. Art thou to become a mother?"   "Away silly fool and do thy buying and pester me not."    [21] Challis coming to the corner of the house leant against a post and something white showed in his hand. It was a letter. His letter to the woman of violet eyes written a week ago in the half-formed idea of sending it some day. He read it through and then paused and looked at Nalia. She raised her head and smiled. Slowly piece by piece he tore it into tiny little squares and with a dreamy hand-wave threw them away. The wind held them in mid-air for a moment and then carried the little white flecks to the beach.   "What is it?" said the bubbling voice of Letia the Disappointed.   "Only a piece of paper that weighed as a piece of iron on my bosom. But it is gone now."   "Even so" said Letia smelling the gaudy label on the tin of salmon in the anticipative ecstasy of a true Polynesian "pe se mea fa'agotoimoana (like a thing buried deep in ocean). May God send me a white man as generous as thee - a whole tin of samani for nothing! Now do I know that Nalia will bear thee a son."   And that is why Challis the Doubter has never turned up again.   [22] "'Tis In The Blood" We were in Manton's Hotel at Levuka-Levuka in her palmy days. There were Robertson of the barque Rolumah; a fat German planter from the Yasawa Group; Harry the Canadian a trader from the Tokelaus and myself.   Presently a knock came to the door and Allan the boatswain of our brig stood hat in hand before us. He was a stalwart half-caste of Manhiki and perhaps the greatest manaia (Lothario) from Ponape to Fiji.   "Captain say to come aboard please. He at the Consul's for papers - he meet you at boat" and Allan left.   "By shingo dot's a big fellow" said Planter Oppermann.   "Ay" said Robertson the trading skipper "and a good man with his mauleys too. He's the champion knocker-out in Samoa and is a match for any Englishman in Polynesia let alone foreigners" - with a sour glance at the German.   "Well good-bye all" I said. "I'm sorry Oppermann I can't stay for another day for your wedding but our skipper isn't to be got at anyhow."   The trading captain and Harry walked with me part of the way and then began the usual Fiji gup. [23]  "Just fancy that fat-headed Dutchman going all the way to Samoa and picking on a young girl and sending her to the Sisters to get educated properly! As if any old beach-girl isn't good enough for a blessed Dutchman. Have you seen her?"   "No" I said; "Oppermann showed me her photo. Pretty girl. Says she's been three years with the Sisters in Samoa and has got all the virtues of her white father and none of the vices of her Samoan mammy. Told me he's spent over two thousand dollars on her already."   Robertson smiled grimly. "Ay I don't doubt it. He's been all round Levuka cracking her up. I brought her here last week and the Dutchman's been in a chronic state of silly ever since. She's an almighty fine girl. She's staying with the Sisters here till the marriage. By the Lord here she is now coming along the street! Bet a dollar she's been round Vagadace way where there are some fast Samoan women living. 'Tis in the blood I tell you."   The future possessor of the Oppermann body and estate was a pretty girl. Only those who have seen fair young Polynesian half-castes - before they get married and grow coarse and drink beer and smoke like a factory chimney - know how pretty.   [24] Our boat was at the wharf and just as we stood talking Allan sauntered up and asked me for a dollar to get a bottle of gin. Just then the German's fiancée reached us. Robertson introduced Harry and myself to her and then said good-bye. She stood there in the broiling Fijian sun with a dainty sunshade over her face looking so lovely and cool in her spotless muslin dress and withal so innocent that I no longer wondered at the Dutchman's "chronic state of silly."   Allan the Stalwart stood by waiting for his dollar. The girl laughed joyously when Harry the Canadian said he would be at the wedding and have a high time and held out her soft little hand as he bade her adieu and strolled off for another drink.   The moment Harry had gone Allan was a new man. Pulling off his straw hat he saluted her in Samoan and then opened fire.   "There are many teine lalelei (beautiful girls) in the world but there is none so beautiful as thou. Only truth do I speak for I have been to all countries of the world. Ask him who is here - our supercargo - if I lie. O maid with the teeth of pearl and face like Fetuao (the morning star) my stomach is drying up with the fire of love."   The sunshade came a little lower and the fingers played nervously with the ivory handle. I leant against a coconut tree and listened.   "Thy name is Vaega. See that! How do I know? Aha how do I? Because for two years or more whenever I passed by the stone wall of the Sisters' dwelling in Matafele I climbed up and watched thee O Star of the Morning and I heard the other girls call thee Vaega. Oho! and some night I meant to steal thee away." [25]  (The rascal! He told me two days afterwards that the only time he ever climbed the Mission wall was to steal mangoes.)   The sunshade was tilted back and displayed two big black eyes luminous with admiring wonder.   "And so thou hast left Samoa to come here to be devoured by this fat hog of a Dutchman! Dost thou not know O foolish lovely one that she who mates with a Siamani (German) grows old in quite a little time and thy face which is now smooth and fair will be coarse as the rind of a half-ripe bread-fruit because of the foul food these swine of Germans eat?"   "Allan" I called "here's the captain!"   There was a quick clasp of hands as the Stalwart One and the Maid hurriedly spoke again this time in a whisper and then the white muslin floated away out of sight.   The captain was what he called "no' so dry" - viz. half-seas over and very jolly. He told Allan he could have an hour to himself to buy what he wanted and then told me that the captain of a steam collier had promised to give us a tug out at daylight. "I'm right for the wedding-feast after all" I thought. [26]  But the wedding never came off. That night Oppermann in a frantic state was tearing round Levuka hunting for his love who had disappeared. At daylight as the collier steamed ahead and tautened our tow-line we could see the parties of searchers with torches scouring the beach. Our native sailors said they had heard a scream about ten at night and seen the sharks splashing and the white liars of Levuka shook their heads and looked solemn as they told tales of monster sharks with eight-foot jaws always cruising close in to the shore at night.   Three days afterwards Allan came to me with stolid face and asked for a bottle of wine as Vaega was very sea-sick. I gave him the wine and threatened to tell the captain. He laughed and said he would fight any man captain or no captain who meddled with him. And as a matter of fact he felt safe - the skipper valued him too much to bully him over the mere stealing of a woman. So the limp and sea-sick Vaega was carried up out of the sweating foc'sle and given a cabin berth and Allan planked down two twenty-dollar pieces for her passage to the Union Group. When she got better she sang rowdy songs and laughed all day and made fun of the holy Sisters. And one day Allan beat her with a deal board because she sat down on a band-box in the trade-room and ruined a hat belonging to a swell official's wife in Apia. And she liked him all the better for it. [27]  The fair Vaega was Mrs Allan for just six months when his erratic fancy was captivated by the daughter of Mauga the chief of Tutuila and an elopement resulted to the mountains. The subsequent and inevitable parting made Samoa an undesirable place of residence for Allan who shipped as boatsteerer in the Niger of New Bedford. As for Vaega she drifted back to Apia and there right under the shadow of the Mission Church she flaunted her beauty. The last time I saw her was in Charley the Russian's saloon when she showed me a letter. It was from the bereaved Oppermann asking her to come back and marry him.   "Are you going?" I said.   "E pule le Atua (if God so wills) but he only sent me twenty dollars and that isn't half enough. However there's an American man-of-war coming next week and these other girls will see then. I'll make the papalagi officers shell out. To fa alii ."     [28] The Revenge Of Macy O'Shea A Story Of The Marquesas  TIKENA the Clubfooted guided me to an open spot in the jungle-growth and sitting down on the butt of a twisted toa indicated by a sweep of his tattooed arm the lower course of what had once been the White Man's dwelling.   "Like unto himself was this his house" he said puffing a dirty clay pipe "square-built and strong. And the walls were of great blocks made of panisina - of coral and lime and sand mixed together; and around each centre-post - posts that to lift one took the strength of fifty men - was wound two thousand fathoms of thin plaited cinnet stained red and black. Apa! he was a great man here in these motu (islands) although he fled from prison in your land; and when he stepped on the beach the marks of the iron bands that had once been round his ankles were yet red to the sight. There be none such as he in these days. But he is now in Hell."   This was the long-deferred funeral oration of Macy O'Shea sometime member of the chain-gang of Port Arthur in Van Dieman's Land and subsequently runaway convict beachcomber cutter-off of whaleships and Gentleman of Leisure in Eastern Polynesia. And of his many known crimes the deed done in this isolated spot was the darkest of all. Judge of it yourself. [29]  The arrowy shafts of sunrise had scarce pierced the deep gloom of the silent forest ere the village woke to life. Right beside the thatch-covered dwelling of Macy O'Shea now a man of might there towers a stately tamanu tree; and as the first faint murmur of women's voices arises from the native huts there is a responsive twittering and cooing in the thickly-leaved branches and further back in the forest the heavy booming note of the red-crested pigeon sounds forth like the beat of a muffled drum.   With slow languid step Sera the wife of Macy O'Shea comes to the open door and looks out upon the placid lagoon now just rippling beneath the first breath of the trade-wind and longs for courage to go out there - there to the point of the reef - and spring over among the sharks. The girl - she is hardly yet a woman - shudders a moment and passes her white hand before her eyes and then with a sudden gust of passion the hand clenches. "I would kill him - kill him if there was but a ship here in which I could get away! I would sell myself over and over again to the worst whaler's crew that ever sailed the Pacific if it would bring me freedom from this cruel cold-blooded devil!" [30]  A heavy tread on the matted floor of the inner room and her face pales to the hue of death. But Macy O'Shea is somewhat shy of his two years' wife this morning and she hears the heavy steps recede as he walks over to his oil-shed. A flock of gogo cast their shadow over the lagoon as they fly westward and the woman's eyes follow them - "Kill him yes. I am afraid to die but not to kill. And I am a stranger here and if I ran a knife into his fat throat these natives would make me work in the taro-fields unless one wanted me for himself." Then the heavy step returns and she slowly faces round to the blood-shot eyes and drink-distorted face of the man she hates and raises one hand to her lips to hide a blue and swollen bruise.   The man throws his short square-set figure on a rough native sofa and passing one brawny hand meditatively over his stubbly chin says in a voice like the snarl of a hungry wolf: "Here I say Sera slew round; I want to talk to you my beauty."   The pale set face flushed and paled again. "What is it Macy O'Shea?"   "Ho ho 'Macy O'Shea' is it? Well just this. Don't be a fool. I was a bit put about last night else I wouldn't have been so quick with my fist. Cut your lip I see. Well you must forget it; any way it's the first time I ever touched you. But you ought to know by now that I am not a man to be trifled with; no man let alone a woman is going to set a course for Macy O'Shea to steer by. And to come to the point at once I want you to understand that Carl Ristow's daughter is coming here. I want her and that's all about it." [31]  The woman laughed scornfully. "Yes I know. That was why" - she pointed to her lips. "Have you no shame? I know you have no pity. But listen. I swear to you by the Mother of Christ that I will kill her - kill you if you do this."   O'Shea's cruel mouth twitched and his jaws set then he uttered a hoarse laugh. "By God! Has it taken you two years to get jealous?"   A deadly hate gleamed in the dark passionate eyes. "Jealous Mother of God! jealous of a drunken licentious wretch such as you! I hate you - hate you! If I had courage enough I would poison myself to be free from you."   O'Shea's eyes emitted a dull sparkle. "I wish you would damn you! Yet you are game enough you say to kill me - and Malia?"   "Yes. But not for love of you but because of the white blood in me. I can't - I won't be degraded by you bringing another woman here."   "'Por Dios' as your dad used to say before the devil took his soul we'll see about that my beauty. I suppose because your father was a d----d garlic-eating ear-ringed Dago and your mother a come-by-chance Tahiti half-caste you think he was as good as me." [32]  "As good as you O bloody-handed dog of an English convict. He was a man and the only wrong he ever did was to let me become wife to a devil like you."   The cruel eyes were close to hers now and the rough brawny hands gripped her wrists. "You spiteful Portuguese quarter-bred ----! Call me a convict again and I'll twist your neck like a fowl's. You she-devil! I'd have made things easy for you - but I won't now. Do you hear?" and the grip tightened. "Ristow's girl will be here to-morrow and if you don't knuckle down to her it'll be a case of 'Vamos' for you - you can go and get a husband among the natives" and he flung her aside and went to the god that ran him closest for his soul next to women - his rum-bottle.   O'Shea kept his word for two days later Malia the half-caste daughter of Ristow the trader at Ahunui stepped from out her father's whaleboat in front of O'Shea's house. The transaction was a perfectly legitimate one and Malia did not allow any inconvenient feeling of modesty to interfere with such a lucrative arrangement as this whereby her father became possessed of a tun of oil and a bag of Chilian dollars and she of much finery. In those days missionaries had not made much head-way and gentlemen like Messrs Ristow and O'Shea took all the wind out of the Gospel drum. [33]  And so Malia dressed as a native girl with painted cheeks and bare bosom walked demurely up from the boat to the purchaser of her sixteen-years'-old beauty who with arms folded across his broad chest stood in the middle of the path that led from the beach to his door. And within with set teeth and a knife in the bosom of her blouse bodice Sera panted with the lust of Hate and Revenge.   The bulky form of O'Shea darkened the door-way. "Sera" he called in English with a mocking insulting inflection in his voice "come here and welcome my new wife!"   Sera came walking slowly with a smile on her lips and holding out her left hand to Malia said in the native language "Welcome!"   "Why" said O'Shea with mocking jocularity "that's a left-handed welcome Sera."   "Aye" said the girl with the White Man's blood "my right hand is for this" - and the knife sank home into Malia's yellow bosom. "A cold bosom for you to-night Macy O'Shea" she laughed as the value of a tun of oil and a bag of Chilian dollars gasped out its life upon the matted floor.     [34]   II  The native drum was beating. As the blood-quickening boom reverberated through the village the natives came out from their huts and gathered around the House of the Old Men where with bound hands and feet Sera the White Man's wife sat with her back to one of the centre-posts. And opposite her sitting like a native on a mat of kapau was the burly figure of O'Shea with the demon of disappointed passion eating away his reason and a mist of blood swimming before his eyes.   The people all detested her especially the soft-voiced slender-framed women. In that one thing savages resemble Christians - the deadly hatred with which some women hate those of their sex whom they know to be better and more pure than themselves. So the matter was decided quickly. Mési - so they called O'Shea - should have justice. If he thought death let it be death for this woman who had let out the blood of his new wife. Only one man Loloku the Boar Hunter raised his voice for her because Sera had cured him of a bad wound when his leg had been torn open by the tusk of a wild boar. But the dull glare from the eyes of O'Shea fell on him and he said no more. Then at a sign from the old men the people rose from the mats and two unbound the cords of afa from the girl and led her out into the square and looked at O'Shea. [35]  "Take her to the boat" he said.   Ristow's boat had been hauled up turned over and covered with the rough mats called kapau to keep off the heat of the sun. With staggering feet but undaunted heart the girl Sera was led down. Only once she turned her head and looked back. Perhaps Loloku would try again. Then as they came to the boat a young girl at a sign from O'Shea took off the loose blouse and they placed her face downwards across the bilge of the boat and two pair of small eager brown hands each seized one of hers and dragged the white rounded arms well over the keel of the boat. O'Shea walked round to that side drawing through his hands the long heavy and serrated tail of the fai - the gigantic stinging-ray of Oceana. He would have liked to wield it himself but then he would have missed part of his revenge - he could not have seen her face. So he gave it to a native and watched with the smile of a fiend the white back turn black and then into bloody red as it was cut to pieces with the tail of the fai.   The sight of the inanimate thing that had given no sign of its agony beyond the shudderings and twitchings of torn and mutilated flesh was perhaps disappointing to the tiger who stood and watched the dark stream that flowed down on both sides of the boat. Loloku touched his arm - "Mési stay thy hand. She is dead else." [36]  "Ah" said O'Shea "that would be a pity; for with one hand shall she live to plant taro."   And hatchet in hand he walked in between the two brown women who held her hands. They moved aside and let go. Then O'Shea swung his arm; the blade of the hatchet struck into the planking and the right hand of Sera fell on the sand.   A man put his arms around her and lifted her off the boat. He placed his hand on the blood-stained bosom and looked at Macy O'Shea.   "E mate! " he said.     The Rangers Of The Tia Kau BETWEEN Nanomea and Nanomaga - two of the Ellice Group - but within a few miles of the latter is an extensive submerged shoal on the charts called the Grand Cocal Reef but by the people of the two islands known as Tia Kau (The Reef). On the shallowest part there are from four to ten fathoms of water and here in heavy weather the sea breaks. The British cruiser Basilisk about 1870 sought for the reef but reported it as non-existent. Yet the Tia Kati is well known to many a Yankee whaler and trading schooner and is a favourite fishing-ground of the people of Nanomaga - when the sharks give them a chance. [37]  One night Atupa Chief of Nanomaga caused a huge fire to be lit on the beach as a signal to the people of Nanomea that a malaga or party of voyagers was coming over. Both islands are low - not more than fifteen feet above sea-level - and are distant from one another about thirty-eight miles. The following night the reflection of the answering fire on Nanomea was seen and Atupa prepared to send away his people in seven canoes. They would start at sundown so as to avoid paddling in the heat (the Nanomagans have no sailing canoes) and be guided to Nanomea which they expected to reach early in the morning by the far distant glare of the great fires of coconut and pandanus leaves kindled at intervals of a few hours. About seventy people were to go and all that day the little village busied itself in preparing for the Nanomeans gifts of foods - cooked puraka fowls pigs and flying-fish.   Atupa the heathen chief was troubled in his mind in those days of August 1872. The John Williams had touched at the island and landed a Samoan missionary who had pressed him to accept Christianity. Atupa dreading a disturbing element in his little community had at first declined; but the ship had come again and the chief having consented to try the new religion a teacher landed. But since then he and his sub-chiefs had consulted the oracle and had been told that the shades of Maumau Tahori and Foilagi their deified ancestors had answered that the new religion was unacceptable to them and that the Samoan teacher must be killed or sent away. And for this was Atupa sending off some of his people to Nanomea with gifts of goodwill to the chiefs to beseech them to consult their oracles also so that the two islands might take concerted action against this new foreign god whose priests said that all men were equal that all were bad and He and His Son alone good. [38]  The night was calm when the seven canoes set out. Forty men and thirty women and children were in the party and the craft were too deeply laden for any but the smoothest sea. On the ama (outrigger) of each canoe were the baskets of food and bundles of mats for their hosts and seated on these were the children while the women sat with the men and helped them to paddle. Two hours' quick paddling brought them to the shoal-water of Tia Kau and at the same moment they saw to the N.W. the sky-glare of the first guiding fire.   It was then that the people in the first canoe wherein was Palu the daughter of Atupa called out to those behind to prepare their asu (balers) as a heavy squall was coming down from the eastward. Then Laheu an old warrior in another canoe cried out that they should return on their track a little and get into deep water; "for" said he "if we swamp away from Tia Kau it is but a little thing but here - " and he clasped his hands rapidly together and then tore them apart. They knew what he meant - the sharks that at night-time forsaking the deep waters patrolled in droves of thousands the shallow waters of the reef to devour the turtle and the schools of tafau uli and other fish. In quick alarmed silence the people headed back but even then the first fierce squall struck them and some of the frail canoes began to fill at once. "I matagi! i matagi! (head to the wind)" a man called out; "head to the wind or we perish! 'Tis but a puff and it is gone." [39]  But it was more than a puff. The seven canoes all abreast were still in shallow water and the paddlers kept them dead in the teeth of the whistling wind and stinging rain and called out words of encouragement to one another and to the women and children as another black squall burst upon them and the curling seas began to break. The canoe in which was Atupa's daughter was the largest and best of all the seven but was much overladen and on the outrigger grating were four children. These the chief's daughter was endeavouring to shield from the rain by covering them with a mat when one of them a little girl endeavoured to steady herself by holding to one of the thin pieces of grating; it broke and her arm fell through and struck the water and in an instant she gave a dull smothered wail. Palu the woman seized her by her hair and pulled the child up to a sitting posture and then shrieked with terror - the girl's arm was gone. [40]  And then in the blackness of night lightened now by the white seething boiling surge the people saw in the phosphorescent water countless hundreds of the savage terrors of the Tia Kau darting hither and thither amongst the canoes - for the smell of blood had brought them together instantly. Presently a great grey monster tore the paddle from out the hands of the steersman of the canoe wherein were the terrified Palu and the four children and then before the man for'ard could bring her head to the wind she broached to and filled. Like ravening wolves the sharks dashed upon their prey and ere the people had time to give more than a despairing cry those hideous jaws and gleaming cruel teeth had sealed their fate. Maddened with fear the rest of the people threw everything out of the six other canoes to lighten them and as the bundles of mats and baskets of food touched the water the sharks seized and bit tore and swallowed. Then one by one every paddle was grabbed from the hands of the paddlers and the canoes broached to and filled in that sea of death - all save one which was carried by the force of the wind away from the rest. In this were the only survivors - two men. [41]  The agony could not have lasted long. "Were I to live as long as he whom the faifeau (missionary) tells us lived to be nine hundred and sixty and nine I shall hear the groans and cries and shrieks of that po malaia that night of evil luck" said one of the two who lived to Denison the white trader at Nanomea. "Once did I have my paddle fast in the mouth of a little devil and it drew me backwards backwards over the stern till my head touched the water. Tah! but I was strong with fear and held on for to lose it meant death by the teeth. And Tulua - he who came out alive with me seized my feet and held on else had I gone. But look thou at this" - and he pointed to his scarred neck and back and shoulders "ere I could free my foe (paddle) and raise my head I was bitten thus by others. Ah Papalagi some men are born to wisdom but most are fools. Had not Atupa been filled with vain fears he had killed the man who caused him to lose so many of our people."   "So" said the white man "and wouldst thou have killed the man who brought thee the new faith? Fie!" [42]  "Aye that would I - in those days when I was po uli uli. But not now for I am Christian. Yet had Atupa killed and buried the stranger we could have lied and said he died of a sickness when they of his people came to seek him. And then had I now my son Tagipo with me he who went into the bellies of the sharks at Tia Kau."     Pallou's Taloi A Memory Of The Paumotus  I STAYED once at Rotoava - in the Low Archipelago Eastern Polynesia - while suffering from injuries received in a boat accident one wild night. My host the Rotoava trader was a sociable old pirate whose convivial soul would never let him drink alone. He was by trade a boat-builder having had in his early days a shed at Miller's Point in Sydney where he made money and married a wife. But this latter event was poor Tom Oscott's undoing and in the end he took his chest of tools on board the Thyra trading brig and sailed away to Polynesia. Finally after many years' wandering he settled down at Rotoava as a trader and boat-builder and became a noted drinker of bottled beer. [43]  The only method by which I could avoid his incessant invitations to "have another" was to get his wife and children to carry me down to his work-shed built in a lovely spot surrounded by giant puka trees. Here under the shade I had my mats spread and with one of his children sitting at my head to fan away the flies I lay and watched through the belt of coconuts that lined the beach the blue rollers breaking on the reef and the snow-white boatswain-birds floating high overhead.   Tom was in the bush one morning when his family carried me to the boat-shed. He had gone for a log of seasoned toa wood to another village. At noon he returned and I heard him bawling for me. His little daughter the fly-brusher gave an answering yell and then Tom walked down the path carrying two bottles of beer; behind him Lucia his eldest daughter a monstrous creature of giggles adipose tissue and warm heart with glasses and a plate of crackers; lastly old Marie the wife with a little table.   "By ---- you've a lot more sense'n me. It's better lyin' here in the cool than foolin' around in the sun; so I've brought yer suthin' to drink."   [44] "Oh Tom" I groaned "I'm sure that beer's bad for me."   The Maker of Boats sat on his bench and said that he knew of a brewer's carter in Sydney who at Merriman's "pub" on Miller's Point had had a cask of beer roll over him. Smashed seven ribs one arm and one thigh. Doctors gave him up; undertaker's man called on his wife for coffin order but a sailor chap said he'd pull him through. Got an indiarubber tube and made him suck up as much beer as he could hold; kept it up till all his bones "setted" again and he recovered. Why shouldn't I - if I only drank enough?   "Hurry up old dark-skin!" - this to the faded Marie. Uttering merely the word "Hog!" she drew the cork. I had to drink some and every hour or so Tom would say it was very hot and open yet another bottle. At last I escaped the beer by nearly dying and then the kind old fellow hurried away in his boat to Apatiki - another island of the group - and came back with some bottles of claret bought from the French trader there. With him came two visitors - a big half-caste of middle age and his wife a girl of twenty or there-about. This was Edward Pallou and his wife Taloi. [...]  I was in the house when Tom returned enjoying a long-denied smoke. Pallou and his wife entered and greeted me. The man was a fine well-set-up fellow wiry and muscular with deep-set eyes and bearing across his right cheek a heavy scar. His wife was a sweet dainty little creature with red lips dazzling teeth hazel eyes and long wavy hair. The first thing I noticed about her was that instead of squatting on a mat in native fashion she sank into a wide chair and lying back enquired with a pleasant smile and in perfect English whether I was feeling any better. She was very fair even for a Paumotuan half-caste as I thought she must be and I said to Pallou "Why any one would take your wife to be an Englishwoman!" [45]  "Not I" said Taloi with a rippling laugh as she commenced to make a banana-leaf cigarette; "I am a full-blooded South Sea Islander. I belong to Apatiki and was born there. Perhaps I have white blood in me. Who knows? - only my wise mother. But when I was twelve years old I was adopted by a gentleman in Papeite and he sent me to Sydney to school. Do you know Sydney? Well I was three years with the Misses F---- in ---- Street. My goodness! I was glad to leave - and so were the Misses F---- to see me go. They said I was downright wicked because one day I tore the dress off a girl who said my skin was tallowy like my name. When I came back to Tahiti my guardian took me to Raiatea where he had a business and said I must marry him the beast!"   Ever since its inauguration the Australian Natives' Association has lent the movement for securing a confederation of the Australian colonies its warmest and most hearty support and has had the satisfaction of each year seeing the object more and more within the grasp of those whose patriotic feelings have moved them to a desire in the direction of building up a great nation in this continent in place of the small and disunited states which exist at present. The Board has every reason to regard the past year as one in which great strides have been made towards the goal of every Australian's ambition. It is now evident that the great masses of the people are taking up the cry for Federation. They are recognising that the future well-being of Australia its progress and prosperity and the material wealth of the colonists themselves depend upon its being united. As "a house divided against itself cannot stand" so it is being perceived that no colony can achieve the same results singlehanded as it would were there a perfect union between all of them. Two years ago after the passing of the Draft Federal Constitution at the Sydney Conference the Board of this Association reported to the annual gathering of delegates that "The Board most deeply regrets that the subject has practically been allowed to drop by the leading politicians in the various legislatures. In some of these it is worthy of note that the Constitution has not been considered at all while at others it was dealt with in so unstatesmanlike a manner as to court defeat. The manner in which the Draft Constitution has been dealt with by the Australian Parliaments undeniably favours the conclusion that the further local consideration of that or any future Draft Constitution must be by local conventions elected for the specific purpose and must not be mixed up in any way with ordinary local Parliamentary and political parties and questions". [499] These words on the part of the then governing body of the Association were prophetic for in the year following local agitation began with the formation of powerful leagues on the borders of every colony the object of which was to bring about a federation of the colonies. Many of the leading spirits in this movement were representatives of this Association who were stationed in these districts and in a few months the work was so far advanced that a convention representing every class and every shade of opinion was held at Corowa on July 31st and August 1st. President Peacock and Vice-President Barrett represented this Association.  The formation and extension of kindred associations to the A.N.A. in the other colonies must form one of the most powerful factors in securing Federation. A good deal has been done in this direction during the year. The experience of the Board is that wherever the A.N.A. or some distinctly national organisation flourishes there also the cause of United Australia stands in the forefront. The most cheering news comes from Hobart; and the Victorian association has pierced its way to Berrigan in New South Wales. The former city has made a request for a visit from the leaders of the Association during the next half-year and the present Board have taken the responsibility of pledging their successors to carry out this application. There is no doubt also that during the coming year the Board of Directors must organise a crusade throughout the length and breadth of the continent for were the native-born as strongly and firmly united in the other colonies as they are in Victoria Federation would long ere this have been an accomplished fact. Therefore the Board feels that the Conference should recommend the incoming Board to carry the flag of the United States of Australia throughout Queensland and into the cities of New South Wales. The great body of native-born electors in the Riverina should be aroused to a sense of the possibilities that may follow their co-operation with brother Australians. South Australia must be toured and even the Northern Territory must be appealed to. In Western Australia there are already signs of life and vigor but inasmuch as the Board considers the people of Australia from the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Australian Bight and from Perth to Port Jackson want to be appealed to they recommend the Conference to instruct the incoming Board to open a vigorous campaign. The time is ripe for an appeal to the whole of Australia. Let the A.N.A. grasp this opportunity and the fruits of reward will be plentiful indeed. The Board feels assured of the hearty assistance of representative Australians in carrying the proposed crusade to a successful termination. [500]  The report was adopted as also was a recommendation by the Rutherglen Branch that the presidents of all the branches of the Association throughout the colony be requested to form branches of the Federation League in their respective towns.  Receding tourists like receding tides leave their jetsam upon our shores. Sometimes it is a mere tangle of weed and scum; sometimes a shell murmuring lessons learned in the deep ocean of truth. The flippant impressions of ANTHONY TROLLOPE and MAX O'RELL writing chiefly to amuse are the merest spume and froth of thought. The balanced judgment of FROUDE and the keen criticism of FRANCIS ADAMS may be disputed but must be respected. [813] Of all our censors ADAMS has incomparably the clearest vision and the surest touch. Miss SHAW is an admirable chronicler and a worthless commentator. Her grasp of facts and details is wonderfully strong of opinions and principles invariably weak. ADAMS added splendid analysis to splendid synthesis; and even MARCUS CLARKE with as many years spent in Australia as ADAMS spent months has left us no such body of suggestive thought upon ourselves and our future as ADAMS left in his brilliant FORTNIGHTLY essays.  It is curious and instructive to compare the impressions of the writers who have wandered through Australia and sought the feeble glimmerings of national tendencies. TROLLOPE in 1871 thought the Australian-born laborer superior to the immigrant. In other classes he found the young native listless unenergetic vain and boastful coming too quickly to a weak maturity. "He rarely runs into bad vices. He does not drink gamble or go utterly to the dogs." But if he does not fall he cannot rise and he is too content in mediocrity. Thirteen years later came FROUDE learned thoughtful severe aiming at truth; but always in leading-strings fixed in preconceptions and seeing only what he was shown. Still he saw much and his intellect enabled him to sift the real from the merely plausible the vital from the unimportant. It is strange considering the difference in the two men how FROUDE'S judgment repeats TROLLOPE'S whilst enlarging upon it: - Sydney colonists have no severe intellectual interests. They are courteous and polite [...] energetic [...] but only to conquer the enemies of material comfort that their own lives may be bright and pleasant. [...] There were no persons that I met with who showed much concern about the deeper spiritual problems in the resolution of which alone man's life rises into greatness. [...] They have no national concerns and risks. [...] They will have good lawyers among them good doctors good men of science engineers merchants manufacturers as the Romans had in the decline of the Empire. But of the heroic type of man of whom poets will sing and after ages be anxious to read there will not be so many when the generation is gone which was bred and born in the old world. [...] The rising Australians are "promising young men". If they mean to be more they must either be independent or must be citizens of Oceana.  This though spoken directly of Sydney residents has reference to the whole race of Australians and particularly to the natives as FROUDE saw them. So also has this spoken of the Victorians: - With so fair a climate and with life so easy the Victorians cannot be sad and it is pleasant to see a people who know so well how to enjoy themselves. But men and nations require in reserve a certain sternness and if anything truly great is ever to come out of them this lesson will in time be hammered into them.  The gist of FROUDE'S criticism is thus that life is too easy with us that we lack the stimulus to be strong and that our material prosperity tends to spiritual barrenness. [814]  Compare MAX O'RELL up to date: - Of all the members of the great Anglo-Saxon family I think the Australian is destined to become the most easy-going the most sociable and perhaps the most cheerful. [...] You will not find in the Australian that dogged obstinate perseverance that bull-dog tenacity which has helped the English to do so many great things and which still puts the Scotchman beyond competition in every enterprise which calls for privations hard work and indomitable tenacity. [...] The Australian has quite a passion for amusement. There is no country in the world whose people flock in such numbers to theatres concerts exhibitions all places of recreation; there are no people who take so many holidays or enter with so much keenness into all national sports; there is no society that dines and dances quite so much as Australasian society.  Is there not a striking similarity in the thought which naturally rises to the lips of these three surveyors of Australian character separated from each other by a decade of time yet singularly unanimous in verdict? Now take ADAMS who brought a more open mind to utilise greater opportunities of observation; though his judgment also was warped by sickness and fettered by prejudice: - The native Australians have too often the self-sufficiency that is gotten on self-confidence by ignorance. Lean and high-strung with the alternations of languor and activity which the terrible changefulness of their climate gives them they wear themselves out in all they do mistaking the exercise of nervous energy for pleasure. They have in their underside the taint of cruelty. [...] More and more the characteristics of a careless pleasure-loving race are developed as secularly educated Young Australia the true religious Gallio gets his way. [...] The average temper of Australians more and more shows itself either indifferent or hostile to the outer world. [...] The heathenism of the bush is intense. Everyone is at heart a pessimist.  ADAMS draws a broad line of demarcation between the residents of the coastal belt and those of the interior plateau and looks to the latter for our best results. "Frankly" he says "I find not only all that is genuinely characteristic in Australia and the Australians springing from this heart of the land but also all that is noblest kindliest and best."  MARCUS CLARKE whose famous judgment of the coming Australian would seem best of all were the dogma a little less doubtful and the wit a little less sparkling divides the Australia of the future into temperate and tropical ruled respectively by a republic and an aristocracy (being copied in this by Miss SHAW)  The Australians will be a fretful clever perverse irritable race [...] selfish self-reliant prone to wander caring little for home ties [...] freed from the highest burden of intellectual development (genius)... . The Australasian will be a squareheaded masterful man with full temples plenty of beard a keen eye a stern yet sensual mouth. His teeth will be hard and his lungs good. He will suffer from liver disease and become prematurely bald; average duration of life in the unmarried fifty-nine; in the married sixty-nine and a decimal. [...] In another hundred years the average Australasian will be a tall coarse. strong-jawed greedy pushing talented man excelling in swimming and horsemanship. His religion will be a form of Presbyterianism; his national policy a democracy tempered by the rate of exchange. [815] His wife will be a thin narrow woman very fond of dress and idleness caring little for her children but without sufficient brain-power to sin with zest. In five hundred years unless recruited from foreign nations the breed will be wholly extinct; but in that five hundred years it will have changed the face of nature and swallowed up all our contemporary civilisation.  The differences as well as the harmonies of these critical dicta give scope for endless debate with Time as sole qualified arbiter. But speculation in spite of uncertainty will have always its value. It is in our power by politic government to alter many of the conditions of national life and so to weaken if we cannot withstand the currents of deterioration in our national character. If observers and thinkers can but determine the nature and force of those currents and statesmen can erect a barrier to their influence the Republic of Australia will long live to amuse its children with the prophecy of MARCUS CLARKE.  "Mr. Pounce Writer and Forger"  All the trouble arose through Copper-plate Josephs' little joke and it is accordingly necessary to say a few words about copperplate Josephs himself.  That inimitable artist in bank-note engraving having in the judgement of the Governor and directors of the Bank of England reached so eminent a degree of proficiency in his profession as to render it (in the interests of their dividends) very desirable that he should be expatriated had been a resident of Old Sydney for a year or two. His fame had preceded him and as from the circumstances attending his conviction he was to be freed the moment he set foot upon the shores of the new Britannia of the Southern World it cannot be said that the intimation of his arrival had imparted much pleasure to Mr. D'Arcy Wentworth President of the Bank of New South Wales and the other magnates of banking circles.  "Have you heard Mackaness" asked the gentlemanly veteran "that that rascally bank-note forger Josephs is being sent out?"  "Yes Mr. Wentworth; my last Times said that he had been respited as a preliminary to transporting him. There seems to be something peculiar about his conviction. There was no direct evidence against him."  "That's my own impression!" replied the ex-Police Magistrate ex-Principal Surgeon and ex-twenty other functions and present Bank President. "Seems to me they've only got moral evidence against him but have succeeded in frightening him so that he'll come out for good. P'r'aps they'll give him a grant and his freedom. If they do we'll have to watch him." [42]  "Certainly!" said Solicitor Mackaness; "he'll have to be watched in any case."  Consequently when the celebrated note-forger having been "morally" convicted on purchased evidence - in those days perjurers stood for hire at per hour within the precincts of the Old Bailey - condemned to death respited and "sent out" was duly dropped by the transport ship Hercules into an armed guard-boat which palpitated gently on the "lucid bosom" of Sydney Cove he was the recipient of much anxious care.  "Josephs Henry life ship's No. 23 - To Governor at once" cried the Principal Superintendent's clerk. And into General Ralph Darling's august presence went the specially honoured Josephs. With the Governor were Sheriff Macquoid and Banker Wentworth.  "Josephs" said his Excellency "his Lordship the Secretary of State for Colonial affairs has been pleased to direct me to extend you his Most Gracious Majesty's clemency on conditions. On conditions Josephs"  Josephs sulky and glum simply ducked his head. He wasn't going to be thankful for nothing wasn't Convict Josephs.  "These are that on your undertaking never to follow your trade you are to be granted two hundred acres of land and your temporary freedom."  Josephs was not surprised he had been told as much "at home". He was not even grateful.  "Do you promise my man?" questioned his precise and prim Excellency.  "S'pose I must sir. Needs must when the devil drives."  The assembled group exchanged mutual glances of surprise and horror. That the transport should associate magnanimous Sir Ralph with that Other Excellent Pro-Consul who should have been nameless to polite ears - Awful!!  "Sir!" Sir Ralph drew himself up to his uttermost quarter-inch. "Sir!"  "Meant no offence your Honour - "  "Your Excellency" corrected Mr. D'Arcy Wentworth. Very obliging always was the veteran and he was never above showing a courtesy to a convict. Even when he ordered a flogging he was so suave and affable that as often as not he would elicit from the floggee a "Thank you sir!" To which the good old man would respond "You're quite welcome my man!"  "No offence your Excellency. Only I've been 'ardly treated sir" [43]  "On shipboard?"  "No your Excellency: But by the Court at 'ome sir - "  "Oh I can't hear anything as to that. Every transport says the same thing. Doesn't he Mr. Macquoid?"  "Never knew one yet who didn't say he was innocent your Excellency!" answered the Sheriff.  "But I am innocent! They've sent me out on suspicion!" persisted the engraver.  Here let us digress to remark that this was a fact and the dignitaries present all knew it. The Bank would have hanged Josephs if it could for the forgery of certain hundred-pound notes and only the circumstance that the Threadneedle Street authorities had nothing to go upon except a microscopic dot in the concave of the "L" which mark was supposed to be the sign by which Josephs proud like all good workmen of his work sought to identify his peculiar achievements had prevented the realisation of their amiable wish. But though the Bank could not hang him it had influence enough to transport him His Majesty's Attorney-General doubtless bringing up his mind to the commission of so slight an illegality by the consideration that in sending Josephs to the New World he was doing Josephs a kindly service. "Josephs" he probably thought "will be sure to be hanged sooner or later if he is freed here while if he goes out there he can't fall into temptation as there are no Banks there!" In fact we might safely go farther and assert the Right Honourable Attorney-General said as much for such remarks were constantly made at the time and later by British officialdom. There were few officers of State fewer still of the magistracy but believed they were doing the best for a man in transporting him. And as to the opinion as to the banking facilities enjoyed at Botany Bay why we find that when Lord Glenelg at a much later time was appending his signature to a charter for an Australian Bank he expressed his hope that "the barbaric system of barter would thereupon cease in the colony". Which remark emanating from a Secretary for the Colonies was profoundly suggestive of the wisdom with which Britain has governed her dependencies. Governor and distinguished Gaoler Hampton of Western Australia and Van Demonian fame used to express his notion of Colonial Secretaries' intelligence by remarking that had they been convict-cooks they could not have stolen the men's rations without detection. In other words they were imbeciles. [44]  This is we say a digression. And having ended it we proceed to state that Copper-plate Josephs accepted freedom two hundred acres on the Hawkesbury and the condition that unless specially ordered by certain prominent officials he was never to pursue his profession.  The sapient Authorities did not ask how Copper-plate Josephs was to live. An artist who had spent thirty years over the sandbag with burin and graver and burnisher was scarcely likely to make a success as a farmer; but obviously it was no concern of the Powers to ascertain how Convict Josephs proposed his tools of trade being withdrawn to keep body and soul together. And to tell the truth Convict Josephs did not trouble about himself sufficiently to put the question to the Authorities. Had he not made en voyage perfect arrangements for the transmission of certain "flash 'uns" to the counting-houses of the village by the Thames? Ah if the old walls of the "Help me through the World" Inn in Fitzgerald Street Windsor had chosen to speak they could have "put away" very nicely not merely Mr. Copper-plate Josephs but a certain young transport-ship surgeon who made numerous trips to and from the dear old land. But then you see the old bricks did not vocalise their reminiscences and consequently both Josephs and his friend and "worker-off" the doctor lived long and prosperously and died piously with their boots off.  The sapient Authorities did not bother their heads as to the engraver's livelihood. They did no more than enter into an agreement through Mr. Mackaness with venerable Mr. Pounce that he should watch over Mr. Josephs with a tender solicitude.  "It's a sound rule Mr. Wentworth" advised Mr. Mackaness "to set a thief to catch a thief. Put Pounce the forger to watch Josephs the forger and if either goes wrong the other'll split. They'll be rivals in a week." Upon this advice the Powers acted.  It did not take a week to generate a first-class though disguised  enmity between the brothers in "advanced penmanship'' as Mr. Timothy Pounce in his moments of conviviality was wont to term the noble art and mystery of forgery. For though Mr. Pounce's speciality was the manipulation of documents and Mr. Josephs' forte was "bank notes from the plate" it is perhaps superfluous to say that both gentlemen were possessed of so intelligent and fertile an ingenuity that if the preparation of a will a land-grant or a pardon did not insuperable obstacles to Mr. Josephs' talents neither was Mr. Pounce ignorant of the process of manufacturing "flash 'uns". [45] And Mr. Pounce felt deeply aggrieved that just as he had succeeded in working up a really lucrative connection among Civil Servants and 'Mancipists who wanted the signatures imitated of Governors and Members of Council and among transports who wished tickets-of-leave and pardons that would pass muster a few years before they would be gazetted in due course Mr. Josephs should be imported to interfere with his monopoly.  Copper-plate Josephs on receiving an interim certificate of freedom had installed himself at Johnny Blackman's "Keep within Compass" Hotel in George Street and thither Mr. Pounce instructed by Mr. John Mackaness wended his way one afternoon.  Of tall and bulky form Mr. Pounce was benign and venerable in aspect and it was with a dignified courtliness which would have reflected upon an English Duke or a colonial Muster-master that he handed his card to the landlord.  "Take that John please" he ordered "to - h'm - newly-freed transport Josephs. I believe he has put up here. And John as a friend you know I would advise you to be more careful as to what characters you accommodate. Licensing-day is coming close and the assessors are inclined to be severe."  Johnny as he delivered his card felt greatly impressed with this exhortation. He was an old friend of Pounce's having come out in the same vessel with him. Pounce was a "lifer" while Johnny was only a seven-year man and therefore the publican looked up to the "penman" and revered him. In the curious topsy-turvy society which the Blessed Spirit of British Colonisation built up in Old Sydney nothing was more amusing than the deference which "short-termers" paid to long-sentence men. A twenty-year man was to the seven- and ten-year fellows an object of respect; a "lifer" was elevated on a pedestal of reverence; while it is by no means certain that they would not have bowed the knee to a worthy whose "drop"-rope had been cut after he had done the preliminary swing or two but before life was extinct.  "Gentleman to see you!" said the landlord to Josephs brusquely. Blackman's tones were not so civil as they had been earlier in the day and Mr. josephs was not slow to perceive the difference. Mr. Blackman had been influenced by Pounce's hint. And the new chum knew it for Mr. Pounce's words had been distinctly audible to the engraver through the partition which separated the bar from the bar-parlour. [46] He took the card from Blackman.  "Oh Mr. Pounce Writing Clerk. You don't call 'im a gentleman d'ye landlord? Why that's old Pounce I'll swear who was lagged for doing some 'dummy old ooman's tickets!' I'm a gentleman indeed. Why I'm surprised ye allow such characters into your bar landlord 'specially as licensing-day is so close and the assessors are so severe. For d'ye know landlord Pounce was not the sort o' man to be content with forging old ooman's tickets but to save paying three and threepence he forged the name of his wash'woman's daughter to his wash'woman's bill. That's your Mr. Pounce landlord. Now show the gentleman in!" With such an accent upon the "gentleman"!  Inasmuch as Mr. Pounce was blessed with the best of good hearings it will be easily believed that there was no love lost between the two experts from the first moment of their acquaintance.  "Mr. Josephs?" queried the venerable blue-coated brass-buttoned and spotless-linened Pounce bowing.  Mr. Josephs arose nodded and desired to be informed what he could do for his visitor.  Mr. Pounce did not at first say was effusive in his welcome to Mr. Josephs sorry for his "misfortune" - "but still y' know Mr. Josephs your personal loss is our young country's gain." - was generous in ordering all a full quart of ruin "to ah cement our 'quaintance sir."  "Don't drink rum!" said Mr. Josephs not to be won over by blandishments. "Then a glass of port - a bottle of port John - must have something for the good of the house y'know Mr. Josephs."  "Don't drink port and as for the good of the house as I pay my bills Pounce and as I don't forge the landlord's name to a receipt if he ain't satisfied with my custom I can go elsewhere."  "You misunderstand me Mr. Josephs" rejoined Pounce outwardly unabashed but inwardly smarting "really - you do."  "Can't say I'm sorry if I do. But you ain't said what ye want."  Mr. Pounce motioned Host Blackman to leave the room and then drawing his chair nearer to the spot where the other rogue was standing whispered: "In confidence my dear sir I came to propose a bit of business - something that might be mutually profitable." [47]  "What business? - what d'ye mean?"  "'Ush my dear sir! Mum's the word." And Mr. Pounce lowered his low voice two tones. "Flash 'uns. You print I'll work off."  In a moment all the love of his old game and all the fascination of a beautiful art awoke within Copper-plate Josephs. With the one and the other there waked too however a doubt of Mr. Pounce. Would that unadulterated scoundrel prove faithful? Might the offer not be a trap to put him away? A man who would forge to evade payment of three and threepence to a poor woman would surely be capable of anything. No he wouldn't trust Mr. Pounce and without troubling to wrap up his resolve in smooth-sounding words he communicated it to his visitor.  "Not trust me!" expostulated that offended person. "Not trust me after I have put my neck into your hands! Why you could hang me for what I've said to you already!"  "Fudge! I ain't been a fortnight here without learning you're hand and glove with the gentlemen of the staff. They say you do all Gov'ment's dirty work and that you'll fix anything from a death-warrant to - to - a wash'woman's bill. Shouldn't be surprised if you've only come here now to trap me. That's my 'pinion of you Mr. Pounce - Writing Clerk."  And Mr. Pounce bridling in the consciousness of his insulted virtue and in the knowledge that there rested in his pocket an indemnity signed by a Very High Personage indeed "for having made a felonious proposal to one Henry Josephs" was compelled to go to Mr. Mackaness and inform him that Josephs really meant to walk in the paths of rectitude henceforth.  "He wouldn't bite Mr. Mackaness" he reported as he returned the indemnity to the solicitor (we have seen two or three such documents). "And for the time at least he means to go square. But I'll drop in on him occasionally sir; and if there's anything wrong he won't get the better of me. No sir!"  It was in this way that the fears of the Old Sydney bankers as to possible damaging effects to the genuineness of their note issues accruing from Copper-plate Josephs' residence in His Gracious Majesty's dependency of New South Wales were allayed. If there is anything in the method that savours of a dubious morality do not we pray you blame the colonists of Old Sydney. [48] Blame instead the System and the lords and gentlemen who sitting in the snug parlour of No. 14 Downing Street set in motion the forces which created it.  Mr. Pounce was true to his word. Again and again he called on Mr. Josephs and was ever polite albeit Josephs was ever the reverse.  It was largely due to Pounce's interest with Mr. Macquoid that "Copper-plate" was permitted to establish himself in a small office in Jamieson Street and work under the strictest police supervision for the printers besides officiating as "Card and Book-plate Engraver to the Gentry". Pounce wisely pointed out that once Josephs was allowed to handle his tools it was only a question of time for him to take to the "flash" business again and the suggestion commended itself to the Principal Superintendent's and the Sheriff's judgments. Both these high functionaries were shareholders in the local banks and they were therefore particularly solicitous to maintain uncontaminated the purity of the note issues. When an official's public ditty travels parallel to his private interests it is singular how indefatigable and ingenious he will prove in administration. It was about this time that a Legal Great Man of Van Demonia procured the reprieve of another bank-note forger on the condition that the criminal would never forge documents prejudicial to the Old Bank. He would make no stipulation as to other concerns but as to the Old Bank - never! The Legal Great Man was a heavy stockholder in the Old Bank. The Principal Superintendent and the Sheriff applied a similar principle to "Copper-plate". As he was not yet colonially condemned they could not well bargain with him that he should leave their bank's interests alone whatever other interests he attacked. But they could throw a temptation or two in his way which would have an equal potency. Once he fingered his gravers Josephs looking at the official experience of like artists would not be long before he tripped and stumbled and then - hey ho for the George Street scaffold and in the one instant the banks would "drop" Convict Josephs and all fears of a spurious note-circulation.  Pounce visited Josephs freely and frequently. He put little jobs in his way and trusted to the future to make up for the temporary loss - the future when Josephs having been hanged he Pounce would once more enjoy a monopoly. [49] Truth to say he was very desirous Josephs should lose no time in getting hanged or at least transported to Norfolk Island. Pounce's schedule of charges was as follows: -   1. For Absolute Pardon with Gazette notice £30.  2. For Absolute Pardon without Gazette notice £20.  3. For Conditional Pardon with Gazette notice £25.  4. For Conditional Pardon without Gazette notice £15.  5. Ticket-of-Leave new form complete with identity exact and Gazette notice £15.  6. Ticket-of-Leave without Gazette notice £10.  7. Ticket-of-leave dead or absconded prisoner's form altered as far as possible £7 7S.  8. Pass to visit Country. 3 or 6 months or Country to visit Town £s 3S.  g. English Marriage Certificate £2 2s.  10. English Certificate of Death £2 2S.  11. English Letters from Home Friends £2 2S.  12. Pass from V.D.L. £2 2S.  13. Letter from V.D.L. £1 1S.  But Copper-plate Josephs' fees were in every case 25 per cent. less than Pounce's scale and the new man's policy of cutting prices had seriously affected the old-established business.  Of course Josephs was not up in the minutae of traffic in forged freedoms and so forth. It took years of experience and careful study of men and papers to concoct a document that would invariably pass muster - using the term in its most literal sense - as it was the Muster-master's duty to examine every convict's "personal papers". And Josephs had not the tact and bonhomie to enlist the alliance of the necessary officers of the Regulation Departments or the knowledge of the routine obligatory if he would avert from the transport who had paid him his fee the dreadful consequences of presenting false papers for examination. Still the average transport who wished to abscond up-country or to Van Demonia with "regular" papers would look at the difference in the rates. He perhaps could not understand that it would be the wiser course to pay Pounce £30 for a Free Pardon properly sealed and signed and not only sealed and signed but registered and GAZETTED as well - how this sort of thing was done we shall tell you some other day - than to fee Josephs in the sum of £22 10s. for a similar document in which there was some defect. [50] The average transport in a word could not always estimate the superior quality of Forger Pounce's work and it was no wonder therefore that Forger Pounce's in-come was decreasing that he was sincerely anxious that his rival in the art of penmanship should be speedily hanged or otherwise put out of the way or that to this admirable end he laboured assiduously if somewhat secretly.  But Providence was not so friendly to Mr. Pounce though he went to church twice every Sunday and Josephs had 'verted to Catholicism so that he might go only once. Providence was indeed distinctly unfriendly to the former inasmuch as Forger Pounce did not succeed in deluding "Copper-plate" into any one of the numerous traps which he laid for that naughty man but himself tumbled head first into the solitary pitfall which Forger Josephs took the trouble to prepare for his venerable rival. 'Which after all wasn't so much a pitfall as a little joke.'  Mr. Timothy Pounce was of refined instincts and very nasty in his personal appointments. He delighted in little knick-knacks such as tassels to his cane and charms to his watch-guard. His penknife - most trustworthy ally in matters of erasure! - bore a tiny silver tablet on which his name was inscribed. And stepping into David Maziere's shop in George Street one day and observing in a counter-box a charming little card-case with just such another tablet thereon the idea occurred to him that the little case would no only prove a convenient accessory to his comfort but would furnish him with another excuse for visiting Mr. Copper-plate Josephs. The two silver dollars necessary to transfer the case from the counter to his pocket were forthwith handed over - and Mr. Pounce proceeded to Jamieson Street.  "Ah! good morning Mr. Josephs. Delighted to see you looking so well. And how's business and could you manage without inconvenience during the next day or two just to engrave my name on this card-case?"  "Sixpence a letter" grunted Josephs otherwise unresponsive to his patron's seductive address.  "H'm isn't that rather high? Especially as I'm - he! he! - in the trade?"[51]  "My terms! you ain't in the trade!"  "Ah well if you must you must. 'Timothy Pounce' in Old English please Mr. Josephs; and when can I get it?"  "Day after to-morrow. Cash six and six before delivery."  "I don't think you need be anxious as to your money Mr. Josephs. It's not my fault we have not done much more business together. There's a little matter now I'd like to mention - "  "Too busy to talk. Talk next time."  And Mr. Pounce left the shop in as dignified a manner as was possible. Bless us how he did swear though as he crossed the vacant ground by St. Phillip's.  He would perchance have sworn a little louder and longer if he could have had any notion of the sequel.  Naturally as soon as he had purchased his new card-case he had transferred to it his bits of pasteboard. Each of these in his own beautiful and perfect writing was thus inscribed: - Never thinking in leaving the case with Josephs he had also left the cards. Even the devil is not always wide-awake.  Opening the case an hour or two later as a preliminary to executing his rival's commission "Copper-plate" observed the cards drew one out looked at it and - smiled. Gruff in manner and short in temper as Mr. Josephs was somewhere or other in his system there lurked an atom of humour which prompted him though he was really busy (having a very important job in hand for Mrs. Chester of Chesterdale) to waste his afternoon in engraving a copperplate in this fashion: -   Timothy Pounce Writer and Forger Macquarie Street. Documents of all kinds forged and uttered. Pardons a speciality. [52]  When he had printed off twenty cards he mixed them with Pounce's pen-written ones. A superficial glance failed to distinguish the one description from the other - the engraved from the manuscript. A close one of course discovered the difference in the wording; but as to the words which were to be found on both cards they were identical to a segment of a curve and to the position of an i-dot. And mixed just as they were but with a couple of Mr. Pounce's own scripts On the top the humorous Josephs filled the card-case with the lot.  Never since he had boarded with her had Mrs. Bevan - widow of the poor wretch Bevan who was ruthlessly shot as an absconder by soldiers in February 1829 while engaged in honourable labour - seen Copper-plate Josephs so genial as he was that evening.  "You are merry sir" she ventured to say.  "Yes Mrs. Bevan I'm rather in good spirits to-night. A rather funny thing happened to-day."  "May I not hear it sit-?'' quoth the curious dame.  "Well well not just at present ma'am. Some day p'r'aps I'll tell you."  He never did though. Nor did he tell the whole story when ten days later he was interrogated in the Supreme Court when Timothy Pounce was on trial for his life for forgery of a Conditional Pardon - a little ceremony which poor Pounce was compelled to undergo as a consequence of having handed to Captain Charles Sturt 39th Regiment without looking at it a card from his new case.  What man or woman is there who as he or she hands a servant or a stranger a card from his or her own case invariably looks at it?  Mr. Pounce did not look at the pasteboard which bowing the while in the grand manner he handed Captain Sturt as he was tendering his assistance in copying for the press the Captain's journals of his expedition into the Interior.  And he had no chance of seeing it again till he was arraigned on the capital charge.  How he was arraigned and why being found guilty he was not hanged will form a tale for another time.  In countries blessed with abundant rainfall the nuggets can be separated from the dirt by a comparatively simple arrangement of sluices and adles. In the drought-stricken west of Australia other means must be adopted which I will endeavour to describe.  Having picked and dug out a certain amount of the alluvial ground which it is hoped contains nuggets of various sizes the digger then breaks up any lumps of clay or earth by means of a heavy billet of wood or like implement and this prepared dirt as it is called he treats in one of the following ways:   1. By means of two iron dishes in diameter 15 to 18 inches and in depth 4 to 5 inches.  One dish is placed empty on the ground the other filled with the prepared dirt is held up at arm's length above the head with the mouth of the dish turned to the wind; the earth is then allowed to fall gradually into the dish beneath all light particles and dust being blown away by the wind. Exchange of dishes having been made the same process is repeated again and again. When there is only a small amount of dust left the full dish is held in both hands and given a circular movement which causes the larger stones or pebbles to come to the surface; these are cleared away with the left hand and a sharp look out is kept for nuggets or quartz specimens. This is repeated until nothing is left in the dish but a small quantity of dust ironstone-gravel and possibly fine gold or small nuggets. The dish is then held up at an angle and shaken from side to side until a compact little heap remains to the bottom of which the gold will have sunk. The next and final operation is to hold the dish up to the mouth nearly horizontally and blow the little heap across the dish. Any fine gold will then be seen lying on the bottom just under the nose of the operator.  Given a good hot summer's day flies as numerous as the supply of water is scanty clouds of dust little or no breeze and the same quantity of gold and a few score of men working within an area of nine or ten acres one is sometimes tempted to think that gold may be bought too dear. But the very lowest depths of despair cannot compare with the heights of satisfaction attained after a successful day's "dry-blowing."  2. By means of two dishes and a tripod stand and pulley.  A tripod twelve or fifteen feet high is set up over a hard and smooth piece of ground. By a rope and a pulley the full dish is hauled up as far as required; the rope is then made fast and a string fixed to the edge of the dish is pulled and the dish tipped up allowing the dirt to fall on to the prepared surface below where it is swept up and treated as in the first method described. [29] With a fair breeze this is a very effectual way of getting rid of the fine dirt.  3. By means of a sieve.  This method is only suitable when the soil is wet and sticky or when the nuggets are fairly large and are not too rare.  On the first rush to Kurnalpi when more alluvial gold was found in a short time than on any other field sieves were almost the only implements used.  A sieve is very useful for prospecting the surface soil being more portable and more rapidly worked than the dishes. A combination of these three methods is found in the Dry-Blowing Machine.  The run extends for a distance of forty-five miles from end to end and has a frontage of a hundred miles to the Darling River. The farthest distance out back is twenty-nine miles.  The homestead known as Winbar is on the river bank twenty-three miles from the upper boundary and consequently about the centre of the frontage.  The shearing-shed is seventeen miles further down the river at the out-station called Campadore within five miles of the lower boundary. At this out-station there is a collection of buildings consisting of overseer's cottage stores and various huts also wool-shed and wool-scouring plant. A brief account of a wool-shed may not prove uninteresting to your readers.  The wool-shed is a building 130 ft. long built of a Colonial pine framework on piles two and a-half feet from the ground and is closed in with galvanized corrugated iron. The floor is of gum boards (two inches) placed one inch apart. [197] At the southern end of the shed a space 40 ft. by 45 ft. is set apart as a sweating-pen. This is where the sheep are kept from exposure to the weather and prior to being put into the shearing-pens. At the northern end of the shed a space 15 ft. by 45 ft. is set apart for the wool-tables and Wool-bins at the former of which five wool sorters stand and divide the fleeces into various classes of wool viz.:. - 1st and 2nd combing; 1st 2nd and 3rd clothing pieces locks and bellies. Of course all these qualities of wool are not found in every fleece some sheet growing combing-wool and others clothing-wool. The low sorts such as bellies pieces and locks are found in every fleece.  Between the sweating-pen and wool-sorters quarters are the shearers. Their portion of the shed is termed the "board" and consists of a space 70 ft. long and 8 ft. wide on the eastern and western sides of the building. Fifteen shearers stand on either side of the board and between them the catching-pens are fixed: These consist of small enclosures about 9 ft. square into which The sheep are put from the sweating-pen. Each pen has a door opening on to the board and two shearers are supplied with sheep from each pen. There is a passage (called a race) in the centre of the building the catching-pens being on either side and a gate opens from each pen into the race; the race is always kept filled with sheep from the sweating-pen and as the catching-pens become empty they are filled from this source.  Machines are used to shear the sheep and it is an interesting sight to see a shed in full work. Most sheds now have machinery and the old system of hand-shearing has almost died out. Mr. E. Arnold the manager informed me that it was nothing more nor less than a stupid prejudice prevented machines from being in use on all stations.   The shearers have a hut built of pine slabs with iron roof to themselves and the shed hands (rouseabouts) have a similar building. The wool scourers also live separately. In all there are about a hundred men employed at the shed during the' shearing and amongst them are some queer characters. One man was named "Silent Billy" and it was a nickname well merited as he did not speak on an average more than twice a day. The shearer's mode of dress is both simple and inexpensive merely a pair of moleskin pants and a merino singlet or flannel. He seldom wears socks or an overshirt. In many instances the shearer works barefooted or he has on shoes made out of a piece of bagging or wool-pack with string for laces. On Sunday the luxury of a pair of boots; and perhaps socks is indulged in and if the shearer is extravagant he may put on a clean shirt and pair of moles. A coat is sometimes noticed and perhaps a necktie on rare occasions.  The daily routine is seldom varied. Work commences at 6 a.m. and lasts until 8 a.m. when an hour is allowed for breakfast. [198] From 9 to 10.20 and then twenty minutes for a smoke after which shearing goes on until noon. At 1 p.m. they resume until 2.20 when there is another twenty minutes for a smoke. They then shear until 4 p.m. and then have twenty minutes for tea; this over they go on until 5.30. Then if the weather is warm enough some go for a swim in the river. At 6 p.m. supper is served. Then yarning commences and at the tale-spinning process shearers are good hands. Perhaps the monotony is broken by someone informing the company the Unionists are unusually active and some have been seen in the vicinity of the premises. Immediately the doors and windows are looked to and the barricades got ready in case of the worst happening. One or two revolvers are inspected. The excitement spreads and by the time the report has reached the far end of the hut it has been added to and the last man informed is told that a large body of armed Unionists are outside thirsting for his blood. Lights are out at 9.30 p.m. when the bulk of the men turn in.  Sunday is devoted to rabbit hunting bird-nesting and fishing with an occasional game at cricket; the shearers however are very poor cricketers.  A public-house is situated within one mile of the shed. It is kept by an elderly widow who has buried three husbands a fact which indicates the quality of the grog kept on the premises. The home-made grog business is a common practice amongst bush publicans owing to there being no proper police supervision. Some queer things occur at these bush shanties and in many of them it is not safe for anyone with money to go into an hotel for if the publican cannot rob the man himself he puts someone on to do it for him.  The following is a fact: One man who had earned nearly £1000 within a few months at rabbiting went to an hotel and called for three drinks - one for himself another for a hanger-on of the publican and a third for the publican. He then produced a cheque for £970 and told the publican to "take it out of that." Of course there was no change on the premises and the cheque had to be sent to the bank and the change obtained by first mail. Whether this was done I cannot say but I know the rabbiter stayed eighteen days at the hotel and went away penniless having transferred his right title and interest to the publican. About £100 would have bought all the grog in the house. This is only one of many instances in which men are robbed by unprincipled ruffians who ought never to have been allowed to keep an hotel.  Life on a station at shearing time is not all pleasure especially in these days when most stations work short handed. The low price of wool makes it necessary to keep expenses down. The musterers who keep the shed going with sheep are the hardest worked men on the station. They are kept busy clay after day from early morning until sunset and sometimes even later. [199] Sundays and week days are all alike nothing but sheep work. It is surprising the amount of work station horses will do when fed upon grass alone.  Occasionally some big tallies are made during shearing. One man's record for one week was 1191 and his total for eleven weeks was 7292. For this he got £72 18s. 5d. Against this was his tucker bill £8 12s. 10d. his comb and cutters cost him £1 10s. 6d. so that he netted £62 15s. 1d. His highest daily total was 212.  Shearers that can shear from 100 to 120 sheep per day are considered the best men to employ. The big tally men set a bad example to the others and cause "running" which means bad shearing. The 200 a-day men are not as a rule first class shearers. No man can shear that number within eight hours properly.  It seems probable that at length the feuds of Labor Electoral Leagues and Trades Unions will be ended by the unity of the Political Labor League. Ever since the historical splitting up of the Parliamentary Labor party in the last Parliament on the issue as to whether Mr. Dibbs was entitled to the same degree of solid support as had been accorded to Sir Henry Parkes the Labor political party has been sundered into two hostile camps. During almost the full period of the Parliament before the one at present sitting the representatives of Labor took opposing sides on the graver issues of politics and accordingly to a very large extent neutralised one another's efforts. The last general election was similarly fought with divided forces and differing aims. In the present Parliament the division remains; true up to the present it has worked no grave harm. Nevertheless it has its great potentiality of mischief for at any crisis of grave moment the workers might find the votes of their "solidarity representatives" cast in opposition to those of their unattached members and the one section thus helping to neutralise the vote of the other. It is indeed time that we had unity; four years of internecine quarrelling should be enough for the most contentious of mortals.  And the strengthening of the Labor political movement could not be more opportune than at present. One of the daily papers recently expressed the opinion that Mr. Reid and his party "have swallowed the Labor party bones and all." [596] The statement is not absolutely untrue; it is only absurdly exaggerated. The present Premier has stolen so many of the planks of the Labor platform to keep his own political raft afloat that the feeling is slowly gaining ground amongst the workers that a separate Labor party is no longer necessary and that all the reforms necessary for the wellbeing of the colony can be obtained from a democratized Free-trade party or an advanced Protectionist organisation. No idea could he more mischievous. The Freetrade party in the present Assembly is not so much progressive because its leaders believe in progress but because the presence of Labor members in the Assembly makes progression the only alternative to political annihilation. Were the Labor party to be abolished tomorrow Mr. Reid and his immediate following would at once lose their zeal for democratic finance and a State Bank and relief for the unemployed. They would relapse into the groove of the good old ancient days when Parkes was consul and when party leaders could see so little in the State needing reformation that they were very chary of attempting to accomplish even a fragment of that little lest in short time Parliament should have absolutely no work to do and then occupation should be gone.  The Labor party and the Labor party alone is responsible for every reform measure passed by the last and present Parliament; it is alone responsible for the fact that so many conservative politicians have executed a "volte-face" discarded their eye-glasses and become democrats; it alone can he devoutly blessed because Sir Henry Parkes is now impotent and unimportant. Every stride of the past few years can be traced to the influence of the Labor members of '91 and of '94 and to the fear of the Labor members of '97. Remove the Labor party and the fear of it from the old politicians and not another inch further will they budge towards reform; their whole energies will be devoted to scudding back on the paths of progress traversed by the past and present legislature.  Seeing then the large importance of strengthening in every possible way the Labor party movement at the present juncture it is matter for congratulation that some prospect of union can be seen ahead. And certainly the proposals of the Political Labor League as so far announced seem reasonable. The objectionable pledge imposed by the raw inexperience the misguided enthusiasm or the crafty selfishness of various Labour League representatives at the '94 conference is to be largely modified and the movement generally given a saner and a less Don Quixotic tone. More important still organised trades-unionism will in future take its proper place in the control of the political movement. The trades-unionist we have always hooked upon as the very backbone of the Labor agitation and the best and safest material for the social-reformer to work upon. The trades-unionist is no will-o'-the-wisp enthusiast. [597] He does not come with his sympathy for Labor at election time and depart with it at Assembling of Parliament time. He is a man who from custom self-interest and settled thought has staked his all on the advancement of Labor and who is therefore most likely to give it loyal service. When the political movement is more trades-unionistic and the trades-union movement more political Labor will be the better advanced.  To the electors of New South Wales. - An election is upon us and again you are called upon to exercise the all-important privilege of selecting and returning to Parliament men who can be relied upon to make laws which are based upon justice and which favor no class. Labor has closed up its ranks united in one political organisation and now appeals to all workers and true democrats to rally for the coming struggle.  You are asked not to be turned aside by the plausible promises or statements of the old parties whose misrule has blighted this otherwise splendid country. The position of the toiling masses to-day is a sufficient proof of the incapacity of the political parties of the past and ample justification for adding to the number of the Labor Party until it is strong enough to take up the work so long neglected and enact laws based on equity and the common good. In the Parliament just ending the Labor Party have sat for the first time in the history of New South Wales as a united body. Through a tempestuous and difficult session in face of perpetual misrepresentation and in spite of the utmost efforts of enemies to sow dissension in our ranks we have preserved our unity unshaken and entire. We stand to-day as strong to the last man as when we entered Parliament. As the result of our presence and our unity the Government of the day have been compelled to do what no Government has done before not merely to pass a large instalment of reform through the Legislative Assembly but also to call upon the people to enforce the acceptance of such reform by the Council.  This Parliament differs from former ones only in the presence of a solid and independent third party. To this cause alone can be attributed the democratic awakening. The absence of the third party would be inevitably followed by a return to the legislative slumbers of the past. Four years ago the Labor Party laid before the workers of this country a platform the two main planks of which were land value taxation and the abolition of the Upper House. Outside their ranks no solitary voice was then raised in favor of either step. To-day the whole country has learnt to support the one measure and the whole country finds itself unable to secure it because it has not yet learnt to support the other. The people have declared with no uncertain sound for the destruction of monopoly in land. Their constitutionally and moderately expressed decision has been flouted by a handful of irresponsible nominees of Dibbs and Parkes. These unrepresentative individuals - largely interested in the abuses which they strive to maintain-have been permitted to usurp the function which should be the privilege of the people alone - that of revising the decision of their representatives through the medium of the referendum. The attitude of the Labor Party on this point as on others is unchanged. The party would never consider an elective Upper House as reform but in the event of being unable to secure its immediate abolition and the substitution of the referendum would be inclined to support any measure curtailing its power and taking from it the power of veto. [598]  We call upon the workers of New South Wales to remember that it is to the exertions of their own representatives that what has already been achieved is due and we appeal to them for undivided and willing support in the great struggle now impending with the last champions of intrigue and oppression. The removal of this bar will at once make it easy for the people's representatives in the Assembly to bring improved conditions to every farmer artisan and other worker. They will then bc able to shift the undue burden of taxation from the workers to the wealthy class strike monopoly at its root and by the establishment of a State Bank help the settlers and other workers with cheap money to build up homes and independence.  The one question before the electors is whether their wishes shall govern the country or not. The hollowness of the old controversy of protection and freetrade is proved if further proof were wanting by the degrading spectacle which we have witnessed this session of the foremost protectionist and the most prominent freetrader joining hands in an unprincipled set amble for office. They sank the "fiscal issue" on that occasion and will do so again in defence of their interests. The workers can and must do the same in defence of theirs.  The other differences which unfortunately divided us at the last election have also been happily reconciled. From the furthest border of New South Wales to the very heart of Sydney the Labor Party now stands without a breach in its ranks or a rent in its organization. It needs only that your energy and unanimity should second ours to secure the continued triumphant progress of the workers' cause.  Yours in the Cause of Humanity  F. Flowers President.  I. Routley General Secretary.  THE JAPANESE INVASION  One of Chas Kingsley's most forcible poems tells how 'the merry brown hares 'came leaping' over a piece of English farm-land - 'Leaping late and early Till under their bite and their tread The swedes and the wheat and the barley Lay cankered and trampled and dead.'  In some such fashion a local poet might describe the Japanese invasion of Australia and its results. The little brown men come leaping over our north-eastern and north-western border by scores and hundreds. Every Yokohama ship brings a few and a few more. And wherever they go the destruction of white industry follows in their train. Sooner or later every Japanese who comes here ousts a white man from a profitable calling. If Australia is to be and remain a white nation the home of white races it is time for the provincial Parliaments to say that the Japanese like the Chinese 'must go' - or at least that their coming be finally stopped. This step must be taken; and every year every week every day that it is deferred the danger and difficulty of taking it increase. The Japanese have hardly yet made good their position. Once let them become entrenched and fortified and no one can guess what it may' cost to shift them.   The question is not to be disposed of by the sneer that Australians are fond 'of a bogey and that the chief-result of the recent war so far as we are concerned has been 'the substitution of a Japanese bogey for the familiar Chinese one. The Chinese invasion was never a bogey: it was a grave danger and it is so still. The younger generation hears with surprise that there was a time when the Chinese in Victoria numbered about 13 per cent. of the adult male population; when 4000 Chinese lay in quarantine on Fitzroy Island (Q.) the Colonial Office's refusal to sanction restrictive legislation having forced the Government of the day to declare the whole Chinese Empire in quarantine! [397] There are still 40000 Chinese in Australia; and in the Northern Territory where they almost monopolise the gold-mining industry there were at the '91 census only 1159 whites to 3392 Chinese. The Japanese danger is not substituted for the Chinese: it is added to it. And the Japanese invasion is the more to be dreaded because the Jap has all the virtues of the Chinaman and more besides because he is supported by a strong alert Government keenly alive to the national advantage keenly sensitive to slights on national honor and because there are obvious commercial advantages to Australia in the budding trade with Japan and some Australian traitors to their country will endeavor to grasp commercial profits at whatever cost of national disaster.  There is one man standing at a Northern outpost of Australian civilization who has had during the last 10 years special opportunities for observing the effects on white industry of the Japanese invasion. Thursday Island is the first port of call on the eastern coast for Asiatic steamers; it is the favorite landing-place of unattached Japanese; it is now a chiefly Japanese settlement. In March '94 there were 720 Japanese to 651 Europeans; and the proportion of Japs. has since increased. JOHN DOUGLAS Q. Government Resident at Thursday Island says in his last-issued report (March 6 '94) - The continuous stream of Japanese immigration if maintained will soon completely change the character of our maritime population. It has had the effect of driving away many of the South Sea Islanders who are the best seamen we have. Wages have dropped from a month to 30s. and they may go down to 20s. This is not an unmixed gain and it seems to be possible that the (pearl-shelling) industry may pass very largely into the hands of aliens. Two years ago there were not 20 boats owned and manned by Japanese. Now there are upwards of 70 and of these 38 are owned by Japanese. This is a matter which merits the serious attention of Parliament. [398]  The hint was plain enough; but Queensland Parliament with its majority employed in propping up their bank took no notice. Q. Ministry indeed was understood to have 'made representations' to the Japanese Government in July last year but nothing came of them except fresh instalments of Japanese immigrants for the sugar-plantations.  Meanwhile the Thursday Island evil has been increasing. Seen last month by a BULLETIN representative Mr. DOUGLAS said: The Japanese now either possess or are working out on credit nearly 100 boats and as things are going it looks as if they will before long own the fisheries altogether. They are slowly but surely winning Thursday Island and what they are doing here they may do elsewhere. They are -hard-working abstemious and clever and they stick to one another closely. They are heaven-born co-operators and in this respect more formidable rivals than the Chinese. In the boats they are all ambitious to become divers. When one man comes up another puts on the dress and goes down and so on. Thus a Japanese boat will sometimes be at work from dawn to dark; at any rate they can and do work longer hours than the ordinary boat in which there is only one diver. Then again those of them who are educated are most indefatigable in studying English. I have a boy in my house just now who works away every evening at his phrase-book with an English and Japanese dictionary. Our local bookseller tells me that the best-educated among them buy useful books grammar and arithmetic books. I took up a book in his shop the other day - 'The Complete Letter-Writer' ('by a member of the aristocracy' if you please!) 'That is' a great favorite with the Japs.' he said; 'I have sold at least a dozen copies to them.' They have their own shops their own boat-building slip and they are trying (they say) to establish a public-house of their own. Altogether they are most assimilative. Here in Thursday Island it will soon be a case of the survival of the fittest; and if they go on as they are doing the Caucasian will be played out. I have really a great respect for the Japanese and have a great admiration for their physical and mental capacity; but if the projected line of steamers between Australia and Japan is going to bring us further heavy contingents to be landed at all our ports I say 'Lookout!'  The men who brought the Japanese divers to Thursday Island bitterly regret it. For the Jap. unlike the Chinaman is not content to be man. He will be master. As Mr. DOUGLAS says he is tireless industrious inventive and - the secret of his success - he knows how to combine. [399] The Japanese community at Thursday Island imports as much as possible from Japan; deals as little as possible with the whites. Jap. helps Jap. sedulously. Every now and again- a white boat-owner is forced out of the competition; his boat is purchased and christened by a Japanese name; there is general Japanese rejoicing. 'We will soon be masters here altogether said one the other day. They have more adaptability than their white rivals and at least as much ability. The representative Jap. at Thursday Island is a University graduate - L.L.B. Down the coast the same characteristics are shown. The sugar labourers look to the time when they will be sugar-farmers - and work for-it. Many already lease or own land; and the others are keenly emulous. It is the same on the western side of Australia - the Jap. divers are gradually supplanting their masters. Westralia too does a flourishing trade in women who come under contract for five years to Japanese brothels. And sex does not alter race-characteristics - white women like men cannot live with their little brown competitors.  All this of course is an old story elsewhere. The pushing restless bearing of the Japs. in Hawaii has earned them the title of 'the English of the Pacific.' Brought in as sugar labourers they now control several plantations. They 'strike' just like a white man and exact the uttermost farthing of possible wages. In California the 10000 Jap. vineyard labourers have brought dismay into the white ranks. What competition is possible with men who are used at home to work gladly for 3d. a day? The Englishman American Australian are expensive animals. They are habituated to luxuries; they waste in a week enough money in food drink and lodging to keep a Japanese family for three months. We are the superior race we say. It may be; but our wants are our masters. The Jap. knows no such master. He develops the maximum of energy with the minimum of expenditure. Where he gets his foot his body follows. And already he is getting footing in Australia. Advertisements for and by Japanese servants are common in the daily papers; there is an agency in Sydney for indenting Japanese labourers in any number desired. What is to be the end of it? [400]  And note this: the Japanese Government is not like that of China an oafish and ostentatious sluggard. It is jealous intelligent aspiring. It is not likely to endure maltreatment of its subjects by a foreign power; more probably it will strenuously insist on their right to rank as equal citizens in any country on earth. When Japanese coolies in Fiji the other day fell sick of an epidemic the Government sent a doctor all the way from Japan to enquire into the circumstances. China would not have done that. Moreover Japan is imbued with a keen spirit of patriotism. When Germany Russia and France insisted on the abrogation of the terms of peace with China and the cessation by Japan of her spoils on the mainland the people were furiously indignant with the Government for giving way. Shrewd observers say it did give way only because it felt its fleet unequal to that of the three allies; And now the Government has ordered another half-dozen ironclads. The Japanese are determined that intruders in Asia shall know that Japan must be reckoned with. -  The Japs. in fact good-humoured though they be have a touchy warlike strain in temperament as easily kindled as that of Frenchmen. They do not hesitate to measure their strength with that of Britain - and one Jap. journal recently referred with contempt to the shopkeeping -country as 'the unwieldy China of the West' and suggested that it would be easily dealt with by the victorious Japanese troops. The ideal of the nation says the competent HENRY Norman is 'Japan for the Japanese' and behind this is the dream of 'Asia for the Asiatics' - a confederacy of Asiatic nations with Japan as arbiter and chief. Realisation is quite possible. No revolution could achieve more marvellous results than- that which transformed feudal Japan into modern Japan in less than 30 years. Japanese manufactures are now outdoing Manchester snatching trade from India. They have the immense advantage of cheap silver. Population is greater than that of the British Islands and nearly as dense. There has already been large immigration. Is Australia also to become a Japanese colony? - - It has received a dextrous invitation. Australian Governments have been asked to notify their wish for inclusion as parties to last year's treaty between Britain and Japan. [401] If they do they agree that the Japanese shall have full liberty to enter travel or reside m any part of Australia. They agree that the Japanese shall have the same rights at law the same liberty of commerce as an Australian citizen. They agree that the Japanese shall not be compelled on any pretext whatever to pay any taxes which natives - do not pay. And one powerful section of the Australian daily press - which has been lately printed on Japanese-made paper - is apparently eager for this treaty to be swallowed The Chambers of Commerce at Adelaide aand Brisbane are considering the question in the interests of trade though Sydney Chamber doubts whether trade may not be too dearly purchased at the price. The Victorian Government has an agent in Japan looking for markets; and it is quite possible that Vic. Parliament may be asked to ratify the treaty. Therefore The BULLETIN has stated the facts as it knows them the risks as it sees them and now makes demand - whether Australians are prepared to sacrifice their birthright for a mess of commercial pottage.  THE MAN FROM SNOWY RIVER   There was movement at the station for the word had passed around  That the colt from old Regret had got away  And had joined the wild bush horses - he was worth a thousand pound  So all the cracks had gathered to the fray.  All the tried and noted riders from the stations near and far  Had mustered at the homestead overnight  For the bushmen love hard riding where the wild bush horses are  And the stock-horse snuffs the battle with delight.  There was Harrison who made his pile when Pardon won the cup  The old man with his hair as white as snow;  But few could ride beside him when his blood was fairly up -  [4] He would go wherever horse and man could go.  And Clancy of the Overflow came down to lend a hand  No better horseman ever held the reins;  For never horse could throw him while the saddle-girths would stand  He learnt to ride while droving on the plains.  And one was there a stripling on a small and weedy beast  He was something like a racehorse undersized  With a touch of Timor pony - three parts thoroughbred at least -  And such as are by mountain horsemen prized.  He was hard and tough and wiry - just the sort that won't say die -  There was courage in his quick impatient tread;  And he bore the badge of gameness in his bright and fiery eye  And the proud and lofty carriage of his head.  But still so slight and weedy one would doubt his power to stay  And the old man said 'That horse will never do  [5] 'For a long and tiring gallop - lad you'd better stop away  'Those hills are far too rough for such as you.'  So he waited sad and wistful - only Clancy stood his friend -  'I think we ought to let him come' he said;  'I warrant he'll be with us when he's wanted at the end  'For both his horse and he are mountain bred.'  'He hails from Snowy River up by Kosciusko's side  'Where the hills are twice as steep and twice as rough  'Where a horse's hoofs strike firelight from the flint stones every stride  'The man that holds his own is good enough.  'And the Snowy River riders on the mountains make their home  'Where the river runs those giant hills between;  'I have seen full many horsemen since I first commenced to roam  'But nowhere yet such horsemen have I seen.'  So he went - they found the horses by the big mimosa clump -  They raced away towards the mountain's brow  [6] And the old man gave his orders 'Boys go at them from the jump  'No use to try for fancy riding now.  'And Clancy you must wheel them try and wheel them to the right.  'Ride boldly lad and never fear the spills  'For never yet was rider that could keep the mob in sight  'If once they gain the shelter of those hills.'  So Clancy rode to wheel them - he was racing on the wing  Where the best and boldest riders take their place  And he raced his stock-horse past them and he made the ranges ring  With the stockwhip as he met them face to face.  Then they halted for a moment while he swung the dreaded lash  But they saw their well-loved mountain full in view  And they charged beneath the stockwhip with a sharp and sudden dash  And off into the mountain scrub they flew.  Then fast the horsemen followed where the gorges deep and black  [7] Resounded to the thunder of their tread  And the stockwhips woke the echoes and they fiercely answered back  From cliffs and crags that beetled overhead.  And upward ever upward the wild horses held their way  Where mountain ash and kurrajong grew wide;  And the old man muttered fiercely 'We may bid the mob good day  'No man can hold them down the other side.'  When they reached the mountain's summit even Clancy took a pull  It well might make the boldest hold their breath  The wild hop scrub grew thickly and the hidden ground was full  Of wombat holes and any slip was death.  But the man from Snowy River let the pony have his head  And he swung his stockwhip round and gave a cheer  And he raced him down the mountain like a torrent down its bed  While the others stood and watched in very fear.  [8] He sent the flint stones flying but the pony kept his feet  He cleared the fallen timber in his stride  And the man from Snowy River never shifted in his seat -  It was grand to see that mountain horseman ride.  Through the stringy barks and saplings on the rough and broken ground  Down the hillside at a racing pace he went;  And he never drew the bridle till he landed safe and sound  At the bottom of that terrible descent.  He was right among the horses as they climbed the further hill  And the watchers on the mountain standing mute  Saw him ply the stockwhip fiercely he was right among them still  As he raced across the clearing in pursuit.  Then they lost him for a moment where two mountain gullies met  In the ranges but a final glimpse reveals  On a dim and distant hillside the wild horses racing yet  With the man from Snowy River at their heels.  [9] And he ran them single-handed till their sides were white with foam.  He followed like a bloodhound on their track  Till they halted cowed and beaten then he turned their heads for home  And alone and unassisted brought them back.  But his hardy mountain pony he could scarcely raise a trot  He was blood from hip to shoulder from the spur;  But his pluck was still undaunted and his courage fiery hot  For never yet was mountain horse a cur.  And down by Kosciusko where the pine-clad ridges raise  Their torn and rugged battlements on high  Where the air is clear as crystal and the white stars fairly blaze  At midnight in the cold and frosty sky  And where around the Overflow the reedbeds sweep and sway  To the breezes and the rolling plains are wide  The man from Snowy River is a household word to-day  And the stockmen tell the story of his ride.     [10] OLD PARDON THE SON OF REPRIEVE   You never heard tell of the story?   Well now I can hardly believe!  Never heard of the honour and glory   Of Pardon the son of Reprieve?  But maybe you're only a Johnnie   And don't know a horse from a hoe?  Well well don't get angry my sonny   But really a young un should know.  They bred him out back on the 'Never'   His mother was Mameluke breed.  To the front - and then stay there - was ever   The root of the Mameluke creed.  He seemed to inherit their wiry   Strong frames - and their pluck to receive -  As hard as a flint and as fiery   Was Pardon the son of Reprieve.  [11] We ran him at many a meeting   At crossing and gully and town  And nothing could give him a beating -   At least when our money was down.  For weight wouldn't stop him nor distance   Nor odds though the others were fast  He'd race with a dogged persistence   And wear them all down at the last.  At the Turon the Yattendon filly   Led by lengths at the mile-and-a-half  And we all began to look silly   While her crowd were starting to laugh;  But the old horse came faster and faster   His pluck told its tale and his strength  He gained on her caught her and passed her   And won it hands-down by a length.  And then we swooped down on Menindie   To run for the President's Cup -  Oh! that's a sweet township - a shindy   To them is board lodging and sup.  Eye-openers they are and their system   Is never to suffer defeat;  [12] It's 'win tie or wrangle' - to best 'em   You must lose 'em or else it's 'dead heat'.  We strolled down the township and found 'em   At drinking and gaming and play;  If sorrows they had why they drowned 'em   And betting was soon under way.  Their horses were good 'uns and fit 'uns   There was plenty of cash in the town;  They backed their own horses like Britons   And Lord! how we rattled it down!  With gladness we thought of the morrow   We counted our wagers with glee  A simile homely to borrow -   'There was plenty of milk in our tea.'  You see we were green; and we never   Had even a thought of foul play  Though we well might have known that the clever   Division would 'put us away'.  Experience 'docet' they tell us   At least so I've frequently heard  But 'dosing' or 'stuffing' those fellows   Were up to each move on the board:  [13] They got to his stall - it is sinful   To think what such villains would do -  And they gave him a regular skinful   Of barley - green barley - to chew.  He munched it all night and we found him   Next morning as full as a hog -  The girths wouldn't nearly meet round him;   He looked like an overfed frog.  We saw we were done like a dinner -   The odds were a thousand to one  Against Pardon turning up winner   'Twas cruel to ask him to run.  We got to the course with our troubles   A crestfallen couple were we;  And we heard the 'books' calling the doubles -   A roar like the surf of the sea;  And over the tumult and louder   Rang 'Any price Pardon I lay!'  Says Jimmy 'The children of Judah   Are out on the warpath to-day.'  [14] Three miles in three heats: - Ah my sonny   The horses in those days were stout  They had to run well to win money;   I don't see such horses about.  Your six-furlong vermin that scamper   Half-a-mile with their feather-weight up;  They wouldn't earn much of their damper   In a race like the President's Cup.  The first heat was soon set a-going;   The Dancer went off to the front;  The Don on his quarters was showing   With Pardon right out of the hunt.  He rolled and he weltered and wallowed -   You'd kick your hat faster I'll bet;  They finished all bunched and he followed   All lathered and dripping with sweat.  But troubles came thicker upon us   For while we were rubbing him dry  The stewards came over to warn us:   'We hear you are running a bye!  If Pardon don't spiel like tarnation   And win the next heat - if he can -  [15] He'll earn a disqualification;   'Just think over that now my man!'  Our money all gone and our credit   Our horse couldn't gallop a yard;  And then people thought that we did it!   It really was terribly hard.  We were objects of mirth and derision   To folk in the lawn and the stand  And the yells of the clever division   Of 'Any price Pardon!' were grand.  We still had a chance for the money   Two heats still remained to be run;  If both fell to us - why my sonny   The clever division were done.  And Pardon was better we reckoned   His sickness was passing away  So he went to the post for the second   And principal heat of the day.  They're off and away with a rattle   Like dogs from the leashes let slip  And right at the back of the battle   He followed them under the whip.  [16] They gained ten good lengths on him quickly   He dropped right away from the pack;  I tell you it made me feel sickly   To see the blue jacket fall back.  Our very last hope had departed -   We thought the old fellow was done  When all of a sudden he started   To go like a shot from a gun.  His chances seemed slight to embolden   Our hearts; but with teeth firmly set  We thought 'Now or never! The old 'un   May reckon with some of 'em yet.'  Then loud rose the war-cry for Pardon;   He swept like the wind down the dip  And over the rise by the garden   The jockey was done with the whip  The field were at sixes and sevens -   The pace at the first had been fast -  And hope seemed to drop from the heavens   For Pardon was coming at last.  And how he did come! It was splendid;   He gained on them yards every bound  [17] Stretching out like a greyhound extended   His girth laid right down on the ground.  A shimmer of silk in the cedars   As into the running they wheeled  And out flashed the whips on the leaders   For Pardon had collared the field.  Then right through the ruck he came sailing -   I knew that the battle was won -  The son of Haphazard was failing   The Yattendon filly was done;  He cut down the Don and the Dancer   He raced clean away from the mare -  He's in front! Catch him now if you can sir!   And up went my hat in the air!  Then loud from the lawn and the garden   Rose offers of 'Ten to one on!'  'Who'll bet on the field? I back Pardon!'   No use; all the money was gone.  He came for the third heat light-hearted   A-jumping and dancing about;  The others were done ere they started   Crestfallen and tired and worn out.  [18] He won it and ran it much faster   Than even the first I believe  Oh he was the daddy the master   Was Pardon the son of Reprieve.  He showed 'em the method to travel -   The boy sat as still as a stone -  They never could see him for gravel;   He came in hard-held and alone.  . . . . .  But he's old - and his eyes are grown hollow;   Like me with my thatch of the snow;  When he dies then I hope I may follow   And go where the racehorses go.  I don't want no harping nor singing -   Such things with my style don't agree;  Where the hoofs of the horses are ringing   There's music sufficient for me.  And surely the thoroughbred horses   Will rise up again and begin  Fresh races on far-away courses   And p'raps they might let me slip in.  [19] It would look rather well the race-card on   'Mongst Cherubs and Seraphs and things  'Angel Harrison's black gelding Pardon   Blue halo white body and wings.'  And if they have racing hereafter   (And who is to say they will not?)  When the cheers and the shouting and laughter   Proclaim that the battle grows hot;  As they come down the racecourse a-steering   He'll rush to the front I believe;  And you'll hear the great multitude cheering   For Pardon the son of Reprieve.     [20] CLANCY OF THE OVERFLOW   I HAD written him a letter which I had for want of better   Knowledge sent to where I met him down the Lachlan years ago  He was shearing when I knew him so I sent the letter to him   Just 'on spec' addressed as follows 'Clancy of The Overflow'.  And an answer came directed in a writing unexpected   (And I think the same was written with a thumb-nail dipped in tar)  'Twas his shearing mate who wrote it and verbatim I will quote it:   'Clancy's gone to Queensland droving and we don't know where he are.'  . . . . .  [21] In my wild erratic fancy visions come to me of Clancy   Gone a-droving 'down the Cooper' where the Western drovers go;  As the stock are slowly stringing Clancy rides behind them singing   For the drover's life has pleasures that the townsfolk never know.  And the bush hath friends to meet him and their kindly voices greet him   In the murmur of the breezes and the river on its bars  And he sees the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended   And at night the wond'rous glory of the everlasting stars.  I am sitting in my dingy little office where a stingy   Ray of sunlight struggles feebly down between the houses tall  And the foetid air and gritty of the dusty dirty city   Through the open window floating spreads its foulness over all  [22] And in place of lowing cattle I can hear the fiendish rattle   Of the tramways and the 'buses making hurry down the street  And the language uninviting of the gutter children fighting   Comes fitfully and faintly through the ceaseless tramp of feet.  And the hurrying people daunt me and their pallid faces haunt me   As they shoulder one another in their rush and nervous haste  With their eager eyes and greedy and their stunted forms and weedy   For townsfolk have no time to grow they have no time to waste.  And I somehow rather fancy that I'd like to change with Clancy   Like to take a turn at droving where the seasons come and go  While he faced the round eternal of the cash-book and the journal -   But I doubt he'd suit the office Clancy of 'The Overflow'.     [23] CONROY'S GAP   This was the way of it don't you know -   Ryan was 'wanted' for stealing sheep  And never a trooper high or low   Could find him - catch a weasel asleep!  Till Trooper Scott from the Stockman's Ford -   A bushman too as I've heard them tell -  Chanced to find him drunk as a lord   Round at the Shadow of Death Hotel.  D'you know the place? It's a wayside inn   A low grog-shanty - a bushman trap  Hiding away in its shame and sin   Under the shelter of Conroy's Gap -  Under the shade of that frowning range   The roughest crowd that ever drew breath -  Thieves and rowdies uncouth and strange   Were mustered round at the Shadow of Death.  [24] The trooper knew that his man would slide   Like a dingo pup if he saw the chance;  And with half a start on the mountain side   Ryan would lead him a merry dance.  Drunk as he was when the trooper came   To him that did not matter a rap -  Drunk or sober he was the same   The boldest rider in Conroy's Gap.  'I want you Ryan' the trooper said   'And listen to me if you dare resist  'So help me heaven I'll shoot you dead!'   He snapped the steel on his prisoner's wrist  And Ryan hearing the handcuffs click   Recovered his wits as they turned to go  For fright will sober a man as quick   As all the drugs that the doctors know.  There was a girl in that rough bar   Went by the name of Kate Carew  Quiet and shy as the bush girls are   But ready-witted and plucky too.  [25] She loved this Ryan or so they say   And passing by while her eyes were dim  With tears she said in a careless way   'The Swagman's round in the stable Jim.'  Spoken too low for the trooper's ear   Why should she care if he heard or not?  Plenty of swagmen far and near   And yet to Ryan it meant a lot.  That was the name of the grandest horse   In all the district from east to west  In every show ring on every course   They always counted the Swagman best.  He was a wonder a raking bay -   One of the grand old Snowdon strain -  One of the sort that could race and stay   With his mighty limbs and his length of rein.  Born and bred on the mountain side   He could race through scrub like a kangaroo  The girl herself on his back might ride   And the Swagman would carry her safely through.  [26] He would travel gaily from daylight's flush   Till after the stars hung out their lamps  There was never his like in the open bush   And never his match on the cattle-camps.  For faster horses might well be found   On racing tracks or a plain's extent  But few if any on broken ground   Could see the way that the Swagman went.  When this girl's father old Jim Carew   Was droving out on the Castlereagh  With Conroy's cattle a wire came through   To say that his wife couldn't live the day.  And he was a hundred miles from home   As flies the crow with never a track  Through plains as pathless as ocean's foam   He mounted straight on the Swagman's back.  He left the camp by the sundown light   And the settlers out on the Marthaguy  Awoke and heard in the dead of night   A single horseman hurrying by.  [27] He crossed the Bogan at Dandaloo   And many a mile of the silent plain  That lonely rider behind him threw   Before they settled to sleep again.  He rode all night and he steered his course   By the shining stars with a bushman's skill  And every time that he pressed his horse   The Swagman answered him gamely still.  He neared his home as the east was bright   The doctor met him outside the town:  'Carew! How far did you come last night?'   'A hundred miles since the sun went down.'  And his wife got round and an oath he passed   So long as he or one of his breed  Could raise a coin though it took their last   The Swagman never should want a feed.  And Kate Carew when her father died   She kept the horse and she kept him well:  The pride of the district far and wide   He lived in style at the bush hotel.  [28] Such was the Swagman; and Ryan knew   Nothing about could pace the crack;  Little he'd care for the man in blue   If once he got on the Swagman's back.  But how to do it? A word let fall   Gave him the hint as the girl passed by;  Nothing but 'Swagman - stable-wall;   'Go to the stable and mind your eye.'  He caught her meaning and quickly turned   To the trooper: 'Reckon you'll gain a stripe  'By arresting me and it's easily earned;   'Let's go to the stable and get my pipe  The Swagman has it.' So off they went   And soon as ever they turned their backs  The girl slipped down on some errand bent  Behind the stable and seized an axe.  The trooper stood at the stable door   While Ryan went in quite cool and slow  And then (the trick had been played before)   The girl outside gave the wall a blow.  [29] Three slabs fell out of the stable wall -   'Twas done 'fore ever the trooper knew -  And Ryan as soon as he saw them fall   Mounted the Swagman and rushed him through.  The trooper heard the hoof-beats ring   In the stable yard and he slammed the gate  But the Swagman rose with a mighty spring   At the fence and the trooper fired too late  As they raced away and his shots flew wide   And Ryan no longer need care a rap  For never a horse that was lapped in hide   Could catch the Swagman in Conroy's Gap.  And that's the story. You want to know   If Ryan came back to his Kate Carew;  Of course he should have as stories go   But the worst of it is this story's true:  And in real life it's a certain rule   Whatever poets and authors say  Of high-toned robbers and all their school   These horsethief fellows aren't built that way.  [30] Come back! Don't hope it - the slinking hound   He sloped across to the Queensland side  And sold the Swagman for fifty pound   And stole the money and more beside.  And took to drink and by some good chance   Was killed - thrown out of a stolen trap.  And that was the end of this small romance   The end of the story of Conroy's Gap.     [31] OUR NEW HORSE   THE boys had come back from the races  All silent and down on their luck;  They'd backed 'em straight out and for places  But never a winner they struck.  They lost their good money on Slogan  And fell most uncommonly flat  When Partner the pride of the Bogan  Was beaten by Aristocrat.  And one said 'I move that instanter  'We sell out our horses and quit  'The brutes ought to win in a canter  'Such trials they do when they're fit.  'The last one they ran was a snorter -  'A gallop to gladden one's heart -  'Two-twelve for a mile and a quarter  'And finished as straight as a dart.  [32] 'And then when I think that they're ready  'To win me a nice little swag  'They are licked like the veriest neddy -  'They're licked from the fall of the flag.  'The mare held her own to the stable  'She died out to nothing at that  'And Partner he never seemed able  'To pace it with Aristocrat.  'And times have been bad and the seasons  'Don't promise to be of the best;  'In short boys there's plenty of reasons  'For giving the racing a rest.  The mare can be kept on the station -  'Her breeding is good as can be -  'But Partner his next destination  'Is rather a trouble to me.  'We can't sell him here for they know him  'As well as the clerk of the course;  'He's raced and won races till blow him  'He's done as a handicap horse.  [33] 'A jady uncertain performer  'They weight him right out of the hunt  'And clap it on warmer and warmer  'Whenever he gets near the front.  'It's no use to paint him or dot him  'Or put any 'fake' on his brand  'For bushmen are smart and they'd spot him  'In any sale-yard in the land.  'The folk about here could all tell him  'Could swear to each separate hair;  'Let us send him to Sydney and sell him  'There's plenty of Jugginses there.  'We'll call him a maiden and treat 'em  'To trials will open their eyes  'We'll run their best horses and beat 'em  'And then won't they think him a prize.  'I pity the fellow that buys him  'He'll find in a very short space  'No matter how highly he tries him  'The beggar won't race in a race.'  . . . . .  Next week under 'Seller and Buyer'  Appeared in the Daily Gazette:  'A racehorse for sale and a flyer;  'Has never been started as yet;  [34] 'A trial will show what his pace is;  'The buyer can get him in light  'And win all the handicap races.  'Apply here before Wednesday night.'  He sold for a hundred and thirty  Because of a gallop he had  One morning with Bluefish and Bertie  And donkey-licked both of 'em bad.  And when the old horse had departed  The life on the station grew tame;  The race-track was dull and deserted  The boys had gone back on the game.  . . . . .  The winter rolled by and the station  Was green with the garland of spring  A spirit of glad exultation  Awoke in each animate thing.  And all the old love the old longing  Broke out in the breasts of the boys  The visions of racing came thronging  With all its delirious joys.  [35] The rushing of floods in their courses  The rattle of rain on the roofs  Recalled the fierce rush of the horses  The thunder of galloping hoofs.  And soon one broke out: 'I can suffer  'No longer the life of a slug  'The man that don't race is a duffer  'Let's have one more run for the mug.'  'Why everything races no matter  Whatever its method may be:  The waterfowl hold a regatta;  The 'possums run heats up a tree;  The emus are constantly sprinting  A handicap out on the plain;  It seems like all nature was hinting  'Tis time to be at it again.  'The cockatoo parrots are talking  Of races to far away lands;  The native companions are walking  A go-as-you-please on the sands;  The little foals gallop for pastime;  The wallabies race down the gap;  [36] Let's try it once more for the last time  Bring out the old jacket and cap.  'And now for a horse; we might try one  Of those that are bred on the place  But I think it better to buy one  A horse that has proved he can race.  Let us send down to Sydney to Skinner  A thorough good judge who can ride  And ask him to buy us a spinner  To clean out the whole countryside.'  They wrote him a letter as follows:  'We want you to buy us a horse;  'He must have the speed to catch swallows  'And stamina with it of course.  'The price ain't a thing that'll grieve us  'It's getting a bad 'un annoys  'The undersigned blokes and believe us  'We're yours to a cinder 'the boys'.'  He answered: 'I've bought you a hummer  'A horse that has never been raced;  'I saw him run over the Drummer  'He held him outclassed and outpaced.  [37] 'His breeding's not known but they state he  'Is born of a thoroughbred strain  'I paid them a hundred and eighty  'And started the horse in the train.'  They met him - alas that these verses  Aren't up to the subject's demands -  Can't set forth their eloquent curses  For Partner was back on their hands.  They went in to meet him in gladness  They opened his box with delight -  A silent procession of sadness  They crept to the station at night.  And life has grown dull on the station  The boys are all silent and slow;  Their work is a daily vexation  And sport is unknown to them now.  Whenever they think how they stranded  They squeal just like guinea-pigs squeal;  They bit their own hook and were landed  With fifty pounds loss on the deal.     [38] AN IDYLL OF DANDALOO   ON Western plains where shade is not   'Neath summer skies of cloudless blue  Where all is dry and all is hot   There stands the town of Dandaloo -  A township where life's total sum  Is sleep diversified with rum.  It's grass-grown streets with dust are deep   'Twere vain endeavour to express  The dreamless silence of its sleep   Its wide expansive drunkenness.  The yearly races mostly drew  A lively crowd to Dandaloo.  There came a sportsman from the East   The eastern land where sportsmen blow  And brought with him a speedy beast -   A speedy beast as horses go.  [39] He came afar in hope to 'do'  The little town of Dandaloo.  Now this was weak of him I wot -   Exceeding weak it seemed to me -  For we in Dandaloo were not   The Jugginses we seemed to be;  In fact we rather thought we knew  Our book by heart in Dandaloo.  We held a meeting at the bar   And met the question fair and square -  'We've stumped the country near and far   'To raise the cash for races here;  'We've got a hundred pounds or two -  'Not half so bad for Dandaloo.  'And now it seems we have to be   'Cleaned out by this here Sydney bloke  'With his imported horse; and he   'Will scoop the pool and leave us broke  'Shall we sit still and make no fuss  'While this chap climbs all over us?'  . . . . .  [40] The races came to Dandaloo   And all the cornstalks from the West  On ev'ry kind of moke and screw   Came forth in all their glory drest.  The stranger's horse as hard as nails  Look'd fit to run for New South Wales.  He won the race by half a length -   Quite half a length it seemed to me -  But Dandaloo with all its strength   Roared out 'Dead heat!' most fervently;  And after hesitation meet  The judge's verdict was 'Dead heat!'  And many men there were could tell   What gave the verdict extra force:  The stewards and the judge as well -   They all had backed the second horse.  For things like this they sometimes do  In larger towns than Dandaloo.  They ran it off; the stranger won   Hands down by near a hundred yards  He smiled to think his troubles done;   But Dandaloo held all the cards.  [41] They went to scale and - cruel fate! -  His jockey turned out under-weight.  Perhaps they'd tampered with the scale!   I cannot tell. I only know  It weighed him out all right. I fail   To paint that Sydney sportsman's woe.  He said the stewards were a crew  Of low-lived thieves in Dandaloo.  He lifted up his voice irate   And swore till all the air was blue;  So then we rose to vindicate   The dignity of Dandaloo.  'Look here' said we 'you must not poke  Such oaths at us poor country folk.'  We rode him softly on a rail   We shied at him in careless glee  Some large tomatoes rank and stale   And eggs of great antiquity -  Their wild unholy fragrance flew  About the town of Dandaloo.  [42] He left the town at break of day   He led his race-horse through the streets  And now he tells the tale they say   To every racing man he meets.  And Sydney sportsmen all eschew  The atmosphere of Dandaloo.     [43] THE GEEBUNG POLO CLUB   IT was somewhere up the country in a land of rock and scrub  That they formed an institution called the Geebung Polo Club.  They were long and wiry natives from the rugged mountain side  And the horse was never saddled that the Geebungs couldn't ride;  But their style of playing polo was irregular and rash -  They had mighty little science but a mighty lot of dash:  And they played on mountain ponies that were muscular and strong  Though their coats were quite unpolished  and their manes and tails were long.  And they used to train those ponies wheeling cattle in the scrub:  They were demons were the members of the Geebung Polo Club.  [44] It was somewhere down the country in a city's smoke and steam  That a polo club existed called 'The Cuff and Collar Team'.  As a social institution 'twas a marvellous success  For the members were distinguished by exclusiveness and dress.  They had natty little ponies that were nice and smooth and sleek  For their cultivated owners only rode 'em once a week.  So they started up the country in pursuit of sport and fame  For they meant to show the Geebungs how they ought to play the game;  And they took their valets with them - just to give their boots a rub  Ere they started operations on the Geebung Polo Club.  Now my readers can imagine how the contest ebbed and flowed  When the Geebung boys got going it was time to clear the road;  And the game was so terrific that ere half the time was gone  [45] A spectator's leg was broken - just from merely looking on.  For they waddied one another till the plain was strewn with dead  While the score was kept so even that they neither got ahead.  And the Cuff and Collar Captain when he tumbled off to die  Was the last surviving player - so the game was called a tie.  Then the Captain of the Geebungs raised him slowly from the ground  Though his wounds were mostly mortal yet he fiercely gazed around;  There was no one to oppose him - all the rest were in a trance  So he scrambled on his pony for his last expiring chance  For he meant to make an effort to get victory to his side;  So he struck at goal - and missed it - then he tumbled off and died.  . . . . .  [46] By the old Campaspe River where the breezes shake the grass  There's a row of little gravestones that the stockmen never pass  For they bear a crude inscription saying 'Stranger drop a tear  For the Cuff and Collar players and the Geebung boys lie here.'  And on misty moonlit evenings while the dingoes howl around  You can see their shadows flitting down that phantom polo ground;  You can hear the loud collisions as the flying players meet  And the rattle of the mallets and the rush of ponies' feet  Till the terrified spectator rides like blazes to the pub -  He's been haunted by the spectres of the Geebung Polo Club.     [47] THE TRAVELLING POST OFFICE   The roving breezes come and go the reed beds sweep and sway  The sleepy river murmurs low and loiters on its way  It is the land of lots o' time along the Castlereagh.  . . . . .  The old man's son had left the farm he found it dull and slow  He drifted to the great North-west where all the rovers go.  'He's gone so long' the old man said 'he's dropped right out of mind  'But if you'd write a line to him I'd take it very kind;  'He's shearing here and fencing there a kind of waif and stray  He's droving now with Conroy's sheep along the Castlereagh.  [48] 'The sheep are travelling for the grass and travelling very slow;  'They may be at Mundooran now or past the Overflow  'Or tramping down the black soil flats across by Waddiwong  'But all those little country towns would send the letter wrong  'The mailman if he's extra tired would pass them in his sleep  'It's safest to address the note to 'Care of Conroy's sheep'  'For five and twenty thousand head can scarcely go astray  'You write to 'Care of Conroy's sheep along the Castlereagh'.'  . . . . .  By rock and ridge and riverside the western mail has gone  Across the great Blue Mountain Range to take that letter on.  A moment on the topmost grade while open fire doors glare  She pauses like a living thing to breathe the mountain air  [49] Then launches down the other side across the plains away  To bear that note to 'Conroy's sheep along the Castlereagh'.  And now by coach and mailman's bag it goes from town to town  And Conroy's Gap and Conroy's Creek have marked it 'further down'.  Beneath a sky of deepest blue where never cloud abides  A speck upon the waste of plain the lonely mailman rides.  Where fierce hot winds have set the pine and myall boughs asweep  He hails the shearers passing by for news of Conroy's sheep.  By big lagoons where wildfowl play and crested pigeons flock  By camp fires where the drovers ride around their restless stock  And past the teamster toiling down to fetch the wool away  My letter chases Conroy's sheep along the Castlereagh.     [50] SALTBUSH BILL   NOW this is the law of the Overland that all in the West obey  A man must cover with travelling sheep a six-mile stage a day;  But this is the law which the drovers make right easily understood  They travel their stage where the grass is bad but they camp where the grass is good;  They camp and they ravage the squatter's grass till never a blade remains  Then they drift away as the white clouds drift on the edge of the saltbush plains  From camp to camp and from run to run they battle it hand to hand  For a blade of grass and the right to pass on the track of the Overland.  [51] For this is the law of the Great Stock Routes 'tis written in white and black -  The man that goes with a travelling mob must keep to a half-mile track;  And the drovers keep to a half-mile track on the runs where the grass is dead  But they spread their sheep on a well-grassed run till they go with a two-mile spread.  So the squatters hurry the drovers on from dawn till the fall of night  And the squatters' dogs and the drovers' dogs get mixed in a deadly fight;  Yet the squatters' men though they hunt the mob are willing the peace to keep  For the drovers learn how to use their hands when they go with the travelling sheep;  But this is the tale of a Jackaroo that came from a foreign strand  And the fight that he fought with Saltbush Bill the King of the Overland.  Now Saltbush Bill was a drover tough as ever the country knew  He had fought his way on the Great Stock Routes from the sea to the big Barcoo;  [52] He could tell when he came to a friendly run that gave him a chance to spread  And he knew where the hungry owners were that hurried his sheep ahead;  He was drifting down in the Eighty drought with a mob that could scarcely creep  (When the kangaroos by the thousands starve it is rough on the travelling sheep)  And he camped one night at the crossing-place on the edge of the Wilga run  'We must manage a feed for them here' he said 'or the half of the mob are done!'  So he spread them out when they left the camp wherever they liked to go  Till he grew aware of a Jackaroo with a station-hand in tow  And they set to work on the straggling sheep and with many a stockwhip crack  They forced them in where the grass was dead in the space of the half-mile track;  So William prayed that the hand of fate might suddenly strike him blue  But he'd get some grass for his starving sheep in the teeth of that Jackaroo.  [53] So he turned and he cursed the Jackaroo he cursed him alive or dead  From the soles of his great unwieldy feet to the crown of his ugly head  With an extra curse on the moke he rode and the cur at his heels that ran  Till the Jackaroo from his horse got down and he went for the drover-man;  With the station-hand for his picker-up though the sheep ran loose the while  They battled it out on the saltbush plain in the regular prize-ring style.  Now the new chum fought for his honour's sake and the pride of the English race  But the drover fought for his daily bread with a smile on his bearded face;  So he shifted ground and he sparred for wind and he made it a lengthy mill  And from time to time as his scouts came in they whispered to Saltbush Bill -  'We have spread the sheep with a two-mile spread and the grass it is something grand  You must stick to him Bill for another round for the pride of the Overland.'  [54] The new chum made it a rushing fight though never a blow got home  Till the sun rode high in the cloudless sky and glared on the brick-red loam  Till the sheep drew in to the shelter-trees and settled them down to rest  Then the drover said he would fight no more and he gave his opponent best.  So the new chum rode to the homestead straight and he told them a story grand  Of the desperate fight that he fought that day with the King of the Overland.  And the tale went home to the Public Schools of the pluck of the English swell  How the drover fought for his very life but blood in the end must tell.  But the travelling sheep and the Wilga sheep were boxed on the Old Man Plain.  'Twas a full week's work ere they drafted out and hunted them off again  With a week's good grass in their wretched hides with a curse and a stockwhip crack  They hunted them off on the road once more to starve on the half-mile track.  [55] And Saltbush Bill on the Overland will many a time recite  How the best day's work that ever he did was the day that he lost the fight.     [56] A MOUNTAIN STATION   I BOUGHT a run a while ago   On country rough and ridgy  Where wallaroos and wombats grow -   The Upper Murrumbidgee.  The grass is rather scant it's true   But this a fair exchange is  The sheep can see a lovely view   By climbing up the ranges.  And 'She-oak Flat''s the station's name   I'm not surprised at that sirs:  The oaks were there before I came   And I supplied the flat sirs.  A man would wonder how it's done   The stock so soon decreases -  They sometimes tumble off the run   And break themselves to pieces.  [57] I've tried to make expenses meet   But wasted all my labours  The sheep the dingoes didn't eat   Were stolen by the neighbours.  They stole my pears - my native pears -   Those thrice-convicted felons  And ravished from me unawares   My crop of paddy-melons.  And sometimes under sunny skies   Without an explanation  The Murrumbidgee used to rise   And overflow the station.  But this was caused (as now I know)   When summer sunshine glowing  Had melted all Kiandra's snow   And set the river going.  And in the news perhaps you read:   'Stock passings. Puckawidgee  'Fat cattle: Seven hundred head   'Swept down the Murrumbidgee;  'Their destination's quite obscure   'But somehow there's a notion  'Unless the river falls they're sure   'To reach the Southern Ocean.'  [58] So after that I'll give it best;   No more with Fate I'll battle.  I'll let the river take the rest   For those were all my cattle.  And with one comprehensive curse   I close my brief narration  And advertise it in my verse -   'For Sale! A Mountain Station.'     [59] BEEN THERE BEFORE   There came a stranger to Walgett town  To Walgett town when the sun was low  And he carried a thirst that was worth a crown  Yet how to quench it he did not know;  But he thought he might take those yokels down  The guileless yokels of Walgett town.  They made him a bet in a private bar  In a private bar when the talk was high  And they bet him some pounds no matter how far  He could pelt a stone yet he could not shy  A stone right over the river so brown  The Darling river at Walgett town.  He knew that the river from bank to bank  Was fifty yards and he smiled a smile  As he trundled down but his hopes they sank  For there wasn't a stone within fifty mile;  For the saltbush plain and the open down  Produce no quarries in Walgett town.  [60] The yokels laughed at his hopes o'erthrown  And he stood awhile like a man in a dream;  Then out of his pocket he fetched a stone  And pelted it over the silent stream -  He had been there before: he had wandered down  On a previous visit to Walgett town.     [61] THE MAN WHO WAS AWAY   THE widow sought the lawyer's room with children three in tow  She told the lawyer man her tale in tones of deepest woe.  Said she 'My husband took to drink for pains in his inside  'And never drew a sober breath from then until he died.  'He never drew a sober breath he died without a will  'And I must sell the bit of land the childer's mouths to fill.  'There's some is grown and gone away but some is childer yet  'And times is very bad indeed - a livin's hard to get.  [62] 'There's Min and Sis and little Chris they stops at home with me  'And Sal has married Greenhide Bill that breaks for Bingeree.  'And Fred is drovin' Conroy's sheep along the Castlereagh  'And Charley's shearin' down the Bland and Peter is away.'  The lawyer wrote the details down in ink of legal blue -  'There's Minnie Susan Christopher they stop at home with you;  'There's Sarah Frederick and Charles I'll write to them to-day  'But what about the other one - the one who is away?  'You'll have to furnish his consent to sell the bit of land.'  The widow shuffled in her seat 'Oh don't you understand?  'I thought a lawyer ought to know - I don't know what to say -  'You'll have to do without him boss for Peter is away.'  [63] But here the little boy spoke up - said he 'We thought you knew;  'He's done six months in Goulburn gaol - he's got six more to do.'  Thus in one comprehensive flash he made it clear as day  The mystery of Peter's life - the man who was away.     [64] THE MAN FROM IRONBARK   It was the man from Ironbark who struck the Sydney town  He wandered over street and park he wandered up and down.  He loitered here he loitered there till he was like to drop  Until at last in sheer despair he sought a barber's shop.  ''Ere! shave my beard and whiskers off I'll be a man of mark  'I'll go and do the Sydney toff up home in Ironbark.'  The barber man was small and flash as barbers mostly are  He wore a strike-your-fancy sash he smoked a huge cigar:  He was a humorist of note and keen at repartee  He laid the odds and kept a 'tote' whatever that may be  [65] And when he saw our friend arrive he whispered 'Here's a lark!  Just watch me catch him all alive this man from Ironbark.'  There were some gilded youths that sat along the barber's wall  Their eyes were dull their heads were flat they had no brains at all;  To them the barber passed the wink his dexter eyelid shut  'I'll make this bloomin' yokel think his bloomin' throat is cut.'  And as he soaped and rubbed it in he made a rude remark:  'I s'pose the flats is pretty green up there in Ironbark.'  A grunt was all reply he got; he shaved the bushman's chin  Then made the water boiling hot and dipped the razor in.  He raised his hand his brow grew black he paused awhile to gloat  [66] Then slashed the red-hot razor-back across his victim's throat;  Upon the newly shaven skin it made a livid mark -  No doubt it fairly took him in - the man from Ironbark.  He fetched a wild up-country yell might wake the dead to hear  And though his throat he knew full well was cut from ear to ear  He struggled gamely to his feet and faced the murd'rous foe:  'You've done for me! you dog I'm beat! one hit before I go!  'I only wish I had a knife you blessed murdering shark!  'But you'll remember all your life the man from Ironbark.'  He lifted up his hairy paw with one tremendous clout  He landed on the barber's jaw and knocked the barber out.  He set to work with tooth and nail he made the place a wreck;  He grabbed the nearest gilded youth and tried to break his neck.  And all the while his throat he held to save his vital spark  And 'Murder! Bloody Murder!' yelled the man from Ironbark.  A peeler man who heard the din came in to see the show;  He tried to run the bushman in but he refused to go.  And when at last the barber spoke and said ''Twas all in fun -  ''Twas just a little harmless joke a trifle overdone.'  'A joke!' he cried 'By George that's fine; a lively sort of lark;  'I'd like to catch that murdering swine some night in Ironbark.'  And now while round the shearing floor the list'ning shearers gape  He tells the story o'er and o'er and brags of his escape.  'Them barber chaps what keeps a tote By George I've had enough  'One tried to cut my bloomin' throat but thank the Lord it's tough.'  [68] And whether he's believed or no there's one thing to remark  That flowing beards are all the go way up in Ironbark.     [69] THE OPEN STEEPLECHASE   I HAD ridden over hurdles up the country once or twice  By the side of Snowy River with a horse they called 'The Ace'.  And we brought him down to Sydney and our rider Jimmy Rice  Got a fall and broke his shoulder so they nabbed me in a trice -  Me that never wore the colours for the Open Steeplechase.  'Make the running' said the trainer 'it's your only chance whatever  'Make it hot from start to finish for the old black horse can stay  'And just think of how they'll take it when they hear on Snowy River  [70] 'That the country boy was plucky and the country horse was clever.  'You must ride for old Monaro and the mountain boys to-day.'  'Are you ready?' said the starter as we held the horses back  All ablazing with impatience with excitement all aglow;  Before us like a ribbon stretched the steeplechasing track  And the sun-rays glistened brightly on the chestnut and the black  As the starter's words came slowly 'Are - you - ready? Go!'  Well I scarcely knew we'd started I was stupid-like with wonder  Till the field closed up beside me and a jump appeared ahead.  And we flew it like a hurdle not a baulk and not a blunder  As we charged it all together and it fairly whistled under  And then some were pulled behind me and a few shot out and led.  [71] So we ran for half the distance and I'm making no pretences  When I tell you I was feeling very nervous-like and queer  For those jockeys rode like demons;  you would think they'd lost their senses  If you saw them rush their horses at those rasping five foot fences -  And in place of making running I was falling to the rear.  Till a chap came racing past me on a horse they called 'The Quiver'  And said he 'My country joker are you going to give it best?  Are you frightened of the fences? does their stoutness make you shiver?  Have they come to breeding cowards by the side of Snowy River?  Are there riders on Monaro? ----' but I never heard the rest.  For I drove the Ace and sent him just as fast as he could pace it  At the big black line of timber stretching fair across the track  [72] And he shot beside the Quiver. 'Now' said I 'my boy we'll race it.  You can come with Snowy River if you're only game to face it  Let us mend the pace a little and we'll see who cries a crack.'  So we raced away together and we left the others standing  And the people cheered and shouted as we settled down to ride  And we clung beside the Quiver. At his taking off and landing  I could see his scarlet nostril and his mighty ribs expanding  And the Ace stretched out in earnest and we held him stride for stride.  But the pace was so terrific that they soon ran out their tether -  They were rolling in their gallop they were fairly blown and beat -  But they both were game as pebbles - neither one would show the feather.  [73] And we rushed them at the fences and they cleared them both together  Nearly every time they clouted but they somehow kept their feet.  Then the last jump rose before us and they faced it game as ever -  We were both at spur and whipcord fetching blood at every bound -  And above the people's cheering and the cries of 'Ace' and 'Quiver'  I could hear the trainer shouting 'One more run for Snowy River.'  Then we struck the jump together and came smashing to the ground.  Well the Quiver ran to blazes but the Ace stood still and waited  Stood and waited like a statue while I scrambled on his back.  There was no one next or near me for the field was fairly slated  So I cantered home a winner with my shoulder dislocated  While the man that rode the Quiver followed limping down the track.  [74] And he shook my hand and told me that in all his days he never  Met a man who rode more gamely and our last set to was prime  And we wired them on Monaro how we chanced to beat the Quiver.  And they sent us back an answer 'Good old sort from Snowy River:  Send us word each race you start in and we'll back you every time.'     [75] THE AMATEUR RIDER   Him going to ride for us! Him - with the pants and the eyeglass and all.  Amateur! don't he just look it - it's twenty to one on a fall.  Boss must be gone off his head to be sending our steeplechase crack  Out over fences like these with an object like that on his back.  Ride! Don't tell me he can ride. With his pants just as loose as balloons  How can he sit on his horse? and his spurs like a pair of harpoons;  Ought to be under the Dog Act he ought and be kept off the course.  Fall! why he'd fall off a cart let alone off a steeplechase horse.  . . . . .  [76] Yessir! the 'orse is all ready - I wish you'd have rode him before;  Nothing like knowing your 'orse sir and this chap's a terror to bore;  Battleaxe always could pull and he rushes his fences like fun -  Stands off his jump twenty feet and then springs like a shot from a gun.  Oh he can jump 'em all right sir you make no mistake 'e's a toff;  Clouts 'em in earnest too sometimes you mind that he don't clout you off -  Don't seem to mind how he hits 'em his shins is as hard as a nail  Sometimes you'll see the fence shake and the splinters fly up from the rail.  All you can do is to hold him and just let him jump as he likes  Give him his head at the fences and hang on like death if he strikes;  Don't let him run himself out - you can lie third or fourth in the race -  Until you clear the stone wall and from that you can put on the pace.  [77] Fell at that wall once he did and it gave him a regular spread  Ever since that time he flies it - he'll stop if you pull at his head  Just let him race - you can trust him - he'll take first-class care he don't fall  And I think that's the lot - but remember He must have his head at the wall.  . . . . .  Well he's down safe as far as the start and he seems to sit on pretty neat  Only his baggified breeches would ruinate anyone's seat -  They're away - here they come - the first fence and he's head over heels for a crown!  Good for the new chum he's over and two of the others are down!  Now for the treble my hearty - By Jove he can ride after all;  Whoop that's your sort - let him fly them! He hasn't much fear of a fall.  [78] Who in the world would have thought it? And aren't they just going a pace?  Little Recruit in the lead there will make it a stoutly-run race.  Lord! But they're racing in earnest - and down goes Recruit on his head  Rolling clean over his boy - it's a miracle if he ain't dead.  Battleaxe Battleaxe yet! By the Lord he's got most of 'em beat -  Ho! did you see how he struck and the swell never moved in his seat?  Second time round and by Jingo! he's holding his lead of 'em well;  Hark to him clouting the timber! It don't seem to trouble the swell.  Now for the wall - let him rush it. A thirty-foot leap I declare -  Never a shift in his seat and he's racing for home like a hare.  What's that that's chasing him - Rataplan - regular demon to stay!  Sit down and ride for your life now! Oh good that's the style - come away!  Rataplan's certain to beat you unless you can give him the slip;  Sit down and rub in the whalebone now - give him the spurs and the whip!  Battleaxe Battleaxe yet - and it's Battleaxe wins for a crown;  Look at him rushing the fences he wants to bring t'other chap down.  Rataplan never will catch him if only he keeps on his pins;  Now! the last fence! and he's over it! Battleaxe Battleaxe wins!  . . . . .  Well sir you rode him just perfect - I knew from the first you could ride.  Some of the chaps said you couldn't an' I says just like this a' one side:  Mark me I says that's a tradesman - the saddle is where he was bred.  Weight! you're all right sir and thank you; and them was the words that I said.   Sir - It was an instruction to me from the Bathurst Federal Convention that a manifesto should be issued to the people of Australasia embodying the results of its deliberations and urging upon Federalists the necessity for an enthusiastic advocacy of a cause which from its very grandeur is too often coldly and respectfully regarded rather than warmly supported. [505] To reach the people of Australasia it is necessary to secure the co-operation of their great press organs; I crave with confidence the favor of your space since the intention of this manifesto is to urge forward the great movement for unity.  With the Hobart Premiers' Conference of 1895 the Federal faith ceased to be followed by politicians alone and came down into the hearts of the people. But from lack of immediate following action the strength of the stimulus given by that conference waned and in November 1896 the advocacy of Federation sorely needed in most of the Colonies at any rate the assistance of popular agitation. That assistance the Bathurst Federal League attempted to give and in the judgement of the impartial attempted successfully. Its deliberations were reported its resolutions criticised by every journal of note in Australasia and the majority of the delegates whom it attracted from six of the seven Colonies departed from it enthusiastic promulgators of the doctrine - "Federation is necessary and immediately necessary."  Apart however from its effects in stimulating interest in the Federal movement it may be I think claimed for the Bathurst Convention that its discussions were of educational value in calling attention to and seeking a remedy for points of difficulty in the Federal Constitution proposed by the Draft Bill of 1891. The gentlemen attending our debates represented the greatest possible variety of interests and included many eminent politicians and financiers. The light of their opinion thrown upon the various clauses of the Draft Federation Bill of 1891 (discussion of which occupied the major portion of the Convention's time) will undoubtedly help to guide those who are entrusted with the consummation of Australian unity.  Two changes in the Draft Bill of 1891 emphasised the opinion of the People's Convention that so far as possible the Government of the new Commonwealth should be kept in the hands of those Who had given practical proof of their devotion to Australian interests. The term of citizenship making a man eligible for election to the Senate was fixed at ten instead of five years and for election to the House of Representatives at five instead of three years While suggesting these changes as safeguards to Australian interests the Convention showed itself fully alive to the importance of the Imperial connection. By an almost unanimous vote a resolution taking the appointment of the Governor General out of the hands of the Queen and providing for his choice by popular ballot was negatived. In many other ways the delegates assembled took care to show their appreciation of the benefits which Australia receives through being under the protecting aegus of the greatest Empire of the world. [506]  Whilst making no concessions to an untimely and ill-advised Republicanism the Convention was actuated by a thoroughly democratic spirit. After a lengthy debate the mode for the appointment of the Senate provided by the 1891 Draft Bill (viz. choice by the various State Parliaments) was disapproved of and an amendment suggested giving to the great hotly of the people the power to elect the Senate.  The financial clauses of the 1891 Draft Bill were altogether remodelled. Perhaps no portion of the work of the great National Convention over which the late Sir Henry Parkes presided was so much criticised as that embodying provisions for the garnering and spending of the Federal revenue. The 1891 Draft Bill provided for the collection by the Federal authority of a revenue far in excess of any possible requirements and for the distribution of the surplus in a manner which may be condemned as unfair. It is admitted by all that to entrust any Government with funds over and above the amount necessary for its expenses is unwise the existence of a large surplus being always liable to cause extravagance and to lead to unjustifiable expenditure. The Bathurst Convention approved of a scheme (for the details of which they were much indebted to Mr. J. T. Walker) by which the Federal revenue and the Federal expenditure would almost exactly balance. Subjected to the criticism of the financial writers of the colonies this scheme has in many quarters found high favour and it is hoped that it will prove of value to the statesmen who will meet in the coming Statutory Convention.  That the basis of Australian Federation should be as large and complete as possible; that it should provide for the creation of a real Australian nation not a mere makeshift Government liable to be vexed and thwarted at every turn - was the emphatic opinion of the Bathurst Convention. Better no Federation at all than a semi-impotent one to which every jarring incident would threaten disruption - that was the spirit actuating its resolutions. The Draft Bill of 1891 was therefore amended in many ways to make Federation more real and complete. The control of the railways a power left in the hands of the State by the National Convention was by the Bathurst body recommended to be vested in the Federal Government. At the same time whilst declaring for the handing over to the central authority of every function necessary for its maintenance as a dignified and complete Power nothing that would trench on the rights of the constituting States was recommended. A worthy and powerful Federation states perfectly autonomous as regards their own affairs - those were the two ideals aimed at. It will rest with the people and with the people's representatives at the Statutory Convention to declare how far those ideals have been realized by the amendments made in the Draft Bill of 1891 by the People's Convention of 1896.  Now having briefly stated the work clone by the Convention especially with respect to the Draft Commonwealth Bill it is my great satisfaction to add that judging from correspondence received from various of the colonies and from other sources the Convention has excited considerable interest and attracted very wide and general attention it has given an impulse to the cause of Australian Federation and stirred numbers previously indifferent to give some thought to the subject. [507] It has helped to enlighten many on the nature of a Federal Constitution and the necessity for Federation who being uninformed were previously unable to take the intelligent interest in the movement they are now inclined to. This has been notably so with young men who have looked to the reports of the Convention for facts and theories and have been moved by it to discuss the subject for themselves.  I may further express the hope that the report of the proceedings of the Convention which has been prepared and will shortly be published will be of service to the members of the Statutory Convention and that the amendments suggested in the Draft Commonwealth Bill by such a popularly representative body as the Bathurst Convention will be of special value to politicians as indicating popular views on the matter.  The interesting papers by specialists and the admirable speeches of those who are recognised experts in the policy of Federation which are printed in full in the volume referred to will be a contribution to the literature of the subject that I am sure will be highly appreciated.  It now remains only to congratulate the promoters and members of the Convention on the success of the work they have done for the good of the great National policy and to urge upon the electors of the Australian colonies that they still further carry on the movement and by their lively interest in the subject and by a judicious selection of the members of the Statutory Convention bring the great ideal of unity to a successful consummation.  THOS. A. MACHATTIE  PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE'S FEDERAL CONVENTION 1896.  Bathurst January 1897.  Australian Tales and Sketches.  Australian Scenery [1]  WHAT is the dominant note of Australian Scenery? That which is the dominant note of Edgar Allan Poe's poetry - Weird Melancholy. A poem like "L'Allegro" could never be written by an Australian. It is too airy too sweet too freshly happy. The Australian mountain forests are funereal secret stern. Their solitude is desolation. They seem to stifle in their black gorges a story of sullen despair. No tender sentiment is nourished in their shade. In other lands the dying year is mourned the falling leaves drop lightly on his bier. In the Australian forests no leaves fall. The savage winds' shout among the rock clefts from the melancholy gums strips of white bark hang and rustle. The very animal life of these frowning hills is either grotesque or ghostly. Great gray kangaroos hop noiselessly over the coarse grass. Flights of white cockatoos stream out shrieking like evil souls. The sun suddenly sinks and the mopokes burst out into horrible peals of semi-human laughter. The natives aver that when night comes from out the bottomless depths of some lagoon the Bunyip rises and in form like a monstrous sea-calf drags his loathsome length from out the ooze. From a corner of the silent forest rises a dismal chant and around a fire dance natives painted like skeletons. All is fear-inspiring and gloomy. No bright fancies are linked with the memories of the mountains. Hopeless explorers have named them out of their sufferings - Mount Misery Mount Dreadful Mount Despair. As when among sylvan scenes in places   "Made green with the running of rivers  And gracious with temperate air"  the soul is soothed and satisfied so placed before the frightful grandeur of these barren hills it drinks in their sentiment of defiant ferocity and is steeped in bitterness.   Australia has rightly been named the Land of the Dawning. Wrapped in the midst of early morning her history looms vague and gigantic. The lonely horseman riding between the moonlight and the day sees vast shadows creeping across the shelterless and silent plains hears strange noises in the primeval forests where flourishes a vegetation long dead in other lands and feels despite his fortune that the trim utilitarian civilisation which bred him shrinks into insignificance beside the contemptuous grandeur of forest and ranges coeval with an age in which European scientists have cradled his own race. [2]  There is a poem in every form of tree or flower but the poetry which lives in the trees and flowers of Australia differs from those of other countries. Europe is the home of knightly song of bright deeds and clear morning thought. Asia sinks beneath the weighty recollections of her past magnificence as the Suttee sinks jewel-burdened upon the corpse of dread grandeur destructive even in its death. America swiftly hurries on her way rapid glittering insatiable even as one of her own giant waterfalls. From the jungles of Africa and the creeper-tangled groves of the Islands of the South arise from the glowing hearts of a thousand flowers heavy and intoxicating odoursthe Upas-poison which dwells in barbaric sensuality. In Australia alone is to be found the Grotesque the Weird the strange scribblings of Nature learning how to write. Some see no beauty in our trees without shade our flowers without perfume our birds who cannot fly and our beasts who have not yet learned to walk on all fours. But the dweller in the wilderness acknowledges the subtle charm of this fantastic land of monstrosities. He becomes familiar with the beauty of loneliness. Whispered to by the myriad tongues of the wilderness he learns the language of the barren and the uncouth and can read the hieroglyphs of haggard gum-trees blown into odd shapes distorted with fierce hot winds or cramped with cold nights when the Southern Cross freezes in a cloudless sky of icy blue. The phantasmagoria of that wild dreamland termed the Bush interprets itself and the Poet of our desolation begins to comprehend why free Esau loved his heritage of desert sand better than all the bountiful richness of Egypt.     Learning "Colonial Experience" [3]   There were three of us Dougald McAlister Jack Thwaites and myself. The place was called in the grandiloquent language of the bush "The Dinkledoodledum Station" (I like these old native names) because it was situated in the Dinkledoodledum Creek. Dinkledoodledum - as any philologist can guess by the sound of it - means the Valley of the Rippling Streamlets; but alas! never a rippling streamlet did our eyes behold during our stay in the inhospitable valley.   The station had just been purchased by Thwaites' brothers - is not his name now synonymous with gold from the Great Glimmera to the Adelaide Desert? - and had been overstocked by its former proprietor. Along the Glimmera banks where jovial but family-burdened Boschman kept his boundary-riding habitation the ground was as bare as a billiard-table and the travelling sheep that called the Great Glimmera their "feeding track" were only too glad to escape beyond the Dinkledoodledum boundary into the pleasant paths of Whistlebinkie. Let it not however be imagined that our station was always in this condition. On the contrary it had been renowned as a place flowing with milk and honey. It was reported that Clibborn had made his fortune out of it; that Wallum had retired to independence and hot grog after twelve months of it; and that Thwaites was in a fair way to do exceedingly well if he could but "hold on" to it.   Unluckily what with the former proprietor's mania for feeding two sheep to every three acres (one sheep to every five acres was about the Dinkledoodledum standard) and a succession of bad seasons the "holding on" was hard work. Economy was absolutely needful and McAlister Jack and I practised it healthily. Mutton and damper all the week and damper and mutton on Sundays was the order of the day and we carried it out to the letter. No epicurean feasts of beef or of pork disgraced the frugality of our board. Never to our table came the feeble fowl or the enervating kitchen-garden vegetable. We had no milk for our dairy cattle were starving; no eggs for our poultry refused to lay; no pumpkin pie for our soil was too poor to grow even that harmless esculent. Yet on Spartan fare we led Spartan lives and were happy.   Oh that bark hut! Never shall I forget the first day when I a slim and somewhat effeminate youth with London smoke not yet cleared from my throat beheld its dilapidated walls. "You will sleep here" said Jack pointing to a skillion which seemed to have been used as a sheep-pen so marked was the "spoor" of those beasts. "With all my heart" said I as that organ sank within me - down down down until I could feel it palpitating in the very tips of my riding-boots. But I did not regret my acquiescence. How many nights in that humble shelter have I listened to the skirr of the wild cats and watched the one bright star that pertinaciously peeped through the chinks of the bark sheets. How many nights have I lighted my lonely pipe and wrestled alone with my own particular angel even as Jacob wrestled at Pennel. Happy Jacob! would I owned thy cunning of wrist and elbow. How many nights have I trimmed the reed in the pannikin of tallow and read the half-dozen books I possessed until I could read no more. How many nights have I slept the unutterably sweet slumber of virtuous weariness until my Jack bursting in with clanking spurs would rouse me with his "All aboard!" Aye old skillion I have had some happy hours in thee; so peace to thy ashes for sooth to say thou art now but fit for burning. [4]  It is proper to boast of the Australian summer. Those who have lived in tents camped by rocky water-holes kept dew-sprinkled watch beneath the yellow moon and ridden through fiery noons hard upon the tails of the head- long herd can with justice boast of the wild intoxication of that burning ether. I have known it I! Not the draught which the great spirit gave to eager Faust maddens so gloriously. Australian summer dost thou say? I am with thee. With open shirt ballooned behind thee with streaming hair and bloody spurs urge urge the straining steed across the level plain! No tree mars the prospect of immensity. In front the flying emu and behind-naught but the whistling air ! The grey grass spins the grey plain reels the cloudless sky glows molten brass above. It comes-the hot wind of the desert ! Bitter-fierce from the sand- hills of the scorching north it sweeps upon thee ! Ride! Ride ! There are fifty miles of grass before thee and the blood of an Emperor's battle steed beats beneath thy saddle-flaps. What are fears griefs loves? Throned upon the rocking saddles of our stretching barbs we laugh at fate. Stand in thy stirrups now and shout! Ha ! ha! Tell me what draught of love or wine compares with this-the champagne nectar of a hot-wind gallop!   But the time to enjoy our hut was in the winter-the wild wet winter that lashed the groaning gums and scoured to white rage the risen river. All the hot summer wooed us to the air. Through parching noons and dewy nights we rode and revelled. Then camped the cattle by the shrinking swamp and the wild horses came down to drink at the famished springs. Then we went expeditions in the balmy moonlight and roused the drowsy township with the clattering echoes of our hurrying hoofs. Then came Harry of the Gap Tom of the Scano and Dare-devil Dick of Mostyn's Folly to "foregather" with us. Then were Homeric days musical with chanted melody and fierce with the recklessness of horse-taming youth. Then were our hearts great within us and in that glowing atmosphere beneath that burning sun our bright blood bounded and we lived!   But in gray chill winter the bark but so long deserted repaid our ingratitude by generous kindness. Creeping all wet and weary with travel splashed with mire and torn by prickly scrub to its friendly shelter it glowed warm welcome its rough but honest sides laughing in the beams of the roaring logs till they were nigh to crack again. How cheery were those evenings. How we ate the ewe mutton and laughed at the mishaps of the day; how we smoked and toasted our toes and "yarned;" three sworn comrades singing the songs of our native Britain to the accompaniment of the whistling Austral wind. [5]  The hut was not commodious. When duly camped within it indeed we had but scant room. When McAlister had flung his lazy length upon the lounging chair (a wool bale stretched upon the racktoothed iron skeleton of some long-forgotten patent) and I had usurped the cane-bottomed American importation there was but one place for Thwaites and that the table top. Thwaites would roost there like some intelligent bird and chant the lays of his native country. We called him the "Little Warbler." Thwaites was a young man of military tendencies. He had belonged in the old country to the Diggleshire Yeomanry Cavalry (who received the thanks of their Lord- Lieutenant and county you may remember for their conduct in the great insurrection of the cider-sellers against the patent bottling process) and in our excursions into the bush he was perpetually waving a brass-headed whip which he affected and with wild cries of "St. George and Diggleshire!" charging the brush fences. Paddy his big-boned horse put him down badly one afternoon and he gave up this method of exhilaration. McAlister who owned that sense of dry humour which is a fungoid growth peculiar to Scotland would artfully excite Thwaites to wrath by the assumption of anti- Hanoverian tendencies and induce in him a violent outburst of loyalty and frequent reference to a lady of whom he habitually spoke as "My gracious sovereign whom God preserve."   While The Billy Boils  An Old Mate Of Your Father's You remember when we hurried home from the old bush school how we were sometimes startled by a bearded apparition who smiled kindly down on us and whom our mother introduced as we raked off our hats as 'An old mate of your father's on the diggings Johnny.' And he would pat our heads and say we were fine boys or girls - as the case may have been - and that we had our father's nose but our mother's eyes or the other way about; and say that the baby was the dead spit of its mother and then add for father's benefit: 'But yet he's like you Tom.' It did seem strange to the children to hear him address the old man by his Christian name considering that the mother always referred to him as 'Father.' She called the old mate Mr. So-and-so and father called him Bill or something to that effect.   Occasionally the old mate would come dressed in the latest city fashion and at other times in a new suit of reach-me-downs and yet again he would turn up in clean white moleskins washed tweed coat Crimean shirt blucher boots soft felt hat with a fresh-looking speckled handkerchief round his neck. [2] But his face was mostly round and brown and jolly his hands were always horny and his beard grey. Sometimes he might have seemed strange and uncouth to us at first but the old man never appeared the least surprised at anything he said or did - they understood each other so well - and we would soon take to this relic of our father's past who would have fruit or lollies for us - strange that he always remembered them - and would surreptitiously slip 'shilluns' into our dirty little hands and tell us stories about the old days 'when me an' yer father was on the diggin's an' you wasn't thought of my boy.'   Sometimes the old mate would stay over Sunday and in the forenoon or after dinner he and father would take a walk amongst the deserted shafts of Sapling Gully or along Quartz Ridge and criticize old ground and talk of past diggers' mistakes and second bottoms and feelers and dips and leads - also outcrops - and absently pick up pieces of quartz and slate rub them on their sleeves look at them in an abstracted manner and drop them again; and they would talk of some old lead they had worked on: 'Hogan's party was here on one side of us Macintosh was here on the other Mac was getting good gold and so was Hogan and now why the blanky blank weren't we on gold?' And the mate would always agree that there was 'gold in them ridges and gullies yet if a man only had the money behind him to git at it.' And then perhaps the guv'nor would show him a spot where he intended to put down a shaft some day - the old man was always thinking of putting down a shaft. And these two old 'Fifty-Niners would mooch round and sit on their heels on the sunny mullock heaps and break clay lumps between their hands and lay plans for the putting down of shafts and smoke till an urchin was sent to 'look for his father and Mr. So-and-so and tell 'em to come to their dinner.' [3]  And again - mostly in the fresh of the morning - they would hang about the fences on the selection and review the live stock: five dusty skeletons of cows a hollow-sided calf or two and one shocking piece of equine scenery - which by the way the old mate always praised. But the selector's heart was not in farming nor on selections - it was far away with the last new rush in West Australia or Queensland or perhaps buried in the worked out ground of Tambaroora Married Man's Creek or Araluen; and by-and-by the memory of some half-forgotten reef or lead or 'Last Chance 'Nil Desperandum' or 'Brown Snake' claim would take their thoughts far back and away from the dusty patch of sods and struggling sprouts called the crop or the few discouraged half-dead slips which comprised the orchard. Then their conversation would be pointed with many Golden Points Baikery Hills Deep Creeks Maitland Bars Specimen Flats and Chinamen's Gullies. And so they'd yarn till the youngster came to tell them that 'Mother sez the breakfus is gettin' cold' and then the old mate would rouse himself and stretch and say 'Well we mustn't keep the missus waitin' Tom!'   And after tea they would sit on a log of the wood-heap or the edge of the verandah - that is in warm weather - and yarn about Ballarat and Bendigo - of the days when we spoke of being 'on' a place oftener than 'at' it: on Ballarat on Gulgong on Lambing Flat on Creswick - and they would use the definite article before the names as 'on The Turon; The Lachlan; The Home Rule; The Canadian Lead.' Then again they'd yarn of old mates such as Tom Brook Jack Henright and poor Martin Ratcliffe - who was killed in his golden hole - and of other men whom they didn't seem to have known much about and who went by the names of 'Adelaide Adolphas' 'Corney George' and other names which might have been more or less applicable. [4]  And sometimes they'd get talking low and mysterious like about 'Th' Eureka Stockade;' and if we didn't understand and asked questions 'what was the Eureka Stockade?' or 'what did they do it for?' father'd say: 'Now run away sonny and don't bother; me and Mr. So-and-so want to talk.' Father had the mark of a hole on his leg which he said he got through a gun accident when a boy and a scar on his side that we saw when he was in swimming with us; he said he got that in an accident in a quartz-crushing machine. Mr. So-and-so had a big scar on the side of his forehead that was caused by a pick accidentally slipping out of a loop in the rope and falling down a shaft where he was working. But how was it they talked low and their eyes brightened up and they didn't look at each other but away over sunset and had to get up and walk about and take a stroll in the cool of the evening when they talked about Eureka?   [5] And again they'd talk lower and more mysterious like and perhaps mother would be passing the wood-heap and catch a word and ask:   'Who was she Tom?'   And Tom - Father - would say:   'Oh you didn't know her Mary; she belonged to a family Bill knew at home.'   And Bill would look solemn till mother had gone and then they would smile a quiet smile and stretch and say 'Ah well!' and start something else.   They had yarns for the fireside too some of those old mates of our father's and one of them would often tell how a girl - a queen of the diggings - was married and had her wedding-ring made out of the gold of that field; and how the diggers weighed their gold with the new wedding-ring for luck - by hanging the ring on the hook of the scales and attaching their chamois-leather gold bags to it (whereupon she boasted that four hundred ounces of the precious metal passed through her wedding-ring); and how they lowered the young bride blindfolded down a golden hole in a big bucket and got her to point out the drive from which the gold came that her ring was made out of. The point of this story seems to have been lost - or else we forgot it - but it was characteristic. Had the girl been lowered down a duffer and asked to point out the way to the gold and had she done so successfully there would have been some sense in it.   And they would talk of King and Maggie Oliver and G. V. Brooke and others and remember how the diggers went five miles out to meet the coach that brought the girl actress and took the horses out and brought her in in triumph and worshipped her and sent her off in glory and threw nuggets into her lap. And how she stood upon the box-seat and tore her sailor hat to pieces and threw the fragments amongst the crowd; and how the diggers fought for the bits and thrust them inside their shirt bosoms; and how she broke down and cried and could in her turn have worshipped those men - loved them every one. They were boys all and gentlemen all. There were college men artists poets musicians journalists - Bohemians all. Men from all the lands and one. They understood art - and poverty was dead. And perhaps the old mate would say slyly but with a sad quiet smile: [6]  'Have you got that bit of straw yet Tom?'   Those old mates had each three pasts behind them. The two they told each other when they became mates and the one they had shared.   And when the visitor had gone by the coach we noticed that the old man would smoke a lot and think as much and take great interest in the fire and be a trifle irritable perhaps.   Those old mates of our father's are getting few and far between and only happen along once in a way to keep the old man's memory fresh as it were. We met one to-day and had a yarn with him and afterwards we got thinking and somehow began to wonder whether those ancient friends of ours were or were not better and kinder to their mates than we of the rising generation are to our fathers; and the doubt is painfully on the wrong side.   [7] Settling on the land the worst bore in Australia just now is the man who raves about getting the people on the land and button-holes you in the street with a little scheme of his own. He generally does not know what he is talking about.   There is in Sydney a man named Tom Hopkins who settled on the land once and sometimes you can get him to talk about it. He did very well at his trade in the city years ago until he began to think that he could do better up-country. Then he arranged with his sweetheart to be true to him and wait whilst he went West and made a home. She drops out of the story at this point.   He selected on a run at Dry Hole Creek and for months awaited the arrival of the Government surveyors to fix his boundaries; but they didn't come and as he had no reason to believe they would turn up within the next ten years he grubbed and fenced at a venture and started farming operations. Does the reader know what grubbing means? Tom does. He found the biggest ugliest and most useless trees on his particular piece of ground; also the greatest number of adamantine stumps. He started without experience or with very little but with plenty of advice from men who knew less about farming than he did. He found a soft place between two roots on one side of the first tree made a narrow irregular hole and burrowed down till he reached a level where the tap-root was somewhat less than four feet in diameter and not quite as hard as flint: then he found that he hadn't room to swing the axe so he heaved out another ton or two of earth - and rested. Next day he sank a shaft on the other side of the gum; and after tea over a pipe it struck him that it would be a good idea to burn the tree out and so use up the logs and lighter rubbish lying round. So he widened the excavation rolled in some logs and set fire to them - with no better result than to scorch the roots. [8]  Tom persevered. He put the trace harness on his horse drew in all the logs within half a mile and piled them on the windward side of that gum; and during the night the fire found a soft place and the tree burnt off about six feet above the surface falling on a squatter's boundary fence and leaving the ugliest kind of stump to occupy the selector's attention; which it did for a week. He waited till the hole cooled and then he went to work with pick shovel and axe: and even now he gets interested in drawings of machinery such as are published in the agricultural weeklies for getting out stumps without graft. He thought he would be able to get some posts and rails out of that tree but found reason to think that a cast-iron column would split sooner - and straighter. He traced some of the surface roots to the other side of the selection and broke most of his trace-chains trying to get them out by horse-power - for they had other roots going down from underneath. He cleared a patch in the course of time and for several seasons he broke more plough-shares than he could pay for. [9]  Meanwhile the squatter was not idle. Tom's tent was robbed several times and his hut burnt down twice. Then he was charged with killing some sheep and a steer on the run and converting them to his own use but got off mainly because there was a difference of opinion between the squatter and the other local J.P. concerning politics and religion.   Tom ploughed and sowed wheat but nothing came up to speak of - the ground was too poor; so he carted stable manure six miles from the nearest town manured the land sowed another crop and prayed for rain. It came. It raised a flood which washed the crop clean off the selection together with several acres of manure and a considerable portion of the original surface soil; and the water brought down enough sand to make a beach and spread it over the field to a depth of six inches. The flood also took half a mile of fencing from along the creek bank and landed it in a bend three miles down on a dummy selection where it was confiscated.   Tom didn't give up - he was energetic. He cleared another piece of ground on the siding and sowed more wheat; it had the rust in it or the smut - and averaged three shillings per bushel. Then he sowed lucerne and oats and bought a few cows: he had an idea of starting a dairy. First the cows' eyes got bad and he sought the advice of a German cockie and acted upon it; he blew powdered alum through paper tubes into the bad eyes and got some of it snorted and butted back into his own. He cured the cows' eyes and got the sandy blight in his own and for a week or so he couldn't tell one end of a cow from the other but sat in a dark corner of the hut and groaned and soaked his glued eyelashes in warm water. Germany stuck to him and nursed him and saw him through. [10]  Then the milkers got bad udders and Tom took his life in his hands whenever he milked them. He got them all right presently - and butter fell to fourpence a pound. He and the aforesaid cockie made arrangements to send their butter to a better market; and then the cows contracted a disease which was known in those parts as 'plooro permoanyer' but generally referred to as 'th'ploorer.'   Again Tom sought advice acting upon which he slit the cows' ears cut their tails half off to bleed them and poured pints of 'pain killer' into them through their nostrils; but they wouldn't make an effort except perhaps to rise and poke the selector when he tried to tempt their appetites with slices of immature pumpkin. They died peacefully and persistently until all were gone save a certain dangerous barren slab-sided luny bovine with white eyes and much agility in jumping fences who was known locally as Queen Elizabeth.   Tom shot Queen Elizabeth and turned his attention to agriculture again. Then his plough horses took bad with something the Teuton called 'der shtranguls.' [11] He submitted them to a course of treatment in accordance with Jacob's advice - and they died. Even then Tom didn't give in - there was grit in that man. He borrowed a broken-down dray horse in return for its keep coupled it with his own old riding hack and started to finish ploughing. The team wasn't a success. Whenever the draught horse's knees gave way and he stumbled forward he jerked the lighter horse back into the plough and something would break. Then Tom would blaspheme till he was refreshed mend up things with wire and bits of clothes-line fill his pockets with stones to throw at the team and start again. Finally he hired a dummy's child to drive the horses. The brat did his best: he tugged at the head of the team prodded it behind heaved rocks at it cut a sapling got up his enthusiasm and wildly whacked the light horse whenever the other showed signs of moving - but he never succeeded in starting both horses at one and the same time. Moreover the youth was cheeky and the selector's temper had been soured: he cursed the boy along with the horses the plough the selection the squatter and Australia. Yes he cursed Australia. The boy cursed back was chastised and immediately went home and brought his father.   Then the dummy's dog tackled the selector's dog and this precipitated things. The dummy would have gone under had his wife not arrived on the scene with the eldest son and the rest of the family. They all fell foul of Tom. The woman was the worst. The selector's dog chawed the other and came to his master's rescue just in time - or Tom Hopkins would never have lived to become the inmate of a lunatic asylum. [12]  Next year there happened to be good grass on Tom's selection and nowhere else and he thought it wouldn't be a bad idea to get a few poor sheep and fatten them up for market: sheep were selling for about seven-and-six pence a dozen at that time. Tom got a hundred or two but the squatter had a man stationed at one side of the selection with dogs to set on the sheep directly they put their noses through the fence (Tom's was not a sheep fence). The dogs chased the sheep across the selection and into the run again on the other side where another man waited ready to pound them.   Tom's dog did his best; but he fell sick while chawing up the fourth capitalistic canine and subsequently died. The dummies had rubbed that cur with poison before starting it across - that was the only way they could get at Tom's dog.   Tom thought that two might play at the game and he tried; but his nephew who happened to be up from the city on a visit was arrested at the instigation of the squatter for alleged sheep-stealing and sentenced to two years' hard; during which time the selector himself got six months for assaulting the squatter with intent to do him grievous bodily harm - which indeed he more than attempted if a broken nose a fractured jaw and the loss of most of the squatter's teeth amounted to anything. The squatter by this time had made peace with the other local Justice and had become his father-in-law.   When Tom came out there was little left for him to live for; but he took a job of fencing got a few pounds together and prepared to settle on the land some more. He got a 'missus' and a few cows during the next year; the missus robbed him and ran away with the dummy and the cows died in the drought or were impounded by the squatter while on their way to water. Then Tom rented an orchard up the creek and a hailstorm destroyed all the fruit. Germany happened to be represented at the time Jacob having sought shelter at Tom's hut on his way home from town. Tom stood leaning against the door post with the hail beating on him through it all. His eyes were very bright and very dry and every breath was a choking sob. Jacob let him stand there and sat inside with a dreamy expression on his hard face thinking of childhood and fatherland perhaps. When it was over he led Tom to a stool and said 'You waits there Tom. I must go home for somedings. You sits there still and waits twenty minutes;' then he got on his horse and rode off muttering to himself: 'Dot man moost gry dot man moost gry.' He was back inside of twenty minutes with a bottle of wine and a cornet under his overcoat. He poured the wine into two pint pots made Tom drink drank himself and then took his cornet stood up at the door and played a German march into the rain after the retreating storm. The hail had passed over his vineyard and he was a ruined man too. Tom did 'gry' and was all right. He was a bit disheartened but he did another job of fencing and was just beginning to think about 'puttin' in a few vines an' fruit trees' when the Government surveyors - whom he'd forgotten all about - had a resurrection and came and surveyed and found that the real selection was located amongst some barren ridges across the creek. Tom reckoned it was lucky he didn't plant the orchard and he set about shifting his home and fences to the new site. But the squatter interfered at this point entered into possession of the farm and all on it and took action against the selector for trespass - laying the damages at £2500. [13] [14]  Tom was admitted to the lunatic asylum at Parramatta next year and the squatter was sent there the following summer having been ruined by the drought the rabbits the banks and a wool-ring. The two became very friendly and had many a sociable argument about the feasibility - or otherwise - of blowing open the floodgates of Heaven in a dry season with dynamite.   Tom was discharged a few years since. He knocks about certain suburbs a good deal. He is seen in daylight seldom and at night mostly in connection with a dray and a lantern. He says his one great regret is that he wasn't found to be of unsound mind before he went up-country.   [15] Enter Mitchell the Western train had just arrived at Redfern railway-station with a lot of ordinary passengers and one swagman.   He was short and stout and bow-legged and freckled and sandy. He had red hair and small twinkling grey eyes and - what often goes with such things - the expression of a born comedian. He was dressed in a ragged well-washed print shirt an old black waistcoat with a calico back a pair of cloudy moleskins patched at the knees and held up by a plaited greenhide belt buckled loosely round his hips a pair of well-worn fuzzy blucher boots and a soft felt hat green with age and with no brim worth mentioning and no crown to speak of. He swung a swag on to the platform shouldered it pulled out a billy and water-bag and then went to a dog-box in the break van.   Five minutes later he appeared on the edge of the cab-platform with an anxious-looking cattle-dog crouching against his legs and one end of the chain in his hand. He eased down the swag against a post turned his face to the city tilted his hat forward and scratched the well-developed back of his head with a little finger. He seemed undecided what track to take. [16]  'Cab sir!'   The swagman turned slowly and regarded cabby with a quiet grin.   'Now do I look as if I want a cab?'   A sweet day lord Thomas de Bohun had been married twice - and more. In fact he was sick and tired of womenkind. And that is why he came out to Australia. He thought a year or two of travel in a savage country free of all the trammels of civilization would give him a rest. Besides the second Lady Thomas had been rather nice to him and she had died pathetically and he missed her. Wherefore he loathed the British matchmaker for the present and was glad to get as far away from her as possible.   He was not a roué and a reprobate such as this introduction might imply. Nothing of the sort. A better-natured or more charming young man - he was on the right side of forty still - was not to be found in London. But he was the son of a duke poor fellow with a great deal of money and no work to do - misfortunes for which the fair-minded reader will make a large allowance.   In the beginning Australia did not quite answer his expectations. Whereas he had imagined a dresssuit to be a thing unknown he found himself obliged to wear one nightly and he was just as ducal in our city clubs and drawing-rooms as he would have been at home - indeed a great deal more so. But as soon as he escaped into the country he was all right. Clad in moleskins and a Crimean shirt with a soft felt hat on his head and big spurs on his heels he galloped about at kangaroo hunts and cattle musters a simple bushman of the bush (while his servant played the gentleman in Melbourne) enjoying health and happiness and the unrivalled charm of novelty to a degree unknown before. Anybody could get him who had no right to get him. The great country houses flattering themselves that they alone could entertain him suitably found it a most difficult matter to drop salt on his elusive tail. [254]  He was at a bush hotel one evening spending a convivial hour with perfect strangers who did not know he was Lord Thomas. Having heard his name was De Bohun they called him Mr. Bone and were quite satisfied with that. So was he. The talk turned upon agricultural machinery as used by English and Australian farmers respectively; and a member of the latter class as Lord Thomas supposed was most anxious to show him a five-furrow plough and various modern implements-American "notions" of the labour-saving kind.   "You come home with me" said the jolly old man "and you shall see 'em working. Now do Mr. Bone. Pot-luck you know but a hearty welcome."   [255] Lord Thomas jumped at the chance for amongst other delightfully novel pursuits he had set himself to the improvement of his mind in these matters as a responsible landlord and potential duke.   "But your family?" he objected. "Would it not inconvenience them to receive a stranger without warning and at so late an hour?"   "Not a bit of it Mr. Bone. There's always a bed ready for anybody that may turn up. Mrs. Kemp will be charmed to see you."   "In that case" said Lord Thomas "I accept with pleasure."   A pair of rough horses in a ramshackle American wagon were brought round and they set forth on a ten-mile voyage through the bush with neither lamps nor moon to steer by. At a long swinging trot never hastening and never loitering the shabby animals did it in an hour without making a false step and were as fresh at the end as at the beginning. The mysterious illimitable gloom and the romantic solitude were very refreshing to the London man and so was his host who was full of merry tales and valuable information. Lord Thomas in short enjoyed his adventure thoroughly.   But he was taken aback by the sight of Mr. Kemp's house. Instead of the shanty of his anticipations he beheld a tall and imposing structure cutting a great block out of the starry midnight sky. A sweet place by daylight - ivied virginia-creepered grape-vined all over its mellow brick walls and decaying verandahs with a great garden and magnificent trees around it. [256]  "Built by my father in the early days" said Mr. Kemp. "The first big house in this district and the only one for nigh twenty years. We've been rich folks in our time Mr. Bone but the ups and downs you know - things ain't what they used to be specially since the Boom. However we've still got a roof over us thank God and a crust to share with a friend."   The family had retired and the guest having been warmed with whisky was escorted to his bedroom by the host. It was a kind of bedroom to make him feel slightly nervous about meeting the hostess next morning. The bed creaked with age and so did the carpetless floor beneath it; but the linen was fine and the pillows soft the handsome old rosewood furniture shone like glass and there was an impalpable air about everything that bespoke the house of a lady.   "I don't know whether you like the windows shut?" said Mr. Kemp hospitably bustling about. "We always keep them open and the blinds up. Nobody to overlook us here you know." He tried to pull down a sash which stuck in the frame but at Lord Thomas's request desisted.   "Leave it as it is" said the guest. "I like them open. It's so Australian!"   [257] And he presently lay down on his lavender-perfumed couch feeling - after his experience of bush inns - that it was the nicest bed he had ever occupied. And that scent of the earth and of the night coming in through open windows how exquisite it was! He blew out his candle-a home-made candle in an old chased silver candlestick-and slept like a baby.   Not for long however. Voices called him through those open windows and before six o'clock he was leaning out of one of them awake and alive as he ad rarely been at such an hour.   What an Arcadian world was this in which he felt like a man new born! Air as clear as crystal and dew shining on shrubs and trees; giant acacias and native white cedars and pink and white oleanders that could have swallowed an ordinary bush house; the morning moon still gleaming like a jewel over the saffron sunrise and the intensely dark-blue hills.   He had heard curlews in the night and frogs at the break of dawn; now the magpies were fluting all over the place cheerful fowls were crowing laughing jackasses shouting "Ha-ha-ha!" and "Hoo-hoooo!" to one another. Delicious sounds. But none acutely audible as the immense silence at the back of them.   "This" said he to himself "is the real bush that we have heard so much about at last."   He looked down from his window and saw the arrows at the ripe grapes now loading the eaves of the verandah; saw a hare limping along the gravelled paths where no hare should be. He looked over the garden hedges to the peaceful fields outside where cows were feeding quietly throwing shadows on the wet grass; flocks of cockatoos were screaming amongst them and sprinkling themselves like white flowers over the fresh-ploughed land; and an army of dusky jays held the vineyard on the hill whence their joyous gabble rose continuously. It was not his property they were destroying and he saw and heard them with delight - those denizens of the wild bush - that was healing him body and soul of the ills of excessive civilization. [258]  The pink dawn spread and glowed quenching the horned moon and dimming the sapphire hues of the distant ranges. Then some white bee boxes gleamed conspicuously to the right of the flower garden - an orderly encampment like tents on a field of battle - and he could see the busy swarms going forth to their day's labour. He could even hear them humming they were in such myriads. And another thing he heard - a faint muffled clatter - which he traced to a little building near the gate of the bees' enclosure; a shed made of reeds with two windows and a door in it - doubtless the honey-house in which some one was early at work. As he listened to the noise within he watched the door which faced his view and presently he saw a girl come out of it. She wore a pink cotton sun-bonnet veiled with a bushman's fly net and an all-embracing tight apron which made her look like the toy figures of a Noah's ark. In each hand she carried a long tin box one heavier than the other by rough loops of fencing wire; and she marched with them down an alley between the bee hives. Mr. Kemp had casually mentioned his daughter who at the time Lord Thomas had not regarded as affecting him in any way. Evidently this was she and the circumstances of the house disposed him to take another view of her. [259]  He saw her put the boxes on the grass and set the lids open then lift the roof from one of the wooden hives. A cloud of angry insects rose to her stooping face and buzzed about her; it made him tingle to see them but she heeded them no more than if they had been motes in the sun-rays that now lighted up her figure so effectively. She puffed something that smoked into the open hive from a sort of little bellows arrangement and then lifted out the frames of comb held them dangling in the air while she brushed black masses of bees off them and placed them edgewise in one of the boxes on the grass until she had quite filled it. Out of the other she took similar frames which she dropped into the emptied chamber and shut down there. Then he saw her labouring towards the honey house with the weighted box and was exasperated to note how it dragged her down. She passed it from hand to hand to ease the strain but could not carry it without a twist of her supple body a staggering gait and pantings that he seemed to hear though of course he could not. [260]  "What a shame!" he inwardly ejaculated. And he withdrew into his room emptied a can of water into a battered old bath and dressed in haste. The clatter in the honey-house which had ceased while she was amongst the bees showing that she worked single-handed began again.   "I wonder" quoth Lord Thomas "what she's doing in there?"   He thought he would go down to see and went stepping softly so as not to disturb the rest of the family who did not seem to rise so early as she. As usual in the bush no locks or bolts impeded him; he turned the handle of the hall door and noiselessly slipped out.   What a morning indeed! Freshly autumnal - for it was the end of March - though the day would be all summer until the sun was low again; cool almost to coldness with an air that washed the lungs and invigorated the heart in a manner to make mere living an ecstasy even to a lord - the air of the spacious untainted bush and of nowhere else in the wide world. He stood a moment on the steps of the verandah to drink it in - to sniff the wholesome odour of gum trees and the richer scent of the perennial orange flower starring the thick green walls of the orchard paths. Then he strolled down one of those perfumed lanes - the one that divided the back garden from the front-and presented himself at the gate of the bee enclosure just as Miss Kemp with one of her tin boxes dashed out of the honey-house and slammed the door behind her disappointing the expectations of a cloud of besieging bees. [261]  She saw him and stopped short evidently taken aback and conscious of her coarse apron and limp sun-bonnet not worn for company. He hesitated for a moment in sympathetic confusion but being immediately aware that the form thus plainly outlined was a charming one as also the pink face in the frame of pink calico stood his ground and modestly accosted her. He lifted his cap gracefully and a bee got under it.   "Good morning - you brute!" was what he said.   "Don't come" she cried in answer waving him back. Then she pulled off a sticky glove and held a bare hand over the gate regardless of bees expressing a polite astonishment at his being up so soon.   "I heard of your arrival Mr. Bone" said she. "I hope you slept well. I hope you like Australia as far as you have seen it."   They chatted conventionally for some minutes. He apologised for his presence and she reassured him on behalf of the family with an easy frankness that seemed to say he was but one of dozens of Mr. Bones flowing in a continuous stream through the house like tramps through a casual ward. And then he begged to be allowed to help her in her work. "I am sure" said he "you must want somebody to carry that heavy box - oh conf----! They know I am a stranger evidently." [262]  "Go away" she laughed. "You have no business here. I don't want help - I am quite used to doing it all - and you'd better go and sit on the verandah where you can be at peace. Or wouldn't you like a stroll round? With a pipe perhaps?"   "Will you show me round?"   "I'm sorry I can't; I must be busy here. The honey is coming in so fast this weather - which may break at any moment-that I can't gather it quickly enough. I get on an average nearly a quarter of a ton per day."   She looked at him with an air of professional pride forgetting her costume; and he looked at her. The closer view showed freckles and a retroussé nose without at all detracting from her charm. He could gaze full into her face without being rude because her eyes were continually following the movements of the bees that buzzed about him. Every now and then her fingers skirmished round his head like a flight of butterflies.   Five minutes more and she was tying a large apron round his waist over a very old coat that did not fit him and he was planting on his aristocratic head an aged straw hat flounced with mosquito netting. In this costume finished off with a pair of good gloves of his own cheerfully sacrificed he was allowed to pass through the gate and take up the box by its handles of fencing-wire. The sun was well above the ranges now and every dewy leaf and blade of grass glittering. [263]  "What a heavenly morning!" he sighed ecstatically.   "Isn't it?" she assented and then fell to work again with an energy interesting to contemplate in a person of her sex and years. She walked between the rows of hives till she came to the one to be operated on; he walked after her inwardly nervous but with an air of utmost valour.   "Now be careful" said she as she seized her little bellows. "Tuck that net into your waistcoat in front and then lift the lid off for me."   He did as she bade him and gasped at the spectacle presented. How all those bees managed to breathe and move let alone work in the space they occupied was more than he could understand. She had no time to explain just now. While he stood rigid and imagined bees under the hems of his trousers - for they were thick in the grass he stood on - she rapidly smoked the hive and drew out the frames of comb heavy with honey brushed thousands of stinging things off them and placed them in the empty tin. From the full one she took the frames filled only with hollow cells which she had brought from the honey house; and these she dropped into the hive amid the masses of bees leaving less than an inch between one wall of comb and another. [264]  "And you make the same wax do again?" he inquired thirsting for knowledge.   "Many times" she replied pleased to inform his ignorance. "That comb will be refilled in about ten days. Put the lid on again please. Gently-don't crush more than you can help. Now ----"   She straightened her back and looked at him.   "Now what?" he inquired eagerly.   "Well if you would you might be filling the other box while I extracted."   But this was rather more than his courage was equal to. He said he was afraid he did not know enough about it yet.   "Very well; we will go and extract the lot we have."   They went to the honey-house together and she quickly shut the door as soon as both were in. He smiled to himself as he saw her do it. The situation to him was - well noticeable; to her it was absolutely without sentimental suggestions. The honeyhouse was the place for work not for play.   It was a stuffy and a sticky place for its little windows as well as the door had to be closed to keep the bees out. Ventilation depended on the loosely-woven canvas lining the reed-thatched walls. Half of the floor was raised above the other half so that the honey from the extractor pouring from the spout upon a fine sieve could flow downwards to the great tank and from that into the tins which conveyed it to market. Five tons' weight of these tins were stacked on the lower floor all filled and soldered up; and many more Miss Kemp stated were stored in the house. [265]  "I used to get sixpence a pound for it" she informed him with an anxious business look in her pretty grey eyes; "but now the stores won't give more than threepence. It really doesn't seem worth while at that price taking railway charges and all do you think it does?"   Lord Thomas did not emphatically.   "So I am going to try exporting. I have the regulation boxes and tins - fifty-six pounds in a tin and two tins in a case - and as soon as I can get my hands free here I shall prepare a consignment for the London market. I do hope that will pay! You are an Englishman Mr. Bone - what is your opinion of the chances of a trade in Australian honey?   With the confidence of utter ignorance Lord Thomas assured her that there was a splendid opening. He knew people - heaps of people - who would snap it up gladly; and proposed to himself to be her purveyor to those people comprising all the De Bohuns and his numerous lady friends.   "Oh I am so thankful to hear you say that!" Miss Kemp ejaculated with a heave of the chest. [266] "You see wool is down and cattle selling for nothing and the value of places like this dropped to less than what they are mortgaged for; therefore something must be done. I've begun with honey so I want to go on with it. I can increase to any extent if I can only get a regular and paying market."   He was oddly touched and more interested and amused than he had ever been in his life to see a pretty girl regarding her destiny from such a point of view. It was something quite out of his experience. She really wanted to work and not to flirt to do something for men instead of being done for by them. And yet there was nothing of the new woman about her. She was sweetly old-fashioned.   For instance it gave her a visible shock to learn in the course of miscellaneous conversation that he had a baby ten months old and had left it behind in England.   "What!" she exclaimed tragically "without either father or mother to look after it?"   "Oh" said he "there are plenty of people to look after it."   "Who will - who could - like its own parents?"   "Well you wouldn't have a fellow travel about the world with a nursery in his train - now would you?"   "I don't know how you can travel under such circumstances."   He thought this very funny. And yet he liked it. Lady Thomas the first had detested children; Lady Thomas the second a mother for a day had shown no feeling for them. This girl's evident concern for his virtual orphan - who as she said might die of croup or convulsions without his knowing it while he idly gadded about like an irresponsible bachelor struck him as very interesting. She asked questions about it in an earnest way and made him feel quite fatherly and serious. He wondered if the poor little brat was really being cared for properly and determined to make strict inquiries by the next mail. [267]  Conversation was not allowed to hinder business. While she talked in this friendly human fashion Miss Kemp worked as he had never seen a lady work before as he had never worked himself since he was born. With a frame of comb in one hand and in the other a big knife kept hot in a tin of water standing on an oil-fed flame she sheared off the capsules from the cells that had been filled and closed leaving those that had bees in them with the rapidity and dexterity of a performing conjuror. Then she dropped the frames into the wheel arrangement inside the extractor and turned the handle violently - no he turned it for her while she prepared more frames full ones for the machine and empty ones for the tin box and cleared up the shreds of wax and so on. She had no regard for attitudes nor for the state of her complexion and it was clearly evident that she valued Lord Thomas for his services and not for himself. He had never been in such a position since he was a fag at school; in relation to a woman never. It chagrined him a little but pleased him much. He determined to remain Mr. Bone for the present. [268]  Called to breakfast he made the acquaintance of just such a hostess as he had expected - a faded woman with a refined face and voice English born and homesick for her own country. He exercised upon her that art of pleasing of which he was a master and she was so charmed with him that she begged him to stay a little not to run away immediately unless bored by the dulness of the place. Her husband abetted her with the unquestioning hospitality of the bush which asks no more of a guest than that he shall know how to behave himself.   "And I'll show you all my improvements" said Mr. Kemp. "A good deal more than you could run through in an hour or two or even in a day."   "Thanks thanks" Lord Thomas murmured. "just at present I am more interested in the honey industry than in anything else. I intend to keep bees myself when I get back and it is a great chance for me to see all the working of the thing as it is done here. Er - er - how clear and beautiful that is!" He looked at a dish containing a square block of honey in the comb neatly removed from the wooden frame it was made in. Letty hastened to pass it to him.   [269] "Isn't it?" she crooned surveying it with a maternal air. "And this is what I get only threepence for in the local market! I can't but think there must be ways of exporting it in sections with careful packing. Don't you think if it could be brought on English breakfast tables in the comb like this there would be a great demand for it? I am sure they haven't honey to surpass our honey."   Lord Thomas was equally sure of it - convinced indeed that benighted England never tasted anything like it in its life. Mrs. Kemp smiled a superior British smile. Mr. Kemp pooh-poohed the fuss his daughter made over comparative trifles. What was honey as a topic of interest for an Englishman anxious to improve his mind compared with ensilage and irrigation and six-furrow ploughs ?   For two precious hours Lord Thomas found himself obliged to attend to these latter subjects with what interest he could muster and he only got away from them so soon by force of misleading insinuations to the effect that bees were his natural hobby and bee-keeping his proposed profession. At eleven o'clock he resumed his sticky apron and gloves his old coat and his veiled old hat with more delight than he had ever taken in clothes before - ridiculous as it seemed even to himself - and rushed to the heated and messy honey-house as he had never rushed to a royal garden party.   Letty's hot face lighted up at sight of him. Beads of perspiration lay like dew under her clear eyes and over her pretty lips but she cared not neither did he. This sort of thing did not spoil the effect as usual. [270]  "Oh how good of you!" she exclaimed. And at once she set him to work. He buckled to with might and main as if his life and hers depended on the amount of honey they could extract in a given time. They had two hours together talking while they worked growing better friends every minute.   "Labour-saving machines" said she still harping on the one string "are splendid I know; but they run away with money when there isn't any money. My plan is just the opposite of father's. It mightn't be such good economy in other circumstances but as things are it is my idea of economy. I don't know what you think."   He told her what he thought and she told him it was beside the point. So it was. So he wanted it to be. Hard as he worked at the handle of the extractor he worked still harder at trying to change the subject. But though she might be led aside a step or two she could not be wholly drawn from it.   It was worse after lunch. She said to him with the firm air of a general directing military manoeuvres "Now you know all that is to be done in the house so you can attend to that while I am changing the frames in the hives. Oh never mind the box; I can carry it quite easily. And we shall get on twice as fast." [271]  He found he had to do it - the uncapping with the hot knife and all the rest of it - while she went back and forth outside. It was a long afternoon and the little shed was stifling. The perspiration poured from his brow and trickled down his neck as he strained every nerve to be ready for her each time she brought the full box in. And his wages were next to nothing.   But at last the sun went down and his long struggle to get the better of his rivals seemed over. They came straggling home in the golden twilight to their well-earned rest and Letty Kemp prepared to follow their example when it was too dark to work any more.   "There" said she with a sigh of utter weariness and satisfaction "we have done well haven't we? I can't tell you how much obliged to you I am Mr. Bone."   Suddenly he felt tired of being Mr. Bone and a casual labourer so he said awkwardly "Er - er - I think you haven't got my name quite correctly. It is De Bohun - Thomas de Bohun."   "Oh I beg pardon" she returned in an airy manner; and he perceived that she was not enlightened. "You know Mr. de Bohun there is a little talk and movement about eucalyptus honey just now. Some chemist people at home have been praising its medicinal properties. And it is everything in these cases to strike while the iron is hot." [272]  "Ye - es" drawled Lord Thomas absent-mindedly. Actually she had been so absorbed in those blessed bees as not to have heard of him in his proper character.   They took off their sticky overalls and returned to the house to prepare for the evening meal. And when Miss Kemp came downstairs washed and brushed in a pale-blue frock a white muslin fichu and a rose Lord Thomas thought her beautiful. Yes in spite of freckles and a turned-up nose. Never had he seen in woman's shape such pure health and such an absence of self-consciousness. Of all the charming novelties surrounding him these were the most charming.   "I suppose she's too busy to notice what a sweet creature she is" he thought as he sat down to the juicy slice of mutton for which he had earned so keen an appetite. And he anticipated with joy the leisure hours he now expected to spend with her undisturbed by bees in the somewhat threadbare drawing-room.   All went thither together at the conclusion of the meal - the comfortable tea-dinner of the bush - Mr. Kemp desiring to talk ploughs and ensilage proposed a smoke. His guest yearning for tobacco aching in every limb declined. Mrs. Kemp sent her daughter to the piano and Letty played - admirably Lord Thomas thought - the intermezzo from Cavalleria and a few things of that sort; and while he tried to listen and to feed his sense of the girl's many-sided excellence his hostess babbled about London as she remembered it and wanted a thousand and one details of the dear city as it was now. During a laborious description of the Thames Embankment Letty rose from the music-stool and softly moved about the room. Her admirer flattered himself that she was listening to him but was shortly undeceived. She vanished at a moment when his face was turned from the door and never came back. [273]  "Does she actually leave me!" he dumbly groaned. "Is she so lost to all the feelings of her sex as to imagine that I won't miss her while I have this old woman to talk to?" It was enough to drive any titled gentleman to extremities.   Soon he was hunting the dim verandahs round and round in search of the fugitive. He explored the passages of the house; he walked about the garden smelling so strongly of orange blossom in the pure night air; and he used bad language under his breath. At last he was drawn to a light shining like a thread of incandescent wire through a certain outhouse door. He lifted the latch and looked in.   There she was. Kneeling on a piece of sacking in the middle of the floor with her blue skirt pinned up round her waist under a large apron and with all the mess of a station workshop and lumber-shed around her she was busily engaged in painting her brand on honey tins. A kerosene lamp shed effective rays on her dainty figure her fair clear skin her shining chestnut hair. In short Lord Thornas stood and looked at her fascinated. Of the thousands of pretty women that he had admired in his time not one had ever appeared to such advantage in the matter of background and grouping. Yet he protested at the sight. [274]  "Oh I say! Haven't you done enough work for one day Miss Kemp? Are you trying to kill yourself?"   She looked up at him with a laugh; and her eyes focussing the light were like stars in the grubby gloom.   "Oh I beg your pardon Mr. de Bohun! I thought as you were talking to mother you would not notice if I slipped away for half an hour."   "Did you?" said Lord Thomas entering and shutting the door behind him.   "I want so badly to get my consignment away next week. And I thought if I painted the tins tonight they would be dry for packing in the morning - "   She continued to dab her black brush upon a slip of perforated zinc but her quick hand became slightly unsteady and she blushed visibly even in that bad light. The fact was that Lord Thomas - not as Lord Thomas but as a man - was a delightful fellow and it was not in nature that a healthy heart-whole girl could spend a long and intimate day with him without being more or less affected in the usual way. [275] As yet her bees were of more consequence than lovers - he was resentfully aware of it - but that did not prevent her feeling hourly more conscious that toil was sweetened by his participation therein. She was pleased that he had found her. She was more pleased when he took the black brush from her asked leave to remove his coat turned up his cuffs and began to paint honey tins himself.   "I am not a very practised hand at this sort of thing" he confessed. "You must tell me if I don't do it right."   "You are quite as practised at that as I am at looking on while others do my work" she replied.   "So I suppose" he rejoined thoughtfully.   They had a happy hour unmolested by the parents who never supposed that their practical Letty could lend herself to foolishness. Lord Thomas painted all the tins successfully. He could not well go wrong while she held the lettered label straight. Their two heads were within an inch of touching as they bent over their job; a handkerchief might have covered their four hands while the branding was in process. They looked at each other's fingers continually.   "Mine" said Letty "are quite rough compared with yours I don't think I ever saw such beautiful nails. It's my belief you never did a stroke of work in your life until you came here."   [276] "Well" said Lord Thomas colouring a little "I am afraid I haven't done much. You make me awfully ashamed of myself Miss Kemp."   They fell into serious talk at this stage - the first serious talk Lord Thomas had ever had with a young lady all his experiences notwithstanding.   "I wish" he abruptly remarked "you'd teach me to be as useful as you are." There was much feeling in his voice.   She seemed to think the matter over. Then she asked him when he intended to return home. He said he was not sure.   "Soon I suppose?"   "Oh I suppose so."   "You must go soon" she urged. "You must for the sake of that poor baby left to the tender mercies of hired people."   "Well" he said "I will."   "Then you will have an opportunity to be very very useful. You can look after my honey for me in London - oh!"   He flung the paint-brush into the pot.   "I suppose it is useless" he exclaimed through grinding teeth "to expect you to care a straw for anything except honey and bees!"   There were but two courses open to a self-respecting man titled or otherwise - to make her do it or die in the attempt.   [277] She is Her Grace the Duchess now. And an excellent duchess into the bargain. The smart folks laugh at her for not "knowing her way about" but the duke does not. He thoroughly realizes that she knows it better than they do. When as a surprise present to her he established a magnificent apiary in the castle grounds and then found she did not care for it he was a little disappointed; but he soon woke to the fact that bees had been merely the make-shift of circumstance until worthier objects for the exercise of her splendid abilities were provided. With great households to administer and young dukes to rear - not to speak of a thousand matters of more public moment - she advisedly transferred her interest in honey to the wives of her husband's tenants.   "But they will never make honey like mine" she says shaking her coroneted head. "It wants the taste of the eucalyptus in it."   KIRKHAM'S FIND  CHAPTER I. "LIFE IS SO DULL"   "It is not for man to rest in absolute contentment. He is born to hopes and aspirations as the sparks fly upwards unless he has brutified his nature and quenched the spirit of immortality which is his portion." SOUTHEY.   "Nancy!"   "Well!"   "What's the good of sitting there saying 'well' when you know I want you?"   A pretty girl with golden brown hair and laughing blue eyes closed her book and rising leisurely from the log on which she had been seated crossed the orchard and joined her sister under the apple tree.   "What do you want?"   "Those hives are just full of honey don't you think I might take some?"   "I'm sure I don't know. I thought the book said bees ought to have enough left to feed them through the winter."   "But it's only November. There are six months till the winter."   "And how are you going to take the honey?"   "Smoke the bees or something. That wretched book only tells about frame hives. Where am I go to get money for frame hives?"   "Oh! gin cases do well enough I think" said Nancy cheerfully. "If you don't like them you can sell honey and buy others."   "That's just it I want to know how I'm to get the honey and then when I've got it I want to know how I'm to sell it."   [2] Phoebe Marsden was taller than her sister and so said the little world of brothers and sisters not nearly so pretty in fact not pretty at all. She was older too more than two years older almost twenty-four and the eldest of the family. The younger ones looked on her as quite an old maid and she herself felt her life as far as any happiness or pleasure to herself went was nearly over. She was nearly a quarter of a century old a great age so said her world for a single woman and she was inclined to think the world had no use for her.   "Mother will buy it from you. You know she said she would."   "Yes I know. Poor mother" and Phoebe laughed scornfully. "She'll give me about a penny a pound and pay me when she has the money. It'll come dribbling in and I'll feel myself a brute for taking it especially after the boys have eaten all the honey."   Nancy was a little afraid of the bees but she saw Phoebe had a discontented fit on and settling herself down on the grass at full length prepared to listen and if possible console.   "It's about that I'm afraid. I told you before Phoebe it isn't the least good in the world trying to do anything for yourself. Why can't you let things alone like me?"   "Because - because" there was almost a sob in the elder girl's voice "what on earth is to become of us? It seems to me we get poorer and poorer father gets less and less to do and the family expenses get heavier and heavier. Just look at those boys growing up."   "I do look" said Nancy "with sorrow."   "Not a penny have I had this month."   "Nor me. Look at those becoming shoes. Don't they look sweet" and she drew her petticoats up and looked down at her feet. Whether they were pretty feet or not and matched the rest of their dainty owner it was impossible to say for those shoes were in the last stage of decrepitude the leather showed wrinkled and cracked through the blacking and there was a deplorable split close to the toe of the left foot. Nancy looked at them a little dolefully.   "Somebody will have to buy me a pair of new ones. Talk about 'travelling on your uppers'! And mother will sigh and look as distressed as if the bottom had fallen out of the world and as for father - well it's no good; I'd rather go barefoot than face father. He makes me feel as if I hadn't a right to exist at all."   [3] "I don't think we have" sighed the elder girl. "How can you take it so coolly Nanny?"   "What is the good of worry worry worry? Phoebe you're just as bad as mother. It's the loveliest day - just look at the sunshine. I've actually hit on a book I haven't read more than once before. I don't think there's anything particular to do or if there is father isn't here to reprove me for idleness so I'm just going to loaf and enjoy myself."   "How can you? I wish I could. Do you really feel happy Nancy?" and her elder sister looked down on her wistfully.   "Happy?" Nancy lay back on the grass and pillowing her head on her arms looked up at the patches of bright blue sky which peeped through the branches of the apple tree - "happy? Why of course I do. Don't you?"   "No" sighed the elder "no never."   "You're older than me I suppose" said Nancy vainly trying to find some reason for this uncomfortable state of affairs.   "I've always been old I think" said her sister. "When I was quite a little girl I was always too old to do the nice things the rest of you did and if you did anything wrong I got scolded because I was the eldest and ought to have looked after you better or exerted a better influence or something of that sort. Oh dear! it's a mistake to be the eldest."   "I don't know I believe I'd have been contented enough even if I had been in that unhappy position."   "I believe you would. How is it Nancy you always manage to be cheerful while I - well I - "   "You are not - no indeed you're not. You're very much the other way just now."   Phoebe cast another mournful glance at the gin cases that did duty as hives then slipped down on to the grass beside her sister. She did not lie down though - there was nothing indolent about Phoebe.   "There seems nothing in the world to look forward to."   "Don't look forward then. I'm sure it's very nice here."   "When father comes home tonight he's sure to be depressed; we shall be told that he hasn't earned five pounds this week and if this goes on - "   "Oh Phoebe don't bother! What do you listen for if it makes you feel bad?"   "I listen of course - I must. I know there's a certain amount of truth in it. So do you. His business is falling off; [4] there are so many younger men coming on and really I don't know that there is room in Ballarat for so many stock and station agents."   "Oh it will all come right in the end. Things always do."   "You always say that Nancy but what will we do if they don't? / Nancy laughed.   "Oh! all men rub along somehow. Where's the good of worrying? You'll spoil your beauty."   "I haven't got any."   Candidly speaking Nancy did not think her sister had. She did not admire her face herself but she did not want to hurt her feelings so she laughed gently and said -   "What a goose you are to believe all the boys say! I believe you think yourself quite hideous."   Phoebe nodded her head and blinked her eyes in a vain attempt to keep the tears back. It is cruelly hard on a young woman to have to acknowledge to herself that she is ugly.   Beside Nancy's sparkling eyes and fresh complexion her sister's pale face looked sallow; her dark hair though abundant was dull in hue; her heavy brown eyes were too deep-set and her whole face wore a sad and discontented air which alone would have spoiled far greater beauty than she possessed. Her figure was good and she was tall and had she had but that place in the world which she was always longing for there would have been many to call the eldest Miss Marsden a handsome woman. But at home father mother sisters brothers all considered and frankly said she was plain - hopelessly plain said her mother who could not conceive of a good-looking woman over five feet five which necessarily meant large hands and feet.   When Phoebe was eighteen she had already fixed her fate in her mind.   "She will be an old maid" she told her only sister plaintively. Mrs Marsden was a woman who must confide in somebody her husband for choice; but as she said there were some things one could not tell a man he would not understand and so she overflowed to her sister on the rare occasions on which they met. "She'll never marry. I don't see that I can do anything with Phoebe."   "I believe some men might call her handsome" said Mrs Carrington thoughtfully "if she were well dressed."   And that was the only commendation poor Phoebe had ever received and even that she had never heard and Mrs Carrington was away in England now and had forgotten all about her. [5]  The family thought Phoebe plain and she was plain; it was almost cause and effect. How could she be good-looking in the face of such adverse opinions? Besides even her aunt had said "if she were well dressed" and she was never well dressed and never likely to be.   Nancy had more than a suspicion of Phoebe's struggle with her tears and suddenly lifting up her head rolled herself into her sister's lap and put a caressing arm round her waist.   "Phoebe you old silly I don't think you are ugly."   "I - I - Nancy it isn't that. I know I'm ugly but I don't believe I'd mind so much if I was a man."   "A man! Phoebe!"   "Or could earn a decent living for myself. It's the same thing isn't it?"   "But how could you earn your own living? It's silly to talk like that."   Phoebe looked down at the pretty face on her knee and wound her fingers through the sunny curls with a sigh.   "We can't live on for ever like this you know. Father and mother will die some day."   "Phoebe!"   "Well they will. Mother is forty-six and father is over fifty."   "Oh Phoebe!"   Nancy was shocked. Such conversation seemed to her brutal. The two girls somehow though they had had the same training could not help looking at life from diametrically opposite points of view.   "Yes I know you are shocked" went on the elder now thoroughly worked up and bent on expounding her ideas even though it was to no purpose "but suppose father did die what would become of us all?"   "It is cruel to talk about such things!"   "It would be still more cruel if they happened which I hope they won't; but still suppose they do? Stanley couldn't keep us and won't be able to keep himself for a good many years to come."   "Oh Stanley will get married as soon as ever he can afford to" said Nancy. Stanley came between the two girls and was in his second-year laws an authority to all the household on the ways of the world for did he not live in Melbourne and had he not for his allowance more money in one year than the girls had in four? Phoebe felt a little bitter towards her eldest brother. If he from his position outside the home circle with his supposed knowledge of the world had had a good word to say for her had given her one word of praise her position among her younger brothers and sisters would have been materially improved; but he did no such thing. She did not happen to come up to his ideal of physical beauty so he uncompromisingly pronounced her ugly; she had views on various subjects and had expressed her disapproval of his noble self very freely when he missed his second year - and he posed as one who should be admired - therefore he revenged himself as he had the power to do. [6]  He explained to his mother that his eldest sister was just the sort old maids are made of. Fancy a fellow marrying a girl like that plain as a pikestaff and gives herself airs - faugh! Nancy in his opinion was all right some fellow was sure to come along and marry her but Phoebe -   All of which had filtered through not only to the girls themselves but to the rest of the family and Phoebe's happiness was not increased thereby; and even though she admitted the truth of the unkind speech she did not love the brother who had made that speech the more for it.   "Well Stanley might manage to keep himself but what would become of mother and the rest of us?"   "What nonsense you do talk!" said Nancy settling herself more comfortably on her sister's lap. "Father isn't going to die until he's quite old - when we are all grown up."   "Even then - " began Phoebe but her sister cut her short.   "Then the boys will all be earning their own livings and we will be all married."   "You may - I suppose you will - and so will Nellie; but what's to become of Lydia and me?"   "You'll get married too."   "The boys say I won't" said Phoebe gloomily "and they say Lydia is just like me. Poor little Lyd!"   "Oh! what is the good of minding what the boys say? Of course you will get married!"   "Who can I marry?" asked the elder. "No one ever cared about me no one ever does care for me. The few men we know all like talking to you and never take any notice of me."   "We don't know any worth troubling our heads about."   [7] "There I told you so!" with gloomy triumph. "If we don't know any men how are we to marry them?"   "Oh I don't know. Husbands come down the chimney for good girls you know."   "It's not fair! it's not fair!" burst out Phoebe passionately; and she pushed her sister aside and rising to her feet began pacing up and down under the apple tree. "A woman's just a useless thing to sit still and do nothing but look pretty until some man comes along and says 'I think you're rather good-looking it pleases my majesty to marry you.'"   "Don't you be afraid" a mocking man's voice came from behind "there's no fear of any one accusing you of looking pretty and still less of any fellow asking you to marry him."   "Stanley!"   Phoebe turned quickly with flushed face and glowing dark eyes and for just that moment her brother thought that that face gave the lie to his words but he did not acknowledge it even to himself.   "You needn't trouble your head my dear" he said with brotherly candour "no one's at all likely to marry you. You are just cut out for the old maid of the family."   "That's just exactly what I've been saying." It wasn't but under the circumstances strict accuracy could hardly be expected. "And as I'm to be an old maid I don't want to live a life like this always. I might as well have a little money or something to do in the world."   "Something to do in the world - bah! It's enough to make a fellow sick to hear a girl talk like that. You're as bad as the awful females at the shop."   "Some of those awful females as you call them" said Phoebe mockingly "have left you far and away behind. Look at Miss Wilson a full-blown B.A. and you only in your second year!"   "Miss Wilson be hanged! What does a girl have to do but grind?"   "I wish - "   "Oh yes I know you. But let me tell you all the decent fellows think like I do and all the decent people too. Do you ever see a girl from good society up at the University? No of course you don't. Decent girls have more sense. I know the sorts of girls I like and there are lots and lots of chaps like me."   "Come then" said Nancy from her lowly position on the grass "tell us what she is like." For Phoebe as usual in an encounter with her brother was silenced by his scornful insinuations - insinuations which at the bottom of her heart she believed to be true: that she being so much less attractive than the majority of girls had no right to judge the world of women from her point of view. [8]  "Well a girl ought to stick at home. She oughtn't to bother her head about Latin and Greek. Who wants his wife to know anything about mathematics? My wife's going to dance beautifully and she must play and sing and she might paint a bit - just enough to decorate the drawing-room. And then if she can cook a bit and sew a little that's all I want."   "Moderate certainly."   "She'll have to be pretty of course. Ugly women ought to be shut up or smothered or something. Blest if I see what use they are."   "What about ugly men?"   "Oh a man don't matter; but I say you girls are you aware that I've come all the way from Melbourne driven out the seven miles from Ballarat and I'm as hungry as a hunter."   "Are you really?" asked Nancy laughing. "I suppose you didn't bring that perfect girl along with you to wait on you?"   "Don't be a fool Nancy! I never said you were ugly" - and the slight emphasis on the "you" did not escape the elder girl's notice - "I only said - and all fellows decent fellows with any sense think like me - that all this talk about higher education for women is all bunkum. No fellow likes a learned wife. Let the women stick at home and mind their houses. A nice girl's pretty sure to get married in the end; what does she want spoiling herself earning her own living?"   "I was thinking about the girls who aren't nice" began Phoebe.   "Hang the girls who aren't nice!"   "By all means if you can do it" said Phoebe politely sarcastic. "But I do believe there are some girls in the world who don't want to be only a reflection of a man. Wasn't the world made for women as well as men?"   But he could not understand her. He was not a bad fellow at bottom he meant kindly enough but he was young and egotistical and he was most firmly imbued with the idea that the world was most certainly made for men and women should only look on it through men's eyes. Besides his eldest sister irritated him. She was hopelessly plain in his opinion she ought to accept that fact and sink quietly into the background. It was hard enough on him he thought to have a plain old maiden sister without her asserting herself and even by inference lecturing him who if he was not good in the schools was certainly one of the best athletes at the Melbourne University. [9]  "I wish you wouldn't talk such infernal rot" he said "I'm sick of it! You are only talking about things you don't understand in the least."   "It is my life" thought Phoebe but she did not put her thoughts into words. He would not have understood. It was a woman's business to sit still and look pretty and wait what Fate would bring her. If the future were good to her then she should have praise and petting in plenty; but if it were not then she should be treated as if it were her own fault. But practically she could do nothing to alter her life. The thought weighed heavily on her this bright summer afternoon and took the sunshine out of the day for her.   "Well" - Stanley felt he had wasted quite enough time over a sister even if she were a pretty one - "well isn't one of you girls going to get a fellow something to eat?"   "Phoebe will I daresay" said Nancy lazily; "she's just burning to show her usefulness in the world."   "Well here's a chance for her" said her brother and Phoebe flashed round angrily. He thought her ugly he thought ugly girls ought to be put out of the way he wounded her without the slightest thought - why then should she wait on him? Angry words rose to her lips and died away there. What was the good of quarrelling? He didn't understand not one of her little world understood her. She supposed there must be something radically wrong in her composition evidently she was not like other girls. If Nancy would not get Stanley something to eat she must and she went into the house with as good a grace as possible which after all was not very good and made him tell his mother that evening that Phoebe was more unbearably old-maidish than ever - a remark which in time reached the culprit's ears and did not materially add to her peace of mind.   Nancy did not stir. She understood her brother in one way far better than her sister did. He would not like her any the less because she gave herself little airs and did not wait on him hand and foot and she had none of Phoebe's earnest desire to do the right thing. As she had explained to her sister she had no object in life save to get through it pleasantly and this was just the right sort of afternoon for a loaf in the garden. Soon it would be too hot to be out of doors but today lying here on the grass under the apple tree it was perfect. [10]  A high hedge hid the house from sight and no one was likely to disturb her therefore she closed her eyes and prepared to make the most of it. She couldn't read. The soft wind blew the leaves over and lost her place it made her arm ache to hold up the book the drowsy hum of the bees - poor Phoebe's bees - was in her ears and from the paddock behind came the sound of children's voices softened by the distance. It made her feel sleepy. Those children were chasing the ducks again she reflected and wondered lazily if Phoebe would hear them and put a stop to it. Then her eyes closed it was so pleasant here under the tree and when Phoebe came back after providing her brother with afternoon tea she was fast asleep.   Phoebe sighed discontentedly. She had had no tea herself not that she did not like it but because except on rare occasions the family finances did not run to it and now it was an added grievance that her confidante should be in the land of dreams. Then the children's voices caught her ear the unlawful nature of the occupation struck her and she went across the orchard to investigate. It was not in Phoebe to shirk any duty however unpleasant and Nancy was left alone to sleep her sleep out.   The shadows grew longer and longer. Mr Marsden's buggy came home and was received with much yelling and shouting by the children; she was dimly conscious that the nursery tea-bell ran furiously and also conscious that it was her turn to look after that meal but still she did not rouse herself. She was not called it was all right. Phoebe in her own ungracious fashion had probably taken her place and Nancy settled herself comfortably to sleep again. Then a leaf or two dropped softly on to her face and on her ungloved hand and she started up wide awake in a moment.   "Good gracious! What - "   "Fairly won by Jove! Miss Nancy - fairly won! That's a pair of gloves to Ned."   "It isn't! I - . How dare you!"   Nancy sat up rubbing her eyes angry and startled but not so angry but that she remembered to pull down her skirts over her feet to hide those worn-out shoes from the eyes of the two young men who were standing over her. [11]  "Don't be cross Miss Nancy" said the taller of the two; "we've been waiting so long for you to wake Ned here felt he had to try other means."   "Then he - he - "   But Ned Kirkham looked down on her with grave dark eyes and she forgave him on the spot or rather she expressed her belief there was nothing to forgive.   "I know you wouldn't; would you now?"   "Of course not. Allan here dropped some leaves on your face. I wouldn't be so impertinent."   "I knew it" said Nancy in gleeful triumph. "There now Mr Morrison!"   "It's all very well to say 'there now' Miss Nancy but you don't know what catastrophe might have happened if I hadn't been here to look after this young cousin of mine. You - "   "I've been asleep all the afternoon. One might as well do that as anything else I think. You never told me you were coming else - "   "Else you would have stayed awake?"   "Oh I didn't say that" said Nancy who was wishing she had on her evening shoes the only decent pair she had left and felt it to be a real grievance that she had been caught in such shabby ones. "But how did you come? Over the fence?"   Ned Kirkham nodded and Allan Morrison asked -   "Do you think the governor'll object?"   "He won't know" said Nancy philosophically. "Now you are here won't you sit down?"   Morrison who was an older man than his cousin Ned Kirkham by seven or eight years accepted the invitation and took a seat close beside her while the other man folding his arms leaned up against the apple tree in such a position that he could carefully scan the fair face beneath him. She blushed a little under his steadfast gaze but it did not discommode her much.   "I am sorry to say" began Morrison gravely "there's been a sad catastrophe."   "I thought your presence averted that" said Nancy mischievously.   "I? I wasn't there" said Morrison who had completely forgotten the chaff of a few minutes ago "I wish to the Lord I had been. Ned and I were burning off at the other end of our place and the confounded jumbucks got into your wheat." [12]  "Your sheep in our wheat! Oh goodness gracious me!"   "It is 'oh goodness gracious me!' with a vengeance. Looks as if about forty thousand of them had been revelling in it. There were only fifty really but - but - "   "They had a real good time" said Nancy smiling.   "They did indeed. And your kids when they drove them out - "   "Had a real good time too. Yes I know what our children are when they get the chance of being useful."   "Well they did trample the crop a good deal" said Morrison; "but the question is what is to be done? Ned and I thought we'd better come and see when your father will be at home. We must offer him compensation you know."   "For the boys trampling the wheat?"   "If the sheep hadn't been there the boys wouldn't have gone after them."   "And if the fence had been properly mended as it should have been the sheep wouldn't have trespassed at all. What are you going to do? See my respected parent and abuse him for not having his fence in proper repair?"   "Well you know" said Morrison who was a Scotchman and believed in his own rights "that fence is just rotten."   "I know I know. It's tumbling to pieces and we ought to have a new one and we have not a penny piece to do it with. Oh I've heard the story over and over again and I'll hear it again tonight."   "Will your father be very wrath Miss Nancy?" asked Kirkham.   "I don't know that it will make much difference" said Nancy with a little grimace "he's always cross. I don't know why we mind telling him about any fresh disaster. We ought not to really because if the bottom had fallen out of the world bodily he couldn't be worse than he was this morning."   "And you suffer. Poor little girl!" said Morrison sympathetically but the tender look that came from Kirkham's brown eyes went straight to her heart.   "After all I'm not the one to be pitied" she said. "I retire and leave mother or Phoebe to bear the brunt. Phoebe is the one who takes things to heart."   "Don't you?"   "No of course not. Where is the good of worrying? [13] Phoebe has views and is always wanting to do something for herself."   "Lord! She don't know what she's asking" said Morrison. "Ned and I could give her a wrinkle or two."   Nancy glanced up at Kirkham's gloomy face.   "Why? Aren't things going well with you?" she asked sympathetically.   "Well? Good Lord no! We've about bottomed I think. The wood is the only thing that pays on the wretched place. We always buy our sheep dear and sell cheap the cows ain't no good the horses die the pigs - " He paused in the catalogue of woes and threw up his head despairingly.   "Well" said Nancy smiling. "I'm glad the wood pays."   "Yes but my dear child" - Morrison was very much in earnest - "We don't want to live out the rest of our lives as splitters."   "Oh but times will mend."   "Mend!" Kirkham's face was gloomily hopeless. "There's not much chance of mending I'm afraid."   "Then what will you do?" Nancy's voice caught a touch of the prevailing gloom.   "Do? We'll - Ah how do you do Miss Marsden?"   Phoebe coming silently across the grass shook hands with both men and looked reproachfully at her sister.   "It's all right Phoebe" said that young lady cheerfully. "I haven't been arranging a clandestine meeting with two young men if that is what you are thinking. They have come over with sorrow to announce a fresh disaster to the family. Their sheep have been in the twelve-acre again and we're just consoling each other in our poverty-stricken condition."   "Really Miss Marsden" said Morrison "I'm awfully sorry - "   "Never mind" interrupted Phoebe "I know all about it. The children have just been telling father."   "And - Is he very vexed?"   "Vexed? I don't know. Something went wrong in town and - "   "We're all on the doorstep of the Benevolent Asylum" interrupted Nancy flippantly. "There now" turning to Kirkham "you needn't worry about it any more. Our wheat never is any good somehow. If it manages to grow up all right it gets spoiled when they reap it or it gets left out in the rain or something. It's lucky the bread supply does not depend on us." [14]  "We go the wrong way about it" sighed Phoebe. "I wish to goodness father would let me manage just for a year and ask no questions. I know I could make it pay."   "Could you Miss Marsden?" asked Morrison sceptically. "It's more than Ned and I can then. All those blessed sheep are down on their knees with foot-rot and we are just thinking of chucking up the whole thing bag and baggage."   "Going away?" cried Nancy in dismay while Phoebe merely shrugged her shoulders.   "Of course" she said "it was just madness to take Bandara poor swamp land like that what could you expect? If you must go in for cockatoo farming you ought to have taken the Hill Farm up above there."   "Listen to Phoebe" mocked Nancy - "talking as if she were a land agent at least."   "Well she talks common sense anyhow" said Morrison "as I know to my cost. But I'd been so long in the back blocks that the green grass looked awfully attractive. I never guessed what a glue-pot it would be in the winter."   "Take the Hill Farm now" suggested Phoebe pleased at the modicum of praise she received from her hero and Nancy eagerly seconded her.   "Oh yes do. It's to let cheap to good tenants." But Morrison shook his head.   "It's no good" he said. "We don't want to be cockatoo farmers all our lives and that's what it would mean. Ned could have done as well as this in England without leaving his own people."   Nancy's eyes stole shyly to Kirkham's face and much to her relief did not read there any signs of great regret at having left the old country. And Morrison went on -   "We want to make our fortunes."   "Lucky people" sighed Phoebe. "I only want to make my own living but there doesn't seem to be the ghost of a chance."   "Well no you are a woman you see" said Morrison watching with a pang the other two exchange glances "some one else has got to do that for you."   Phoebe sighed. No one understood her not even the man to whom she gave the highest place in her small world. He talked to her but he watched her sister's bright face the while. [15] Then he sighed at what he read there and the elder girl echoed the sigh. There was evidently something wrong in the scheme of creation.   "Well what are you thinking of doing?" she asked after a pause given up to bitter reflections.   Morrison hesitated and looked doubtfully at his cousin.   "It's a wild scheme" he said at last. "There may be a mint of money in it or it may all end in smoke and the next time you see your friends they'll be tramping the country looking for work with swags on their backs and quart pots in their hands."   "All right" said Nancy "come along this road and we will give you tea and come and pour it out for you."   "But you will succeed. I know you will succeed" said Phoebe.   "Won't you tell us what it is? It seems to me almost anything would be better than stagnating here right out of the world."   "It's a deal further out of the world where we propose to go" laughed Morrison. "Don't scoff and I'll tell you."   "Oh we won't scoff" said Nancy "but I can't see what you want going at all."   "You read about the gold discoveries at Dowden's Creek up in the north?" said Morrison and Phoebe nodded her head - she always read the papers. "Well" he went on "I know that country and I know some like it just two hundred miles to the west. If there's gold at Dowden's Creek there's gold in the Boolcunda country I'll take my colonial oath on that."   "But" objected Phoebe "there was very little gold at Dowden's Creek. It was soon worked out."   "I know the man who discovered it" said Morrison warming to his subject "and he cleared twenty thousand pounds before ever the rush took place. Now twenty thousand would just suit Ned and me to a T. We ain't greedy. Five hundred a year certain would just give us something to go upon and of course we'd make more than five hundred."   Nancy opened her eyes.   "Oh yes; five hundred a year would be very nice if you could get it; but it just seems to me a wild goose chase."   "No it isn't; indeed it is not. Is it Miss Marsden?" cried Kirkham appealing to Phoebe in order to convince her sister. "That's generally the way gold has been found before only you must keep the secret. We must be first in the field."   [16] "Yes; mum's the word" said Morrison. "Just you wait Miss Nancy till you see the wealthy gold-diggers returning laden with the spoils. You ought to promise us a triumphal arch and a band at the very least."   "Oh I'll promise you" said Nancy laughing to try and hide the fact that the tears were very near the surface "only I'm afraid you won't deserve it. You'll forget all about us and never come back any more. Why don't you take the Hill Farm and be content with enough to live on?"   "Because we're sick to death of cockatoo farming and we are going to make a bid for fortune. It's neck or nothing this time I can tell you."   Both men sighed as if it were already decided it should be nothing and the girls echoed that sigh. What would their life be like when these their next-door neighbours the only decent young men within reach as Nancy openly said were gone?   But neither could put their thoughts into words. The shadows had grown longer and longer; it was manifestly near the hour when the elder members of the Marsden family had their evening meal; but even careful Phoebe forgot for once to notice the flight of time; all four stood silent for a moment then the older girl said gravely -   "If there's any chance of succeeding I really think you ought to go."   "Yes I - "began Morrison. Then with a sudden change of tone "Oh I say here's your father."   Nancy scrambled to her feet forgetful for once of the shabby shoes and both girls looked round uneasily. They were doing nothing morally wrong yet both started apart guiltily. In truth Mr Marsden was not an easy man to deal with. He strode across the orchard with long quick strides his downbent head never raised yet both girls were horribly conscious that those keen blue eyes of his had taken them and their companions in long before they had perceived his long thin figure coming towards them. That would have been all right if only he would have come up and spoken but both felt too that he would if not stopped pass on without taking any notice and probably later on they would hear from their mother how much their father disapproved of their conduct in talking to young men in a clandestine manner in the orchard. Nancy wished helplessly the earth would open and swallow her up and Phoebe stood still with a sullenness that had something of despair in it. Morrison saw their difficulty and stepped across their father's path. [17]  "Good evening sir" he said. "My cousin and I came over to see you."   "Indeed" said Mr Marsden coldly. "I don't usually see people in the orchard."   Nancy raised her eyebrows for Kirkham's benefit and Morrison went on steadily and civilly.   "It was about those blessed sheep sir. I'm sorry."   Mr Marsden never stopped in his walk for a moment and a flush of shame mounted to Phoebe's cheek as she saw he had to follow after her father to make himself heard. Nancy gave a sigh of relief.   "That's done" she said to Kirkham. "I do hope he won't be outrageously rude to poor Mr Morrison. I've long given over trying to tame the savage beast. When I find he's in one of these sweet tempers I just retire and leave the coast clear."   "Nancy!" remonstrated her sister.   "Oh it's all very way to say 'Nancy' in shocked tones Phoebe but it's no good pretending father is sweet or amiable or even decently civil is it? Mr Kirkham has eyes. You don't call that good old English manners do you Mr Kirkham?"   Kirkham laughed. He himself was certainly glad to see his cousin beard the lion in his den. After next month the old gentleman's tantrums wouldn't affect him one way or the other. He was sorry for the girls though and did his best to smooth matters over for them.   "Old gentlemen even in England Miss Marsden" he said with a smile "sometimes get out of temper and make things unpleasant for - for - "   "Their daughters and their daughters' friends" said Nancy. "There's one thing about father he is abominably rude to you but it must be constitutional; he can't help it he'd be just the same to the Prince of Wales or - or St Michael and all the angels. I hope and pray it isn't hereditary. I've fancied of late I've seen signs of it in Stanley. I'm afraid I'll have to remonstrate with him on the subject."   Kirkham looked over his shoulder. Through the fruit trees he could see the persistent Morrison had at last succeeded in cornering Mr Marsden in the extreme end of the orchard where the only alternative was to stand and listen or to turn and hurriedly retrace his steps.   [18] Phoebe watched them too uneasily. Then a bell up at the house rang out loudly and Nancy turned to Kirkham.   "That is our tea" she said. "We really must go for it at once. Father will be back in a minute and I wouldn't walk up to the house with him for worlds. Oh dear! it's going to be such a lovely moonlight night. I wish I could ask you in and we could sit on the verandah and talk but - "   "Thank you very much Miss Nancy for the kindly thought." Kirkham looked his pleasure. It was not very often his lady love was so gracious to him. "I suppose I may walk up to the house with you mayn't I? I don't suppose your father would be best pleased if he saw me getting over the fence."   At the house door Phoebe hurriedly bid him good-bye and entered. She was uncomfortably conscious that her sister wanted a word alone with him and yet was fearful lest her father should come up and catch them before he was gone. Phoebe's name as Nancy often said should have been Martha she was troubled by so many things.   But for once in a way the same thought had occurred to Nancy and she cut her adieux remarkably short.   "When shall I see you again?" he asked laying a detaining hand on her arm.   "Goodness knows" said she carelessly though in reality she was as anxious as he. "Come over some day in the evening. If it's fine you are pretty sure to find Phoebe and me in the orchard. And - there I really must go. Mind you come." And she vanished into the house while the young man not desirous of second interview with the house's master hurriedly made his way along the drive to the front gate.     CHAPTER II. THE UNATTRACTIVE MEMBER OF THE FAMILY   "'I mean to be somebody and to do something useful in the world' said the eldest of five brothers. 'I don't care how humble my position is so that I can only do some good which will be something. I intend to be a brickmaker; bricks are always wanted and I shall be really doing something.'" - HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN   The schoolroom or breakfast-room as it was indifferently called at Weeroona was a plainly furnished room the floor covered with linoleum and the chairs of Austrian cane pattern the couch was anything but a couch of ease and the only other furniture in the room was a book-case which Mr Marsden was wont to stigmatise as 'hideously' untidy. Phoebe sometimes made desperate efforts to reduce it to order but her father on these occasions either took no notice of it at all or grumbled at the way in which she arranged the books and then her struggles after law and order suffered a relapse and she allowed the children to work their wicked will upon it.   She was just at present in a state of relapse and the room bare as it was certainly looked as if it wanted some kindly hand to reduce it to a state of comfort. The Marsden family lived there. They had both a dining-room and a drawing-room well and comfortably furnished but they very seldom sat in them unless in the winter-time when occasional fires were lighted to keep the damp and mildew out. The breakfast-room was the living room that was part of Mrs Marsden's economies.   She was already seated at the head of the tea-table surrounded by the teapot and half a dozen cups and saucers of the common white-and-gold pattern. Her best service only saw the light on rare occasions. She was a little woman below the ordinary height with a look of Nancy in her faded fretful face but her eyes were dark as Phoebe's own and her hair too though plentifully streaked with grey had once been black as the proverbial raven's wing. [20]  She looked up from her knitting as Phoebe entered.   "Where's your father?" she asked. "Late as usual. Cook's made some scones and they'll all be quite cold if he doesn't come at once."   "Never mind" said Phoebe whose mind was relieved by hearing Nancy's footsteps following her down the passage. "I don't suppose he will eat the scones. He will say they are indigestible. He is in the orchard and he must have heard the bell because I was there and I heard it quite plainly. But Stanley and Nellie aren't in yet."   "Oh they'll come. I don't mind about them but I don't like your father to be late. I know you were in the orchard because - well your father is very vexed about it."   "About what?" asked Nancy appearing on the scene to defend herself.   "About your being there talking to those young men. He saw you from the road as he was coming in." Nancy made a mental note of that for future use. "And he's very vexed. It is just like servant girls he says."   "What is?" asked Nancy. She was not in the least afraid of her mother.   "Why meeting young men like that. Leaning over a fence and talking to them instead of - "   "Coming into the drawing-room and sitting prop chitty on two chairs I suppose. Well if father sees any harm in what we did this evening he must be looking for it that's all I can say. Besides we weren't there so very long. I was sound asleep on the grass by myself most of the time."   "So bad for you" murmured Mrs Marsden and Nancy went on unheeding -   "Then Mr Kirkham and Mr Morrison came over - "   "And your father doesn't like them getting over the fence" put in Mrs Marsden.   "Just to tell us that their sheep had got into the twelve acre and if you see anything wrong in that why you had better make arrangements to keep us locked up in our rooms for the remainder of our lives" finished Nancy bringing her defence to a triumphant conclusion.   [21] "They should come up to the house and ask for me" commented the mother feebly. "As your father says it's not proper for young girls - "   "You don't call Phoebe a young girl surely" put in Stanley entering and taking his seat at the table. "I thought everybody knew she was comfortably settled on the shelf. Anything decent to eat? Give us a chop Phoebe."   Phoebe took her seat at the bottom of the table and raising the dish cover began serving.   "Very well mother" she said for once making capital out of her brother's rudeness; "if I'm on the shelf I should think I might do whatever I please without anybody making remarks. And there was no harm in our talking to those two men in the orchard."   "The wonder is they cared to stop and talk to you" said her brother who somehow could never resist teasing his sister. To do him justice he hardly understood how cruel his remarks were. "But I suppose it was Nancy they came after eh Nan? Jack says they're both awfully mashed on you."   Nancy tossed her head and laughed a denial which deceived nobody least of all her sister. It was true she knew most true. Stanley knew it at any rate thought it most probable she herself saw it even young Jack saw it and she sighed to herself as her father entered the room and took his seat in dead silence.   Dinewan the Emu and Goomblegubbon the Bustard   DINEWAN the emu being the largest bird was acknowledged as king by the other birds. The Goomblegubbons the bustards were jealous of the Dinewans. Particularly was Goomblegubbon the mother jealous of the Diriewan mother. She would watch with envy the high flight of the Dinewans and their swift running. And she always fancied that the Dinewan mother flaunted her superiority in her face for whenever Dinewan alighted near Goomblegubbon after a long high flight she would flap her big wings and begin booing in her pride not the loud booing of the male bird but a little triumphant satisfied booing noise of her own which never failed to irritate Goomblegubbon when she heard it.  Goomblegubbon used to wonder how she could put an end to Dinewan's supremacy. She decided that she would only be able to do so by injuring her wings and checking her power of flight. But the question that troubled her was how to effect this end. She knew she would gain nothing by having a quarrel with Dinewan and fighting her for no Goomblegubbon would stand any chance against a Dinewan There was evidently nothing to be gained by an open fight. She would have to effect her end by cunning.  One day when Goomblegubbon saw in the distance Dinewan coming towards her she squatted down and doubled in her wings in such a way as to look as if she had none. After Dinewan had been talking to her for some time Goomblegubbon said: "Why do you not imitate me and do without wings? Every bird flies. The Dinewans to be the king of birds should do without wings. When all the birds see that I can do without wings they will think I am the cleverest bird and they will make a Goomblegubbon king." "But you have wings" said Dinewan.  "No I have no wings." And indeed she looked as if her words were true so well were her wings hidden as she squatted in the grass. Dinewan went away after awhile and thought much of what she had heard. She talked it all over with her mate who was as disturbed as she was. They made up their minds that it would never do to let the Goomblegubbons reign in their stead even if they had to lose their wings to save their kingship.  At length they decided on the sacrifice of their wings. The Dinewan mother showed the example by persuading her mate to cut off hers with a combo or stone tomahawk and then she did the same to his. As soon as the operations were over the Dinewan mother lost no time in letting Goomblegubbon know what they had done. She ran swiftly down to the plain on which she had left Goomblegubbon and finding her still squatting there she said: "See I have followed your example. I have now no wings. They are cut off." "Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Goomblegubbon jumping up and dancing round with joy at the success of her plot. As she danced round she spread out her wings flapped them and said: "I have taken you in old stumpy wings. I have my wings yet. You are fine birds you Dinewans to be chosen kings when you are so easily taken in. Ha! ha! ha!" And laughing derisively Goomblegubbon flapped her wings right in front of Dinewan who rushed towards her to chastise her treachery. But Goomblegubbon flew away and alas! the now wingless Dinewan could not follow her.  Brooding over her wrongs Dinewan walked away vowing she would be revenged. But how? That was the question which she and her mate failed to answer for some time. At length the Dinewan mother thought of a plan and prepared at once to execute it. She hid all her young Dinewans but two under a big salt bush. Then she walked off to Goomblegubbons' plain with the two young ones following her. As she walked off the morilla ridge where her home was on to the plain she saw Goomblegubbon out feeding with her twelve young ones.  After exchanging a few remarks in a friendly manner with Goomblegubbon she said to her "Why do you not imitate me and only have two children? Twelve are too many to feed. If you keep so many they will never grow big birds like the Dinewans. The food that would make big birds of two would only starve twelve." Goomblegubbon said nothing but she thought it might be so. It was impossible to deny that the young Dinewans were much bigger than the young Goomblegubbons and discontentedly Goomblegubbon walked away wondering whether the smallness of her young ones was owing to the number of them being so much greater than that of the Dinewans. It would be grand she thought to grow as big as the Dinewans. But she remembered the trick she had played on Dinewan and she thought that perhaps she was being fooled in her turn. She looked back to where the Dinewans fed and as she saw how much bigger the two young ones were than any of hers once more mad envy of Dinewan possessed her. She determined she would not be outdone. Rather would she kill all her young ones but two. She said "The Dinewans shall not be the king birds of the plains. The Goomblegubbons shall replace them. They shall grow as big as the Dinewans and shall keep their wings and fly which now the Dinewans cannot do." And straightway Goomblegubbon killed all her young ones but two. Then back she came to where the Dinewans were still feeding. When Dinewan saw her coming and noticed she had only two young ones with her she called out: "Where are all your young ones?" Goomblegubbon answered "I have killed them and have only two left. Those will have plenty to eat now and will soon grow as big as your young ones." "You cruel mother to kill your children. You greedy mother. Why I have twelve children and I find food for them all. I would not kill one for anything not even if by so doing I could get back my wings. There is plenty for all. Look at the emu bush how it covers itself with berries to feed my big family. See how the grasshoppers come hopping round so that we can catch them and fatten on them." "But you have only two children." "I have twelve. I will go and bring them to show you." Dinewan ran off to her salt bush where she had hidden her ten young ones. Soon she was to be seen coming back. Running with her neck stretched forward her head thrown back with pride and the feathers of her boobootella swinging as she ran booming out the while her queer throat noise the Dinewan song of joy the pretty soft-looking little ones with their zebra-striped skins running beside her whistling their baby Dinewan note. When Dinewan reached the place where Goomblegubbon was she stopped her booing and said in a solemn tone "Now you see my words are true I have twelve young ones as I said. You can gaze at my loved ones and think of your poor murdered children. And while you do so I will tell you the fate of your descendants for ever. By trickery and deceit you lost the Dinewans their wings and now for evermore as long as a Dinewan has no wings so long shall a Goomblegubbon lay only two eggs and have only two young ones. We are quits now. You have your wings and I my children." And ever since that time a Dinewan or emu has had no wings and a Goomblegubbon or bustard of the plains has laid only two eggs in a season.    The Galah and Oolah the Lizard   OOLAH the lizard was tired of lying in the sun doing nothing. So he said "I will go and play." He took his boomerangs out and began to practise throwing them. While he was doing so a Galah came up and stood near watching the boomerangs come flying back for the kind of boomerangs Oolah was throwing were the bubberahs. They are smaller than others and more curved and when they are properly thrown they return to the thrower which other boomerangs do not.  Oolah was proud of having the gay Galah to watch his skill. In his pride he gave the bubberah an extra twist and threw it with all his might. Whizz whizzing through the air back it came hitting as it passed her the Galah on the top of her head taking both feathers and skin clean off. The Galah set up a hideous cawing croaking shriek and flew about stopping every few minutes to knock her head on the ground like a mad bird. Oolah was so frightened when he saw what he had done and noticed that the blood was flowing from the Galah's head that he glided away to hide under a bindeah bush. But the Galah saw him. She never stopped the hideous noise she was making for a minute but still shrieking followed Oolah. When she reached the bindeah bush she rushed at Oolah seized him with her beak rolled him on the bush until every bindeah had made a hole in his skin. Then she rubbed his skin with her own bleeding head. "Now then" she said "you Oolah shall carry bindeahs on you always and the stain of my blood." "And you" said Oolah as he hissed with pain from the tingling of the prickles "shall be a bald-headed bird as long as I am a red prickly lizard." So to this day underneath the Galah's crest you can always find the bald patch which the bubberah of Oolah first made. And in the country of the Galahs are lizards coloured reddish brown and covered with spikes like bindeah prickles.    Bahloo the Moon and the Daens   BAHLOO the moon looked down at the earth one night when his light was shining quite brightly to see if any one was moving. When the earth people were all asleep was the time he chose for playing with his three dogs. He called them dogs but the earth people called them snakes the death adder the black snake and the tiger snake. As he looked down on to the earth with his three dogs beside him Bahloo saw about a dozen daens or black fellows crossing a Creek. He called to them saying "Stop I want you to carry my dogs across that creek." But the black fellows though they liked Bahloo well did not like his dogs for sometimes when he had brought these dogs to play on the earth they had bitten not only the earth dogs but their masters; and the poison left by the bites had killed those bitten. So the black fellows said "No Bahloo we are too frightened; your dogs might bite us. They are not like our dogs whose bite would not kill us." Bahloo said "If you do what I ask you when you die you shall come to life again not die and stay always where you are put when you are dead. See this piece of bark. I throw it into the water." And he threw a piece of bark into the creek. "See it comes to the top again and floats. That is what would happen to you if you would do what I ask you: first under when you die then up again at once. If you will not take my dogs over you foolish daens you will die like this" and he threw a stone into the creek which sank to the bottom. "You will be like that stone never rise again Wombah daens!" But the black fellows said "We cannot do it Bahloo. We are too frightened of your dogs." "I will come down and carry them over myself to show you that they are quite safe and harmless." And down he came the black snake coiled round one arm the tiger snake round the other and the death adder on his shoulder coiled towards his neck. He carried them over. When he had crossed the creek he picked up a big stone and he threw it into the water saying "Now you cowardly daens you would not do what I Bahloo asked you to do and so forever you have lost the chance of rising again after you die. You will just stay where you are put like that stone does under the water and grow as it does to be part of the earth. If you had done what I asked you you could have died as often as I die and have come to life as often as I come to life. But now you will only be black fellows while you live and bones when you are dead." Bahloo looked so cross and the three snakes hissed so fiercely that the black fellows were very glad to see them disappear from their sight behind the trees. The black fellows had always been frightened of Bahloo's dogs and now they hated them and they said "If we could get them away from Bahloo we would kill tbem." And thenceforth whenever they saw a snake alone they killed it. But Bahloo only sent more for he said "As long as there are black fellows there shall be snakes to remind them that they would not do what I asked them."     The Origin of the Narran Lake   OLD BYAMEE said to his two young wives Birrahgnooloo and Cunnunbeillee "I have stuck a white feather between the hind legs of a bee and am going to let it go and then follow it to its nest that I may get honey. While I go for the honey go you two out and get frogs and yams then meet me at Coorigel Spring where we will camp for sweet and clear is the water there." The wives taking their goolays and yam sticks went out as he told them. Having gone far and dug out many yams and frogs they were tired when they reached Coorigel and seeing the cool fresh water they longed to bathe. But first they built a bough shade and there left their goolays holding their food and the yams and frogs they had found. When their camp was ready for the coming of Byamee who having wooed his wives with a nullah-nullah kept them obedient by fear of the same weapon then went the girls to the spring to bathe. Gladly they plunged in having first divested them selves of their goomillahs which they were still young enough to wear and which they left on the ground near the spring. Scarcely were they enjoying the cool rest the water gave their hot tired limbs when they were seized and swallowed by two kurreahs. Having swallowed the girls the kurreahs dived into an opening in the side of the spring which was the entrance to an underground watercourse leading to the Narran River. Through this passage they went taking all the water from the spring with them into the Narran whose course they also dried as they went along.  Meantime Byamee unwitting the fate of his wives was honey hunting. He had followed the bee with the white feather on it for some distance; then the bee flew on to some budtha flowers and would move no further. Byamee said "Something has happened or the bee would not stay here and refuse to be moved on towards its nest. I must go to Coorigel Spring and see if my wives are safe. Something terrible has surely happened." And Byamee turned in haste towards the spring. When he reached there he.saw the bough shed his wives had made he saw the yams they had dug from the ground and he saw the frogs but Birrahgnooloo and Cunnunbeillee he saw not. He called aloud for them. But no answer. He went towards the spring; on the edge of it he saw the goomillahs of his wives. He looked into the spring and seeing it dry he said "It is the work of the kurreahs; they have opened the underground passage and gone with my wives to the river and opening the passage has dried the spring. Well do I know where the passage joins the Narran and there will I swiftly go." Arming himself with spears and woggarahs he started in pursuit. He soon reached the deep hole where the underground channel of the Coorigel joined the Narran. There he saw what he had never seen before namely this deep hole dry. And he said: "They have emptied the holes as they went along taking the water with them. But well know I the deep holes of the river. I will not follow the bend thus trebling the distance I have to go but I will cut across from big hole to big hole and by so doing I may yet get ahead of the kurreahs." On swiftly sped Byamee making short cuts from big hole to big hole and his track is still marked by the morilla ridges that stretch down the Narran pointing in towards the deep holes. Every hole as he came to it he found dry until at last he reached the end of the Narran; the hole there was still quite wet and muddy then he knew he was near his enemies and soon he saw them. He managed to get unseen a little way ahead of the kurreahs. He hid himself behind a big dheal tree. As the kurreahs came near they separated one turning to go in another direction. Quickly Byamee hurled one spear after another wounding both kurreahs who writhed with pain and lashed their tails furiously making great hollows in the ground which the water they had brought with them quickly filled. Thinking they might again escape him Byamee drove them from the water with his spears and then at close quarters he killed them with his woggarahs. And ever afterwards at flood time the Narran flowed into this hollow which the kurreahs in their writhings had made.  When Byamee saw that the kurreahs were quite dead he cut them open and took out the bodies of his wives. They were covered with wet slime and seemed quite lifeless; but he carried them and laid them on two nests of red ants. Then he sat down at some little distance and watched them. The ants quickly covered the bodies cleaned them rapidly of the wet slime and soon Byamee noticed the muscles of the girls twitching. "Ah" he said there is life they feel the sting of the ants." Almost as he spoke came a sound as of a thunder-clap but the sound seemed to come from the ears of the girls. And as the echo was dying away slowly the girls rose to their feet. For a moment they stood apart a dazed expression on their faces. Then they clung together shaking as if stricken with a deadly fear. But Byamee came to them and explained how they had been rescued from the kurreahs by him. He bade them to beware of ever bathing in the deep holes of the Narran lest such holes be the haunt of kurreahs.  Then he bade them look at the water now at Boogira and he said: "Soon will the black swans find their way here the pelicans and the ducks; where there was dry land and stones in the past in the future there will be water and water-fowl from henceforth; when the Narran runs it will run into this hole and by the spreading of its waters will a big lake be made." And what Byamee said has come to pass as the Narran Lake shows with its large sheet of water spreading for miles the home of thousands of wild fowl.    Gooloo the Magpie and the Wahroogah   Gooloo was a very old woman and a very wicked old woman too as this story will tell. During all the past season when the grass was thick with seed she had gathered much doonburr which she crushed into meal as she wanted it for food. She used to crush it on a big flat stone with small flat stones - the big stone was called a dayoorl. Gooloo ground a great deal of the doonburr seed to put away for immediate use the rest she kept whole to be ground as required.  Soon after she had finished her first grinding a neighbouring tribe came along and camped near where she was. One day the men all went out hunting leaving the women and the children in the camp. After the men had been gone a little while Gooloo the magpie came to their camp to talk to the women. She said "Why do you not go hunting too? Many are the nests of the wurranunnahs round here and thick is the honey in them. Many and ripe are the bumbles hanging now on the humble trees; red is the fruit of the grooees and opening with ripeness the fruit of the guiebets. Yet you sit in the camp and hunger until your husbands return with the dinewan and bowrah they have gone forth to slay. Go women and gather of the plenty that surrounds you. I will take care of your children the little Wahroogabs." "Your words are wise" the women said. "It is foolish to sit here and hunger when near at hand yams are thick in the ground and many fruits wait but the plucking. We will go and fill quickly our comebees and goolays but our children we will take with us." "Not so" said Gooloo "foolish indeed were you to do that. You would tire the little feet of those that run and tire yourselves with the burden of those that have to be carried. No take forth your comebees and goolays empty that ye may bring back the more. Many are the spoils that wait only the hand of the gatherer. Look ye I have a durrie made of fresh doonburr seed cooking just now on that bark between two fires; that shall your children eat and swiftly shall I make them another. They shall eat and be full ere their mothers are out of sight. See they come to me now they hunger for durrie and well will I feed them. Haste ye then that ye may return in time to make ready the fires for cooking the meat your husbands will bring. Glad will your husbands be when they see that ye have filled your goolays and comebees with fruits and your wirrees with honey. Haste ye I say and do well." Having listened to the words of Gooloo the women decided to do as she said and leaving their children with her they started forth with empty comebees and armed with combos with which to chop out the bees' nests and opossums and with yam sticks to dig up yams.  When the women had gone Gooloo gathered the children round her and fed them with durrie hot from the coals. Honey too she gave them and bumbles which she had buried to ripen. When they had eaten she hurried them off to her real home built in a hollow tree a little distance away from where she had been cooking her durrie. Into her house she hurriedly thrust them followed quickly herself and made all secure. Here she fed them again but the children had already satisfied their hunger and now they missed their mothers and began to cry. Their crying reached the ears of the women as they were returning to their camp. Quickly they came at the sound which is not good in a mother's ears. As they quickened their steps they thought how soon the spoils that lay heavy in their comebees would comfort their children. And happy they the mothers would feel when they fed the Wahroogahs with the dainties they had gathered for them. Soon they reached the camp but alas! where were their children? And where was Gooloo the magpie? "They are playing wahgoo" they said "and have hidden themselves." The mothers hunted all round for them and called aloud the names of their children and Gooloo. But no answer could they hear and no trace could they find. And yet every now and then they heard the sound of children wailing. But seek as they would they found them not. Then loudly wailed the mothers themselves for their lost Wahroogahs and wailing returned to the camp to wait the coming of the black fellows. Heavy were their hearts and sad were their faces when their husbands returned. They hastened to tell the black fellows when they came how Gooloo had persuaded them to go hunting promising if they did so that she would feed the hungry Wahroogahs and care for them while they were away but - and here they wailed again for their poor Wahroogahs. They told how they had listened to her words and gone; truth had she told of the plenty round their comebees and goolays were full of fruits and spoils they had gathered but alas! they came home with them laden only to find their children gone and Gooloo gone too. And no trace could they find of either though at times they heard a sound as of children wailing.  Then wroth were the men saying: "What mothers are ye to leave your young to a stranger and that stranger a Gooloo ever a treacherous race? Did we not go forth to gain food for you and our children? Saw ye ever your husbands return from the chase empty handed? Then why when ye knew we were gone hunting must ye too go forth and leave our helpless ones to a stranger? Oh evil evil indeed is the time that has come when a mother forgets her child. Stay ye in the camp while we go forth to hunt for our lost Wahroogahs. Heavy will be our hands on the women if we return without them." The men hunted the bush round for miles but found no trace of the lost Wahroogahs though they too heard at times a noise as of children's voices wailing.  But beyond the wailing which echoed in the mothers' ears for ever no trace was found of the children. For many days the women sat in the camp mourning for their lost Wahroogahs and beating their heads because they had listened to the voice of Gooloo.    The Weeoonibeens and the Piggiebillah   Two Weeoombeen brothers went out hunting. One brother was much younger than the other and smaller so when they sighted an emu the elder one said to the younger: "You stay quietly here and do not make a noise or Piggiebillah whose camp we passed just now will hear you and steal the emu if I kill it. He is so strong. I'll go on and try to kill the emu with this stone." The little Weeoombeen watched his big brother sneak up to the emu crawling along almost flat on the ground. He saw him get quite close to the emu then spring up quickly and throw the stone with such an accurate aim as to kill the bird on the spot. The little brother was so rejoiced that he forgot his brother's caution and he called aloud in his joy. The big Weeoombeen looked round and gave him a warning sign but too late Piggiebillah had heard the cry and was hastening towards them. Quickly big Weeoombeen left the emu and joined his little brother.  Piggiebillah when he came up said: "What have you found?" "Nothing" said the big Weeoombeen "nothing but some mistletoe berries." "It must have been something more than that or your little brother would not have called out so loudly." Little Weeoombeen was so afraid that Piggiebillah would find their emu and take it that he said: "I hit a little bird with a stone and I was glad I could throw so straight." "It was no cry for the killing of a little bird or for the finding of mistletoe berries that I heard. It was for something much more than either or you would not have called out so joyfully. If you do not tell me at once I will kill you both." The Weeoombeen brothers were frightened for Piggiebillah was a great fighter and very strong so when they saw he was really angry they showed him the dead emu.  "Just what I want for my supper" he said and so saying dragged it away to his own camp. The Weeoombeens followed him and even helped him to make a fire to cook the emu hoping by so doing to get a share given to them. But Piggiebillah would not give them any; he said he must have it all for himself.  Angry and disappointed the Weeoombeens marched straight off and told some black fellows who lived near that Piggiebillah had a fine fat emu just cooked for supper.  Up jumped the black fellows seized their spears bade the Weeoombeens quickly lead them to Piggiebillah's camp promising them for so doing a share of the emu.  When they were within range of spear shot the black fellows formed a circle took aim and threw their spears at Piggiebillah. As the spears fell thick on him sticking out all over him Piggiebillah cried aloud: "Bingehlah Bingeblah. You can have it you can have it." But the black fellows did not desist until Piggiebillah was too wounded even to cry out; then they left him a mass of spears and turned to look for the emu. But to their surprise they found it not. Then for the first time they missed the Weeoombeens.  Looking round they saw their tracks going to where the emu had evidently been; then they saw that they had dragged the emu to their nyunnoo which was a humpy made of grass.  When the Weeoombeens saw the black fellows coming they caught hold of the emu and dragged it to a big hole they knew of with a big stone at its entrance which stone only they knew the secret of moving. They moved the stone got the emu and themselves into the hole and the stone in place again before the black fellows reached the place.  The black fellows tried to move the stone but could not. Yet they knew that the Weeoombeens must have done so for they had tracked them right up to it and they could hear the sound of their voices on the other side of it. They saw there was a crevice on either side of the stone between it and the ground. Through these crevices they drove in their spears thinking they must surely kill the brothers. But the Weeoombeens too had seen these crevices and had anticipated the spears so they had placed the dead emu before them to act as a shield. And into its body were driven the spears of the black fellows extended for the Weeoombeens.  Having driven the spears well in the black fellows went off to get help to move the stone but when they had gone a little way they heard the Weeoombeens laughing. Back they came and speared again and again started for help only as they left to hear once more the laughter of the brothers.  The Weeoombeens finding their laughter only brought back the black fellows to a fresh attack determined to keep quiet which after the next spearing they did.  Quite sure when they heard their spear shots followed by neither conversation nor laughter that they had killed the Weeoombeens at last the black fellows hurried away to bring back the strength and cunning of the camp to remove the stone.  The Weeoombeens hurriedly discussed what plan they had better adopt to elude the black fellows for well they knew that should they ever meet any of them again they would be killed without mercy. And as they talked they satisfied their hunger by eating some of the emu flesh.  After a while the black fellows returned and soon was the stone removed from the entrance. Some of them crept into the hole where to their surprise they found only the remains of the emu and no trace of the Weeoombeens. As those who had gone in first crept out and told of the disappearance of the Weeoombeens others incredulous of such a story crept in to find it confirmed. They searched round for tracks; seeing that their spears were all in the emu it seemed to them probable the Weeoombeens had escaped alive but if so whither they had gone their tracks would show. But search as they would no tracks could they find. All they could see were two little birds which sat on a bush near the hole watching the black fellows all the time. The little birds flew round the hole sometimes but never away always returning to their bush and seeming to be discussing the whole affair; but what they said the black fellows could not understand. But as time went on and no sign was ever found of the Weeoombeens the black fellows became sure that the brothers had turned into the little white-throated birds which had sat on the bush by the hole so they supposed to escape their vengeance. And ever afterwards the little white-throats were called Weeoombeens. And the memory of Piggiebillah is perpetuated by a sort of porcupine ant-eater which bears his name and whose skin is covered closely with miniature spears sticking all over it.    Bootoolgah the Crane and Goonur the Kangaroo Rat the Fire Makers   In the days when Bootoolgah the crane married Goonur the kangaroo rat there was no fire in their country. They had to eat their food raw or just dry it in the sun. One day when Bootoolgah was rubbing two pieces of wood together he saw a faint spark sent forth and then a slight smoke. "Look" he said to Goonur "see what comes when I rub these pieces of wood together - smoke! Would it not be good if we could make fire for ourselves with which to cook our food so as not to have to wait for the sun to dry it?" Goonur looked and seeing the smoke she said: "Great indeed would be the day when we could make fire. Split your stick Bootoolgah and place in the opening bark and grass that even one spark may kindle a light." And hearing wisdom in her words even as she said Bootoolgah did. And lo! after much rubbing from the opening came a small flame. For as Goonur had said it would the spark lit the grass the bark smouldered and smoked and so Bootoolgah the crane and Goonur the kangaroo rat discovered the art of fire making.  "This we will keep secret" they said "from all the tribes. When we make a fire to cook our fish we will go into a Bingahwingul scrub. There we will make a fire and cook our food in secret. We will hide our firesticks in the openmouthed seeds of the Bingahwinguls; one firestick we will carry always hidden in our comebee." Bootoolgah and Goonur cooked the next fish they caught and found it very good. When they went back to the camp they took some of their cooked fish with them. The blacks noticed it looked quite different from the usual sun-dried fish so they asked: "What did you to that fish? "Let it lie in the sun" said they.  "Not so" said the others.  But that the fish was sun-dried Bootoolgah and Goonur persisted. Day by day passed and after catching their fish these two always disappeared returning with their food looking quite different from that of the others. At last being unable to extract any information from them it was determined by the tribe to watch them. Boolooral the night owl and Quarrian the parrot were appointed to follow the two when they disappeared to watch where they went and find out what they did. Accordingly after the next fish were caught when Bootoolgah and Goonur gathered up their share and started for the bush Boolooral and Quarrian followed on their tracks. They saw them disappear into a Bingahwingul scrub where they lost sight of them. Seeing a high tree on the edge of the scrub they climbed up it and from there they saw all that was to be seen. They saw Bootoolgah and Goonur throw down their load of fish open their comebee and take from it a stick which stick when they had blown upon it they laid in the midst of a heap of leaves and twigs and at once from this heap they saw a flame leap which flame the fire makers fed with bigger sticks. Then as the flame died down they saw the two place their fish in the ashes that remained from the burnt sticks. Then back to the camp of their tribes went Boolooral and Quarrian back with the news of their discovery. Great was the talk amongst the blacks and many the queries as to how to get possession of the comebee with the fire stick in it when next Bootoolgah and Goonur came into the camp. It was at length decided to hold a corrobboree and it was to be one on a scale not often seen probably never before by the young of the tribes. The grey beards proposed to so astonish Bootoolgah and Goonur as to make them forget to guard their precious comebee. As soon as they were intent on the corrobboree and off guard some one was to seize the comebee steal the firestick and start fires for the good of all. Most of them had tasted the cooked fish brought into the camp by the fire makers and having found it good hungered for it. Beeargah the hawk was told to feign sickness to tie up his head and to lie down near wherever the two sat to watch the corrobboree. Lying near them he was to watch them all the time and when they were laughing and unthinking of anything but the spectacle before them he was to steal the comebee. Having arranged their plan of action they all prepared for a big corrobboree. They sent word to all the surrounding tribes asking them to attend especially they begged the Bralgahs to come as they were celebrated for their wonderful dancing which was so wonderful as to be most likely to absorb the attention of the firemakers.  All the tribes agreed to come and soon all were engaged in great preparations. Each determined to outdo the other in the quaintness and brightness of their painting for the corrobboree. Each tribe as they arrived gained great applause; never before had the young people seen so much diversity in colouring and design. Beeleer the Black Cockatoo tribe came with bright splashes of orange-red on their black skins. The Pelicans came as a contrast almost pure white only a touch here and there of their black skin showing where the white paint had rubbed off. The Black Divers came in their black skins but these polished to shine like satin. Then came the Millears the beauties of the Kangaroo Rat family who had their home on the morillas. After them came the Buckandeer or Native Cat tribe painted in dull colours but in all sorts of patterns. Mairas or Paddymelons came too in haste to take part in the great corrobboree. After them walking slowly came the Bralgahs looking tall and dignified as they held up their red heads painted so in contrast to their French-grey bodies which they deemed too dull a colour unbrightened for such a gay occasion. Amongst the many tribes there too numerous to mention were the rose and grey painted Galahs the green and crimson painted Billai; most brilliant were they with their bodies grass green and their sides bright crimson so afterwards gaining them the name of crimson wings. The bright little Gidgereegahs came too.  Great was the gathering that Bootoolgah the crane and Goonur the kangaroo rat found assembled as they hurried on to the scene. Bootoolgah had warned Goonur that they must only be spectators and take no active part in the corrobboree as they had to guard their combee. Obedient to his advice Goonur seated herself beside him and slung the comebee over her arm. Bootoolgah warned her to be careful and not forget she had it. But as the corrobboree went on so absorbed did she become that she forgot the comebee which slipped from her arm. Happily Bootoolgah saw it do so replaced it and bade her take heed so baulking Beeargah who had been about to seize it for his vigilance was unceasing and deeming him sick almost unto death the two whom he was watching took no heed of him. Back he crouched moaning as he turned but keeping ever an eye on Goonur. And soon was he rewarded. Now came the turn of the Bralgahs to dance and every eye but that of the watchful one was fixed on them as slowly they came into the ring. First they advanced bowed and retired then they repeated what they had done before and again each time getting faster and faster in their movements changing their bows into pirouettes craning their long necks and making such antics as they went through the figures of their dance and replacing their dignity with such grotesqueness as to make their large audience shake with laughter they themselves keeping throughout all their grotesque measures a solemn air which only seemed to heighten the effect of their antics.  And now came the chance of Beeargah the hawk. In the excitement of the moment Goonur forgot the comebee as did Bootoolgah. They joined in the mirthful applause of the crowd and Goonur threw herself back helpless with laughter. As she did so the comebee slipped from her arm. Then up jumped the sick man from behind her seized the comebee with his combo cut it open snatched forth the firestick set fire to the heap of grass ready near where he had lain and all before the two realised their loss. When they discovered the precious comebee was gone up jumped Bootoolgah and Goonur. After Beeargah ran Bootoolgah but Beeargah had a start and was fleeter of foot so distanced his pursuer quickly. As he ran he fired the grass with the stick he still held. Bootoolgah finding he could not catch Beeargah and seeing fires everywhere retired from the pursuit feeling it was useless now to try and guard their secret for it had now become the common property of all the tribes there assembled.    Weedah the Mocking Bird   WEEDAH was playing a great trick on the black fellows who lived near him. He had built himself a number of grass nyunnoos more than twenty. He made fires before each to make it look as if some one lived in the nyunnoos. First he would go into one nyunnoo or humpy and cry like a baby then to another and laugh like a child then in turn as he went the round of the humpies he would sing like a maiden corrobboree like a man call out in a quavering voice like an old man and in a shrill voice like an old woman; in fact imitate any sort of voice he had ever heard and imitate them so quickly in succession that any one passing would think there was a great crowd of blacks in that camp. His object was to entice as many strange black fellows into his camp as he could one at a time; then he would kill them and gradually gain the whole country round for his own. His chance was when he managed to get a single black fellow into his camp which he very often did then by his cunning he always gained his end and the black fellow's death. This was how he attained that end. A black fellow probably separated from his fellows in the excitement of the chase would be returning home alone passing within earshot of Weedah's camp he would hear the various voices and wonder what tribe could be there. Curiosity would induce him to come near. He would probably peer into the camp and only seeing Weedah standing alone would advance towards him. Weedah would be standing at a little distance from a big glowing fire where he would wait until the strange black fellow came quite close to him. Then he would ask him what he wanted. The stranger would say he had heard many voices and had wondered what tribe it could be so had come near to find out. Weedah would say "But only I am here. How could you have heard voices? See; look round; I am alone." Bewildered the stranger would look round and say in a puzzled tone of voice: "Where are they all gone? As I came I heard babies crying men calling and women laughing; many voices I heard but you only I see." "And only I am here. The wind must have stirred the branches of the balah trees and you must have thought it was the wailing of children the laughing of the gouggourgahgah you heard and thought it the laughter of women and mine must have been the voice as of men that you heard. Alone in the bush as the shadows fall a man breeds strange fancies. See by the light of this fire where are your fancies now? No women laugh no babies cry only I Weedah talk." As Weedah was talking he kept edging the stranger towards the fire; when they were quite close to it he turned swiftly seized him and threw him right into the middle of the blaze. This scene was repeated time after time until at last the ranks of the black fellows living round the camp of Weedah began to get thin.  Mullyan the eagle hawk determined to fathom the mystery for as yet the black fellows had no clue as to how or where their friends had disappeared. Mullyan when Beeargah his cousin returned to his camp no more made up his mind to get on his track and follow it until at length he solved the mystery. After following the track of Beeargah as he had chased the kangaroo to where he had slain it on he followed his homeward trail. Over stony ground he tracked him and through sand across plains and through scrub. At last in a scrub and still on the track of Beeargah he heard the sounds of many voices babies crying women singing men talking. Peering through the bush finding the track took him nearer the spot whence came the sounds he saw the grass humpies. "Who can these be?" he thought. The track led him right into the camp where alone Weedah was to be seen. Mullyan advanced towards him and asked where were the people whose voices he had heard as he came through the bush.  Weedah said: "How can I tell you? I know of no people; I live alone." "But" said Mullyan the eagle hawk "I heard babies crying women laughing and men talking not one but many." "And I alone am here. Ask of your ears what trick they played you or perhaps your eyes fail you now. Can you see any but me? Look for yourself." "And if as indeed it seems you only are here what did you with Beeargah my cousin and where are my friends? Many are their trails that I see coming into this camp but none going out. And if you alone live here you alone can answer me." "What know I of you or your friends? Nothing. Ask of the winds that blow. Ask of Bahloo the moon who looks down on the earth by night. Ask of Yhi the sun that looks down by day. But ask not Weedah who dwells alone and knows naught of your friends." But as Weedah was talking he was carefully edging Mullyan towards the fire.  Below And On Top Chapter I.  The Peep-o'-Day had been shut down for a long time now. The grand machinery rusted in the imposing brick engine-house deserted by all saving the swallows and Dick who could just squeeze in through the slit in the wall where the beam rode and who did not share the superstitious fear inspired in his schoolmates by its dim light and silence and loneliness. The rabbits burrowed and bred under the black boilers and about the foundations of the towering stack and a subduing influence hung around the old mine and touched with reverence the stranger loitering curiously about its many buildings and piled-up tips.   Over young Dick Haddon the mine exerted a peculiar fascination. Most of his spare time after school hours and on Saturday afternoons he spent running at large about the place washing innumerable prospects in his old fryingpan at the big dam. He found his way into the locked offices and rummaged the blacksmith's shop the engine-room and boiler-houses; climbed the lightning-rod on the dizzy rocking smoke-stack to the imminent risk of his precious neck; scrambled over every part of poppet-legs brace and puddling plat doing monkey on the tie-beams with sheer falls of a hundred or two hundred feet inviting him to the scattered clean white boulders below; or taking the air up on the poppet-heads to the scandal of Brother Bear or Brother Petric or any other pious brother of the little Waddytown Wesleyan chapel for all believed such devilment to be a certain evidence of evil possession. [2]  The mine had always filled the greater part of the boy's life. He remembered since memory began with him a mighty smoking whistling entity vomiting unending water and clattering truck-loads of gravel and slate and curious streams of white mullock fed with big four-horse waggon-loads of wood that came up the muddy Springs road to the accompaniment of volleying whip-cracks and gorgeous profanity that seemed grand and inspiring and filled him with the same large emotions as a tale of "Arabian Nights" read aloud by his mother before the winter evening fires.   He remembered too that night when he was five years old - ages ago it seemed to him now - when he crawled from his bed and found his mother her white nightdress all dabbled with blood wailing over his father lying silent and motionless upon the kitchen floor whilst in the grey shadowy background stood three or four miners ashen-faced and still hiding their mouths behind their smirched felt hats. He knew that the mine had killed his father and thought of it as a living thing taking vengeance. Even now when he was eleven and almost a man the illusion was not dispelled and sometimes took complete possession of him especially when none other was near and the wind played upon the many vast props and legs of the mine as if they were the strings of a gigantic harp and crooned mournful songs amongst the timbers or when he called through the openings between the slabs over the pump shaft and started the voices whispering in the black bottomless depths and the moans and sobs vibrating faintly in the miles of dripping dark drives far below there in the centre of the world. [3]  Other children came over the common occasionally during the dinner hour or on bright afternoons from the weatherbeaten wooden school in the lazy town-ship to slide down the tips or ride on the long arms of the capstans breaking their limbs and their heads indiscriminately and Dickie resented it as an intrusion. Tinker Smith he didn't mind; the little dry old fossicker was silent and pipeclayed and seemed to be part of the mine and imbued with its spirit. He had always been there Dick thought pottering about amongst the tips sluicing puddling and cradling or crooning over his pan at the water's edge. [4]  The mine had another familiar whom Dickie respected - one indeed whom he regarded with a profound reverence as a creature superior to the ordinary run of mortals gentler and more angelic than mere women were and one having some wondrous affinity with those sorrowful souls lost in the long drives in whose existence he so implicitly believed. This was Sim's Idiot the mad woman who came from the bush beyond the township and visited the mine by night only - a tall woman with long silver-white hair and a pale young face in which her dark eyes shone with lustre that lived in no other eyes the boy had ever seen or dreamed of. Knowing no other form of madness than this which was ineffably beautiful and mournful and tender Dick's mind assimilated the term with his highest ideas of beauty purity and love and Agnes Brett became an ideal of his boyish fancy.   Agnes's father a fairly well-to-do farmer owned the paddocks where the youngsters of Waddy went to gather sticks and bark and where they ran wild half their time - nesting or hunting meek 'possums or malicious native cats. She was a widow. Three years ago twelve months after their marriage her husband Simon Brett was killed with three others in a drive of the Peep-o'-Day almost under the house where his wife lay peacefully sleeping. A blundering screaming fool took the news to her and came near to killing her on the instant. A baby was born and for long days the mother was despaired of; but she lived - lived bereft of reason and possessed with many quaint beliefs about the old mine and the spirit of her murdered lover; and this girl who was handsome and ruddy and commonplace in health and happiness went home to her parents again a slim eerie creature wondrously transformed with a face superhuman in its spirituality. Her hair whitened rapidly and she was silent save when she spoke of Sim and of the mine that had killed him. [5]  They called her Sim's Idiot and in the minds of those who had known her from her infancy and had grown up with her Sim's Idiot soon ceased to be connected with Agnes Brett; it seemed as if the latter had died and a stranger had come amongst them between whom and the woman they had known there was not a passing resemblance or anything in common.   The name was absurdly inappropriate; but Waddy lacked imagination; in common with most bush town-ships it had a lamentable poverty of ideas. Nothing in Agnes's affliction suggested idiocy - indeed a celestial intellectuality seemed to sit upon her serene countenance. But Waddy did not draw fine distinctions and the name stuck.   One night shortly after her return to her father's house Agnes was missed and was found an hour or so later standing in the moonlight by the post and rail fence surrounding the Peep-o'-Day gazing upon the mine and calling her husband's name. They led her away but she came again on other nights a statuesque figure waiting and calling in a penetrating voice that carried above the clangour of the engines and the churning roar of the puddlers. [6]  Sometimes she addressed the mine in sweet plaintive unintelligible speech and it was a pathetic yet a thrilling sight to see her thus when the furnace yawned and the rolling steam-clouds caught the ruddy glow and lept like flame and the radiance fell upon her for a moment glorifying her tall figure picking it out of the darkness.   At first she was a wonder in Waddytown and people when they heard that Sim's Idiot was out would walk across from the township about a quarter of a mile off and gathered in small nervous groups amongst the scattered trees would watch her curiously as long as she remained offering abject opinions with the gravity of sages the women frequently discerning Sim's spirit beckoning amongst the fleeing steam rack to their delicious terror. Waddy presently lost interest seeing that nothing happened and the comings and goings of Sim's Idiot were not considered worthy of remark. Even her father who was devoted to her ceased to follow her knowing that no harm would befall and the brace- [7] men hearing her voice were not thrilled as at first with irritating fears or induced to take unworkman-like precautions when moving about the shaft for the sake of their own wives who might some day be brought to this.   Whilst the Peep-o'-Day continued working the mad woman ventured no nearer than the rail fence but at length long after the mine was shut down and when rust and decay had taken full advantage of the law's delay Dickie saw her one bright night sitting alone by the pump shaft. Over the mouth of each of the two winding shafts stood a heavy cage and the pump shaft was covered with slabs securely spiked so that she was in no danger of falling into either.   The old mine in its most mysterious humours had no terrors for young Dick. His superstitious beliefs were many but without terror. Of late he came often at night with his horsehair nooses trapping the rabbits that bred miraculously about the top workings and fattened on the profuse milk thistles and the wild corn and so the sight of Agnes Brett was no unusual thing to him. But to him she never lost interest; a wonderful pity for her grew in his heart and touched his life with a melancholy utterly at variance with his healthy boyhood and his natural heartiness - a melancholy that for many weeks gave his brave busy little mother much concern about his digestion and other matters and led to his being afflicted with superfluous flannels and plied with home-brewed medicines with a camomile basis all equally atrocious to taste and smell. [8]  Dick would follow Agnes to the mine and creeping near her in the darkness would crouch in one of the cages watching her and listening as she called the one name down the echoing shaft and spoke strange mad words to the mysteries that whispered and flitted below in a voice so soft so piteous in its pleading that without comprehending he found himself sobbing aloud and filled with a passionate longing to do something to help this poor white woman with the starlike eyes who was always waiting and praying for the thing that never came. He tried to understand her to know what it was she sought and he grew to believe that it was in her poor ruined mind that her husband's spirit was imprisoned with the rest deep deep down in the black shaft or the blacker drives and that some night he would answer her - perhaps escape from the powers of darkness again and come up to her and be free and happy. To Dick it was a rational belief and he wondered that it evoked no response.   One night listening to her supplicating tones thrilled by their magical tenderness he conceived a bright idea. For days and nights it haunted him and then resolution came. He would do the thing he had thought upon and see if it were not possible to give peace to this fairy woman.     [9] Chapter II.  After school on the day on which Dick determined upon taking action he sauntered into Tinker Smith's vicinity at the Peep-o'-Day with his hands in his pockets his hat set on the back of his head and whistling affectedly. Tinker was somewhat an identity of Waddy and Dick wanted information; but there was a matter of a broken shovel to be settled between him and the old fossicker and he had to proceed warily. He selected a strategical position that offered facilities for a hurried retreat and commenced insinuatingly:   "Any luck t'day Tink'?"   The old man grunted without looking up from his tub and Dickie edged off a bit. He had little faith in Tinker Smith a little old pipeclayed man with a ferrety face and ferrety hair and thin dry whiskers. He was full of surprises and had a way of falling upon a victim when least expected and taking summary vengeance in the most convenient manner that offered itself preserving all the time an expressionless face and a calmness quite contrary to nature. He had clipped Dick with a pick handle tipped him head over heels into the dam and had bitten his ear till it bled and the boy had learned the value of eternal vigilance.   "Sim's Idiot was here again lars night" ventured Dickie after a strained silence.   [10] Tinker was indifferent.   "Say Tinker them Finny kids come here yes'dee. Teddy broke your shovel diggin' out a bunny an' I licked him."   The fossicker turned his dull little eyes doubtingly on the boy but continued puddling.   Dickie tried another tack.   "I can lay you onter a bit o' pay dirt if you want it."   Tinker knew the boy sometimes hit upon decent patches of dirt and had profited by several of his discoveries. This interested him.   "Where to?" he asked.   "Where to's tellin's" responded Dick.   Tinker churned in his tub with an air of utter obliviousness to anything beyond and Dick suspicious of the symptoms edged away a few paces.   "See here" he said presently "you tell me about Sim - her husban' you know - an' I'll show you the stuff. Got ten grains in two han'fuls Satterdee."   "S'welp yer bob?"   "True's death."   Tinker was convinced. He ceased puddling leaned on his shovel and commenced awkwardly and with great labour - conversation was difficult to him coherent narrative impossible:   "Well this here Simon Brett he was the feller what fought Hoppy Hoffman up on the pound eighteen rounds and licked him got killed in a fall in Number 3 - him an' Ryan an' Bowden an' Kit Stevens - Collard's shift. I was platman. Strappin' chap Sim; alwiz smilin'; he'd work smilin' an' fight smilin'. Happy sorter man. She was his missus this idjit." [11]  Dickie wanted further particulars and as Tinker had evidently agreed to an armistice he abandoned his defences and approached the fossicker.   "But you knew him an' his wife; you went ter their house sometimes didn't you? What 'id he call her? How'd he talk when he was bein' lovin' like? Was they sweethearts long an' did they walk in the wattle paddocks an' sit on the rocks on Bullock Hill?"   Dick had a riotous fancy and Tinker was as unimaginative as a wombat but by dint of close questioning he managed to get out of the old man much of the information he needed and after that he waited his opportunity.   Agnes did not visit the mine for nearly two weeks and when Dick saw her again it was too late to effect his purpose; she was already crouched at the mouth of the shaft. Her face was pressed to one of the narrow openings and she wept with a low moaning sound. Dick touched her thin pale hand and spoke to her.   "Who's there please?" His heartbeat heavily and erratically and he trembled although he did not fear the mad woman in the least.   [12] She arose and stood regarding him for a moment. The boy pointed to the shaft.   "Won't he come?" he asked eagerly but she moved away without appearing to have heard him and he followed her slowly and from the top of the big gates watched her dark figure across the moonlit flat.   After that he waited for her and when she came again he was ready. He hastened to the shaft and pulled away one end of the side slab having found some days previously that the spike was loose. Then he squeezed his body through the opening and stood in the pump shaft on the topmost rung of the ladder that ran straight down the wall of the shaft. Grasping the ladder with his left hand with the other he dragged the slab - still secured with one spike - into its place again and clinging to the rungs in the tomb-like silence he waited.   The mighty black depths seemed to drag at the boy as he stood drawing and drawing him down into the abyss at his feet and as if irritated at his bold intrusion the mysteries muttered and moaned and eddied impatiently and an ominous threatening seemed to murmur in the hollow workings. But the boy was too full of his purpose to give any heed to these when Agnes came and he saw the light of her eyes as she bent her face to the crevice just above his head. He felt her breath upon his cheek as she called the name of her dead lover repeating the word again and again in the mournful chant so familiar to him. [13] There was no coherency in the words that followed. They sounded like an inarticulate prayer instinct with intensest emotion but softly spoken.   Dick listened for a time absorbed and presently when she seemed awaiting a reply he brought his lips close to her face and whispered a few words:   "Aggie dear wife!"   The boy had not anticipated the full effect of his action. A wild cry of joy rang out upon the night and awakened eddying echoes in the deep shaft and the woman flung herself upon the slabs beating them with her thin hands plucking at their edges with long white fingers sobbing laughing and calling upon the dead in an ecstasy of madness that appalled him and he clung to the ladder trembling in every limb.   Dick had never before succeeded in winning a reply from the woman. When he met her at the mine or wandering in the bush and spoke to her feeling that she pleaded for something in that strange language of hers and hoping that he might be able to help her since none of the men and women of Waddy gave heed to her sorrow she regarded him with great unmeaning eyes that did not see; in their gaze he seemed to have no existence; and if she spoke it was only in the tangled speech of madness. He expected she would hear and understand the voice in the shaft and believe her husband had answered her at last.   It was long ere Dick found courage to speak again but when Agnes was silent save for the faint sobbing that escaped her he leant back his head and whispered close to her face and her hot tears fell upon his cheek. She did not shriek this time but babbled a few words and finished laughing softly. [14]  Dickie addressed her with expressions of endearment and pet names learned from the old fossicker and finding her calm and rapt he wove quaint fancies from fairy tales into his talk as he had planned it and at times his words were almost as mad as her own but he remembered always to dwell upon visions of joy and beauty. He had escaped from the desolation of the old mine and was going up out of the darkness to light and beatitude to dwell with the angels in a boyish paradise. The talk was jumbled; it was spoken in the quaint diction peculiar to bush boys; but there was a flavour of inspiration in it and the mad woman clinging to the slabs above was awakened to some understanding and laughed a soft low laugh and murmured like a happy child.   At length Dickie was recalled to himself by the numbness of his extended arms and the pain throbbing in his neck.   "I'm goin' now" he whispered. "Good-bye dear wife."   Pressing his face to the slabs where her white face shone faintly he kissed her mouth.   She cried out again at the contact - a cry of exultation.   [15] Dick standing on the ladder waited till she should leave before climbing out of the shaft. She remained prone upon the slabs silent for a long time but at length she talked talked almost inaudibly but with no trace of the anguish that was wont to make her voice like the moaning of a dumb beast in pain. The boy's limbs ached and fear began to creep into his heart. Still he was true to his purpose and after twenty minutes that seemed half a night to him Agnes arose and moved slowly away. Dick waited for a few minutes and then with a great effort painful to his stiffened limbs he shifted the slab aside and drew himself out of the shaft. He was replacing the long spike when looking up he saw the mad woman standing erect within a few yards of the shaft regarding him fixedly. When he faced her she took a step forward threw out her hands and with a cry that seemed to the boy to echo among the clouds overhead and in every hollow of the earth she fell forward upon the stones and lay still. Dick ran to her and turned her face to the moonlight; it was rigid the half-closed eyes were glazed. He believed her dead and fled like'a hunted hare.   Houten and Winter returned with Dick to the mine and found Agnes as he had left her. They took her up and carried her to her father's home the boy going after with a quaking heart. Then followed a long illness for Agnes and a troublous time for little Mrs. Haddon who became more and more precautious in the matter of flannel and doubled the doses of camomile tea without effecting any visible improvement in Dick's condition. The boy had become strangely morbid; he grew pale and thin and whilst his mother fretted imagining him to be the victim of some wasting disease he was beset with a fear that Agnes Brett was going to die and that he would be her murderer. He kept his secret religiously within his own breast and in his spare time he haunted her father's farm sometimes venturing to ask after the sick woman but usually skulking about as if dreading observation. [16]  At length to Dick's immeasurable relief Agnes was reported out of danger and Waddy was electrified by the news that Sim's Idiot had recovered her reason. With the restoration of her health her mind had been restored and she was now as she had been before the news of her husband's death struck her down. Happiness returned to the breast of Dickie Haddon but he still kept to himself the story of his escapade at the mine waiting for a chance to see Agnes wondering if she remembered. When at length he saw her face to face he was sadly disillusioned. She sat in an easy chair under the verandah at the farmhouse; the beautiful white hair was done up in a hard ungainly knot. She looked ordinary - not at all the gentle spiritual creature he had known. Dick was vaguely troubled. He felt that the responsibility of this deplorable change rested upon his shoulders and was surprised that no-body seemed to regret the alteration in Mrs. Brett. [17]    Chapter III.  Dick was as mischievous an imp as the township was afflicted with - and the boys of Waddy were even more prone than boys of other places to the evil that is dear to the young heart everywhere; but the other boys did not take their pranks seriously as he did. His exuberant fancy invested his absurdest escapades with a high purpose and a most tremendous dignity. If he led a moonlight raid upon Jock Summer's pear trees it was in the character of a mediaeval knight of spotless honour and god-like beauty and the purpose was to rescue from an ungainly gross and remorseless baron some fair distressful damsel. He stole the pears all the same and was careful to secure his share of the loot but for the time being imagination held sway. To his mates it was all entertaining make-believe - to Dick Haddon it was all actual and as the knight of old Thunderbolt the bushranger or Jacky Jacky the chief of a bloodthirsty band of blacks the boy's romanticism helped largely to keep the lives of the housewives and housefathers of Waddy from sinking into an enervating monotony of peaceful dulness.   [18] But Dick had not enlisted the co-operation of the mates who usually shared in his boyish pranks in this his most wonderful adventure. For some time now he had deserted the haunts of his youthful companions and there was comparative calm in Waddy. The boys were very well as subordinate blacks or inferior banditti but in a matter of pure sentiment Dick felt instinctively that he could expect no sympathy from them - they would not understand. The radiant unearthliness of the mad woman had never appealed to them; they were indifferent to her white beauty like that of the shining angels pictured in the Haddon family bible. They were just plain boys and the plain boy is perilously near to the brute at times in the entire absence of motive and thought that characterizes his cruelties. Dick's fiercest battle was fought with Fod Carroll who led an attack with sods on Agnes Brett on the Back Flat and Fod bewildered by the impetuosity of his small enemy collapsed miserably in the third round. That fight was long remembered in Waddy; it created a new respect for Dickie among the boys and fixed his status as the natural leader in any matter of common interest in which he chose to interfere.   There was one boy indeed in whom he might have confided - Dolf Belman a youngster of about his own age who provided most of his books and was his lieutenant in many adventures; but Dick in his sick unrest wanted no companionship. The more he saw of Mrs. Brett - and she rapidly grew plump and ruddy - the more bitterly he lamented the act of his that had so altered her. He who had been most anxious to serve her had been the one to bring about this deplorable change this transformation of an ethereal creature into a giggling dairymaid. [19]  One evening Dick Haddon saw Agnes Brett walking with Peter Kiley in the wattle paddock and Peter - the long ungainly son of a long ungainly dairyman up the creek - was making awkward and bashful love to Mrs. Brett whilst the buxom widow made a great pretence of resisting his elephantine blandishments with shrill laughter and coy protestations.   Dickie fled from the sight filled with bitterness and seeking the seclusion of the Peep-o'-Day blubbered miserably on the slabs over the pump shaft for twenty minutes.   How would Sim bear it? was a question that now presented itself to his active mind. Agnes had not been seen near the mine since her recovery - she never seemed to think of it or of her dead husband now. Did the spirit imprisoned in the old mine miss her? Was it waiting to hear her calling again in the early evening hours? The boy's faith was absolute; he knew that the drives were peopled with the spirits of the mine's victims and that his father's ghost and the chosts of Brett and Bowden and Ryan and the rest walked the drives and talked in strange low monotonous voices. He had heard them talking had distinguished words he thought when all was still. How could he doubt? But he thought only of Brett the forsaken husband the neglected lover the poor spirit whom his act had deprived of its only companionship and consolation and he spent much time peering down through the cracks and harassing his young soul with most extravagant conjecture. [20]  The morbid condition induced by these truly preposterous problems was the occasion of many more doses of camomile tea extra strong and Mrs. Haddon in her perplexity called in elderly female experts who having reared large families in spite of all the ills that are the heritage of youth believed themselves to be and were generally believed to be capable of diagnosing every ailment and prescribing innumerable infallible cures. These old women gravely considered Dickie's symptoms and suggested many remedies with most of which he was duly afflicted at one time or another; but the boy refused to brighten up and resume his old healthy careless impish courses under the influence of either pill potion plaster or unction or the lot together.   Meanwhile however Dick had resolved to speak to Mrs. Brett at the first opportunity. He was curious to know her thoughts on the matter uppermost in his mind. He had the idea that her present condition of mind and body was abnormal and that she might be brought back to her former romantic state if she were made to understand that the spirit of her dead husband wandered in the Peep-o'-Day workings and yearned to hear her voice again. [21]  Later the boy saw Mrs. Brett at the Sunday-school anniversary picnic. She was now ruddy-cheeked and full-breasted. Clad in a tight town-made dress and with her wonderful hair dyed a common brown she was romping with a shrieking crowd playing kiss-in-the-ring and a sense of hopelessness took possession of Dickie as he watched; but presently when she had taken a seat on a log apart from the rest and was fanning herself after her exertions he approached her and straddling the same butt commenced with a boy's abruptness:   "Ain't you never goin' ter the Peep-o'-Day no more?"   Agnes Brett turned upon him astonished and indignant. Her father had told her of her doings during the time of her affliction and she hated any allusion to that time from the lips of others.   "If you're cheeky little boy I'll box your ears for you" she said with a threatening gesture.   Dicky did not wince but sat looking up at her like a small red-headed cherub in rather indifferent health and Agnes who was as soft of heart as any breathing creature was touched by the wan expression of the ailing imp.   "Ain't meanin' it fer cheek" said Dick picking nervously at the bark; "I jes wanter know."   [22] "Well I am not going - I am well now - an' you mus' never talk about it."   "Why?" Dick moved nearer. "I say d' you know me?"   "The boy Haddon."   On Our Selection.  Chapter I. Starting the Selection.   It's twenty years ago now since we settled on the Creek. Twenty years! I remember well the day we came from Stanthorpe on Jerome's dray-eight of us and all the things - beds tubs a bucket the two cedar chairs with the pine bottoms and backs that Dad put in them some pint-pots and old Crib. It was a scorching hot day too - talk about thirst! At every creek we came to we drank till it stopped running.   Dad didn't travel up with us: he had gone some months before to put up the house and dig the waterhole. It was a slabbed house with shingled roof and space enough for two rooms; but the partition wasn't up. The floor was earth; but Dad had a mixture of sand and fresh cow-dung with which he used to keep it level. About once every month he would put it on; and everyone had to keep outside that day till it was dry. There were no locks on the doors: pegs were put in to keep them fast at night; and the slabs were not very close together for we could easily see through them anybody coming on horseback. Joe and I used to play at counting the stars through the cracks in the roof. [2]  The day after we arrived Dad took Mother and us out to see the paddock and the flat on the other side of the gully that he was going to clear for cultivation. There was no fence round the paddock but he pointed out on a tree the surveyor's marks showing the boundary of our ground. It must have been fine land the way Dad talked about it! There was very valuable timber on it too so he said; and he showed us a place among some rocks on a ridge where he was sure gold would be found but we weren't to say anything about it. Joe and I went back that evening and turned over every stone on the ridge but we didn't find any gold.   No mistake it was a real wilderness - nothing but trees "goannas" dead timber and bears; and the nearest house - Dwyer's - was three miles away. I often wonder how the women stood it the first few years; and I can remember how Mother when she was alone used to sit on a log where the lane is now and cry for hours. Lonely! It was lonely.   Dad soon talked about clearing a couple of acres and putting in corn - all of us did in fact - till the work commenced. It was a delightful topic before we started; but in two weeks the clusters of fires that illumined the whooping bush in the night and the crash upon crash of the big trees as they fell had lost all their poetry. [3] [4]  We toiled and toiled clearing those four acres where the haystacks are now standing till every tree and sapling that had grown there was down. We thought then the worst was over; but how little we knew of clearing land! Dad was never tired of calculating and telling us how much the crop would fetch if the ground could only be got ready in time to put it in; so we laboured the harder.   With our combined male and female forces and the aid of a sapling lever we rolled the thundering big logs together in the face of Hell's own fires; and when there were no logs to roll it was tramp tramp the day through gathering armfuls of sticks while the clothes clung to our backs with a muddy perspiration. Sometimes Dan and Dave would sit in the shade beside the billy of water and gaze at the small patch that had taken so long to do; then they would turn hopelessly to what was before them and ask Dad (who would never take a spell) what was the use of thinking of ever getting such a place cleared? And when Dave wanted to know why Dad didn't take up a place on the plain where there were no trees to grub and plenty of water Dad would cough as if something was sticking in his throat and then curse terribly about the squatters and political jobbery. He would soon cool down though and get hopeful again. [5]  "Look at the Dwyers" he'd say; "from ten acres of wheat they got £70 last year besides feed for the fowls; they've got corn in now and there's only the two."   It wasn't only burning off! Whenever there came a short drought the waterhole was sure to run dry; then it was take turns to carry water from the springs - about two miles. We had no draught horse and if we had there was neither water-cask trolly nor dray; so we humped it - and talk about a drag! By the time you returned if you hadn't drained the bucket in spite of the big drink you'd take before leaving the springs more than half would certainly be spilt through the vessel bumping against your leg every time you stumbled in the long grass. Somehow none of us liked carrying water. We would sooner keep the fires going all day without dinner than do a trip to the springs. [6]  One hot thirsty day it was Joe's turn with the bucket and he managed to get back without spilling very much. We were all pleased because there was enough left after the tea had been made to give each a drink. Dinner was nearly over; Dan had finished and was taking it easy on the sofa when Joe said:   "I say Dad what's a nater-dog like?" Dad told him: "Yellow sharp ears and bushy tail."   "Those muster bin some then thet I seen - I don't know 'bout the bushy tail-all th' hair had comed off." "Where'd y' see them Joe?" we asked. "Down 'n th' springs floating about-dead."   Then everyone seemed to think hard and look at the tea. I didn't want any more. Dan jumped off the sofa and went outside; and Dad looked after Mother.   At last the four acres - excepting the biggest of the iron-bark trees and about fifty stumps-were pretty well cleared; and then came a problem that couldn't be worked-out on a draught-board. I have already said that we hadn't any draught horses; indeed the only thing on the selection like a horse was an old "tuppy" mare that Dad used to straddle. [7] The date of her foaling went further back than Dad's I believe; and she was shaped something like an alderman. We found her one day in about eighteen inches of mud with both eyes picked out by the crows and her hide bearing evidence that a feathery tribe had made a roost of her carcase. Plainly there was no chance of breaking up the ground with her help. We had no plough either; how then was the corn to be put in? That was the question.   Dan and Dave sat outside in the corner of the chimney both scratching the ground with a chip and not saying anything. Dad and Mother sat inside talking it over. Sometimes Dad would get up and walk round the room shaking his head; then he would kick old Crib for lying under the table. At last Mother struck something which brightened him up and he called Dave.   "Catch Topsy and-" He paused because he remembered the old mare was dead.   "Run over and ask Mister Dwyer to lend me three hoes."   Dave went; Dwyer lent the hoes; and the problem was solved. That was how we started.     [8] Chapter II. Our First Harvest   If there is anything worse than burr-cutting or breaking stones it's putting corn in with a hoe.   We had just finished. The girls were sowing the last of the grain when Fred Dwyer appeared on the scene. Dad stopped and talked with him while we (Dan Dave and myself) sat on our hoe-handles like kangaroos on their tails and killed flies. Terrible were the flies particularly when you had sore legs or the blight.   Dwyer was a big man with long brown arms and red bushy whiskers.   "You must find it slow work with a hoe?" he said.   "Well-yes-pretty" replied Dad (just as if he wasn't quite sure).   After a while Dwyer walked over the "cultivation" and looked at it hard then scraped a hole with the heel of his boot spat and said he didn't think the corn would ever come up. Dan slid off his perch at this and Dave let the flies eat his leg nearly off without seeming to feel it; but Dad argued it out. [9]   "Orright orright" said Dwyer; "I hope it do."   Then Dad went on to speak of places he knew of where they preferred hoes to a plough for putting corn in with; but Dwyer only laughed and shook his head.   "D--n him!" Dad muttered when he had gone; "what rot! won't come up!"   ("I hope it do!" said Dwyer.) [10]   Dan who was still thinking hard at last straightened himself up and said he didn't think it was any use either. Then Dad lost his temper.   "No use?" he yelled "you whelp what do you know about it?"   Dan answered quietly: "On'y this that it's nothing but tomfoolery this hoe business."   "How would you do it then?" Dad roared and Dan hung his head and tried to button his buttonless shirt wrist-band while he thought.   "With a plough" he answered.   Something in Dad's throat prevented him saying what he wished so he rushed at Dan with the hoe but - was too slow.   Dan slept outside that night.   No sooner was the grain sown than it rained. How it rained! for weeks! And in the midst of it all the corn came up - every grain - and proved Dwyer a bad prophet. Dad was in high spirits and promised each of us something - new boots all round.   The corn continued to grow-so did our hopes but a lot faster. Pulling the suckers and "heeling it up" with hoes was but child's play-we liked it. Our thoughts were all on the boots; 'twas months months since we had pulled on a pair. Every night in bed we decided twenty times over whether they would be lace-ups or bluchers and Dave had a bottle of "goanna" oil ready to keep his soft with. [11]   Dad now talked of going up country-as Mother put it "to keep the wolf from the door"-while the four acres of corn ripened. He went and returned on the day Tom and Bill were born-twins. Maybe his absence did keep the wolf from the door but it didn't keep the dingoes from the fowl-house!   Once the corn ripened it didn't take long to pull it but Dad had to put on his considering-cap when we came to the question of getting it in. To hump it in bags seemed inevitable till Dwyer asked Dad to give him a hand to put up a milking-yard. Then Dad's chance came and he seized it.   Dwyer in return for Dad's labour carted in the corn and took it to the railway-station when it was shelled. Yes when it was shelled! We had to shell it with our hands and what a time we had! For the first half-hour we didn't mind it at all and shelled cob after cob as though we liked it; but next day talk about blisters! we couldn't close our hands for them and our faces had to go without a wash for a fortnight.   Fifteen bags we got off the four acres and the storekeeper undertook to sell it. Corn was then at 12s. and 14s. per bushel and Dad expected a big cheque.   Every day for nearly three weeks he trudged over to the store (five miles) and I went with him. Each time the storekeeper would shake his head and say "No word yet."   Dad couldn't understand. At last word did come. The storekeeper was busy serving a customer when we went in so he told Dad to "hold on a bit". [12]   (Good old dad.) [13]   Dad felt very pleased-so did I.   The customer left. The storekeeper looked at Dad and twirled a piece of string round his first finger then said- "Twelve pounds your corn cleared Mr. Rudd; but of course" (going to a desk) "there's that account of yours which I have credited with the amount of the cheque-that brings it down now to just £3 as you will see by the account."   Dad was speechless and looked sick.   He went home and sat on a block and stared into the fire with his chin resting in his hands till Mother laid her hand upon his shoulder and asked him kindly what was the matter. Then he drew the storekeeper's bill from his pocket and handed it to her and she too sat down and gazed into the fire.   That was our first harvest.     [14] Chapter III.   Before we got the deeds our selection adjoined a sheep-run on the Darling Downs and boasted of few and scant improvements though things had gradually got a little better than when we started. A verandahless four-roomed slab-hut now standing out from a forest of box-trees a stock-yard and six acres under barley were the only evidence of settlement. A few horses - not ours - sometimes grazed about; and occasionally a mob of cattle - also not ours - cows with young calves steers and an old bull or two would stroll around chew the best legs of any trousers that might be hanging on the log reserved as a clothes-line then leave in the night and be seen no more for months-some of them never.   And yet we were always out of meat!   Dad was up the country earning a few pounds - the corn drove him up when it didn't bring what he expected. All we got out of it was a bag of flour - I don't know what the storekeeper got. Before he left we put in the barley. Somehow Dad didn't believe in sowing any more crops he seemed to lose heart; but Mother talked it over with him and when reminded that he would soon be entitled to the deeds he brightened up again and worked. How he worked! [15]  We had no plough so old Anderson turned over the six acres for us and Dad gave him a pound an acre - at least he was to send him the first six pounds got up country. Dad sowed the seed; then he Dan and Dave yoked themselves to a large dry bramble each and harrowed it in. From the way they sweated it must have been hard work. Sometimes they would sit down in the middle of the paddock and "spell" but Dad would say something about getting the deeds and they'd start again.   A cockatoo-fence was round the barley; and wire-posts a long distance apart round the grass-paddock. We were to get the wire to put in when Dad sent the money; and apply for the deeds when he came back. Things would be different then according to Dad and the farm would be worked properly. We would break up fifty acres build a barn buy a reaper ploughs cornsheller get cows and good horses and start two or three ploughs. Meanwhile if we (Dan Dave and I) minded the barley he was sure there'd be something got out of it.   Dad had been away about six weeks. Travellers were passing by every day and there wasn't one that didn't want a little of something or other. Mother used to ask them if they had met Dad? None ever did until an old grey man came along and said he knew Dad well - he had camped with him one night and shared a damper. Mother was very pleased and brought him in. We had a kangaroo-rat (stewed) for dinner that day. The girls didn't want to lay it on the table at first but Mother said he wouldn't know what it was. The traveller was very hungry and liked it and when passing his plate the second time for more said it wasn't often he got any poultry. [16]  He tramped on again and the girls were very glad he didn't know it was a rat. But Dave wasn't so sure that he didn't know a rat from a rooster and reckoned he hadn't met Dad at all.   The seventh week Dad came back. He arrived at night and the lot of us had to get up to find the hammer to knock the peg out of the door and let him in. He brought home three pounds-not enough to get the wire with but he also brought a horse and saddle. He didn't say if he bought them. It was a bay mare a grand animal for a journey - so Dad said - and only wanted condition. Emelina he called her. No mistake she was a quiet mare! We put her where there was good feed but she wasn't one that fattened on grass. Birds took kindly to her - crows mostly - and she couldn't go anywhere but a flock of them accompanied her. Even when Dad used to ride her (Dan or Dave never rode her) they used to follow and would fly on ahead to wait in a tree and "caw" when he was passing beneath. [17]   ("When I get those deeds.") [18]   One morning when Dan was digging potatoes for dinner - splendid potatoes they were too Dad said; he had only once tasted sweeter ones but they were grown in a cemetery-he found the kangaroos had been in the barley. We knew what that meant and that night made fires round it thinking to frighten them off but didn't - mobs of them were in at daybreak. Dad swore from the house at them but they took no notice; and when he ran down they just hopped over the fence and sat looking at him. Poor Dad! I don't know if he was knocked up or if he didn't know any more but he stopped swearing and sat on a stump looking at a patch of barley they had destroyed and shaking his head. Perhaps he was thinking if he only had a dog! We did have one until he got a bait. Old Crib! He was lying under the table at supper-time when he took the first fit and what a fright we got! He must have reared before stiffening out because he capsized the table into Mother's lap and everything on it smashed except the tin-plates and the pints. The lamp fell on Dad too and the melted fat scalded his arm. Dad dragged Crib out and cut off his tail and ears but he might as well have taken off his head.   Dad stood with his back to the fire while Mother was putting a stitch in his trousers. "There's nothing for it but to watch them at night" he was saying when old Anderson appeared and asked "if I could have those few pounds." Dad asked Mother if she had any money in the house? Of course she hadn't. Then he told Anderson he would let him have it when he got the deeds. Anderson left and Dad sat on the edge of the sofa and seemed to be counting the grains on a corn-cob that he lifted from the floor while Mother sat looking at a kangaroo-tail on the table and didn't notice the cat drag it off. At last Dad said "Ah well! - it won't be long now Ellen before we have the deeds!" [19]  We took it in turns to watch the barley. Dan and the two girls watched the first half of the night and Dad Dave and I the second. Dad always slept in his clothes and he used to think some nights that the others came in before time. It was terrible going out half awake to tramp round that paddock from fire to fire from hour to hour shouting and yelling. And how we used to long for daybreak! Whenever we sat down quietly together for a few minutes we would hear the dull thud! thud! thud!-the kangaroo's footstep.   At last we each carried a kerosene tin slung like a kettle-drum and belted it with a waddy - Dad's idea. He himself manipulated an old bell that he had found on a bullock's grave and made a splendid noise with it.   It was a hard struggle but we succeeded in saving the bulk of the barley and cut it down with a scythe and three reaping-hooks. The girls helped to bind it and Jimmy Mulcahy carted it in return for three days' binding Dad put in for him. The stack wasn't built twenty-four hours when a score of somebody's crawling cattle ate their way up to their tails in it. We took the hint and put a sapling fence round it. [20]  Again Dad decided to go up country for a while. He caught Emelina after breakfast rolled up a blanket told us to watch the stack and started. The crows followed.   We were having dinner. Dave said "Listen!" We listened and it seemed as though all the crows and other feathered demons of the wide bush were engaged in a mighty scrimmage. "Dad's back!" Dan said and rushed out in the lead of a stampede.   Emelina was back anyway with the swag on but Dad wasn't. We caught her and Dave pointed to white spots all over the saddle and said - "Hanged if they haven't been ridin' her!" - meaning the crows.   Mother got anxious and sent Dan to see what had happened. Dan found Dad with his shirt off at a pub on the main road wanting to fight the publican for a hundred pounds but couldn't persuade him to come home. Two men brought him home that night on a sheep-hurdle and he gave up the idea of going away.   After all the barley turned out well - there was a good price that year and we were able to run two wires round the paddock. [21]   One day a bulky Government letter came. Dad looked surprised and pleased and how his hand trembled as he broke the seal! "THE DEEDS!" he said and all of us gathered round to look at them. Dave thought they were like the inside of a bear-skin covered with writing.   Dad said he would ride to town at once and went for Emelina.   "Couldn't y' find her Dad?" Dan said seeing him return without the mare.   Dad cleared his throat but didn't answer. Mother asked him.   "Yes I found her" he said slowly "dead."   The crows had got her at last.   He wrapped the deeds in a piece of rag and walked. [22]   There was nothing scarcely that he didn't send out from town and Jimmy Mulcahy and old Anderson many and many times after that borrowed our dray.   Now Dad regularly curses the deeds every mail-day and wishes to Heaven he had never got them.     [23] Chapter IV. When the wolf was at the door.   There had been a long stretch of dry weather and we were cleaning out the waterhole. Dad was down the hole shovelling up the dirt; Joe squatted on the brink catching flies and letting them go again without their wings - a favourite amusement of his; while Dan and Dave cut a drain to turn the water that ran off the ridge into the hole-when it rained. Dad was feeling dry and told Joe to fetch him a drink.   Joe said: "See first if this cove can fly with only one wing." Then he went but returned and said: "There's no water in the bucket - Mother used the last drop to boil th' punkins" and renewed the fly-catching. Dad tried to spit and was going to say something when Mother half-way between the house and the waterhole cried out that the grass paddock was all on fire. "So it is Dad!" said Joe slowly but surely dragging the head off a fly with finger and thumb. [24]  Dad scrambled out of the hole and looked. "Good God!" was all he said. How he ran! All of us rushed after him except Joe - he couldn't run very well because the day before he had ridden fifteen miles on a poor horse bare-back. When near the fire Dad stopped running to break a green bush. He hit upon a tough one. Dad was in a hurry. The bush wasn't. Dad swore and tugged with all his might. Then the bush broke and Dad fell heavily upon his back and swore again.   To save the cockatoo fence that was round the cultivation was what was troubling Dad. Right and left we fought the fire with boughs. Hot! It was hellish hot! Whenever there was a lull in the wind we worked. Like a wind-mill Dad's bough moved - and how he rushed for another when one was used up! Once we had the fire almost under control; but the wind rose again and away went the flames higher and faster than ever.   "It's no use" said Dad at last placing his hand on his head and throwing down his bough. We did the same then stood and watched the fence go. After supper we went out again and saw it still burning. Joe asked Dad if he didn't think it was a splendid sight? Dad didn't answer him - he didn't seem conversational that night. [25]   (When the fire took fencing.) [26]   We decided to put the fence up again. Dan had sharpened the axe with a broken file and he and Dad were about to start when Mother asked them what was to be done about flour? She said she had shaken the bag to get enough to make scones for that morning's breakfast and unless some was got somewhere there would be no bread for dinner.   Dad reflected while Dan felt the edge on the axe with his thumb.   Dad said "Won't Missus Dwyer let you have a dishful until we get some?"   "No" Mother answered; "I can't ask her until we send back what we owe them."   Dad reflected again. "The Andersons then?" he said.   Mother shook her head and asked what good there was it sending to them when they only that morning had sent to her for some?   "Well we must do the best we can at present" Dad answered "and I'll go to the store this evening and see what is to be done."   Putting the fence up again in the hurry that Dad was in was the very devil! He felled the saplings-and such saplings!- trees many of them were - while we "all of a muck of sweat" dragged them into line. Dad worked like a horse himself and expected us to do the same. "Never mind staring about you" he'd say if he caught us looking at the sun to see if it were coming dinner-time - "there's no time to lose if we want to get the fence up and a crop in." [27]  Dan worked nearly as hard as Dad until he dropped the butt-end of a heavy sapling on his foot which made him hop about on one leg and say that he was sick and tired of the dashed fence. Then he argued with Dad and declared that it would be far better to put a wire-fence up at once and be done with it instead of wasting time over a thing that would only be burnt down again. "How long" he said "will it take to get the posts? Not a week" and he hit the ground disgustedly with a piece of stick he had in his hand.   "Confound it!" Dad said "haven't you got any sense boy? What earthly use would a wire-fence be without any wire in it?"   Then we knocked off and went to dinner.   No one appeared in any humour to talk at the table. Mother sat silently at the end and poured out the tea while Dad at the head served the pumpkin and divided what cold meat there was. Mother wouldn't have any meat - one of us would have to go without if she had taken any.   I don't know if it was on account of Dan arguing with him or if it was because there was no bread for dinner that Dad was in a bad temper; anyway he swore at Joe for coming to the table with dirty hands. Joe cried and said that he couldn't wash them when Dave as soon as he had washed his had thrown the water out. Then Dad scowled at Dave and Joe passed his plate along for more pumpkin. [28]  Dinner was almost over when Dan still looking hungry grinned and asked Dave if he wasn't going to have some bread? Whereupon Dad jumped up in a tearing passion. "D--n your insolence!" he said to Dan "make a jest of it would you?"   "Who's jestin'?" Dan answered and grinned again.   "Go!" said Dad furiously pointing to the door "leave my roof you thankless dog!"   Dan went that night.   ("Leave my roof!")   It was only upon Dad promising faithfully to reduce his account within two months that the storekeeper let us have another bag of flour on credit. And what a change that bag of flour wrought! How cheerful the place became all at once! and how enthusiastically Dad spoke of the farm and the prospects of the coming season!   Four months had gone by. The fence had been up some time and ten acres of wheat put in; but there had been no rain and not a grain had come up or was likely to. [29]  Nothing had been heard of Dan since his departure. Dad spoke about him to Mother. "The scamp!" he said "to leave me just when I wanted help-after all the years I've slaved to feed him and clothe him see what thanks I get! but mark my word he'll be glad to come back yet." But Mother would never say anything against Dan.   The weather continued dry. The wheat didn't come up and Dad became despondent again.   The storekeeper called every week and reminded Dad of his promise. "I would give it you willingly" Dad would say "if I had it Mr. Rice; but what can I do? You can't knock blood out of a stone."   We ran short of tea and Dad thought to buy more with the money Anderson owed him for some fencing he had done; but when he asked for it Anderson was very sorry he hadn't got it just then but promised to let him have it as soon as he could sell his chaff. When Mother heard Anderson couldn't pay she did cry and said there wasn't a bit of sugar in the house nor enough cotton to mend the children's bits of clothes.   We couldn't very well go without tea so Dad showed Mother how to make a new kind. He roasted a slice of bread on the fire till it was like a black coal then poured the boiling water over it and let it "draw" well. Dad said it had a capital flavour- he liked it. [30]  Dave's only pair of pants were pretty well worn off him; Joe hadn't a decent coat for Sunday; Dad himself wore a pair of boots with soles tied on with wire; and Mother fell sick. Dad did all he could - waited on her and talked hopefully of the fortune which would come to us some day; but once when talking to Dave he broke down and said he didn't in the name of the Almighty God know what he would do! Dave couldn't say anything - he moped about too and home somehow didn't seem like home at all.   (When Dan came home.) [31]   When Mother was sick and Dad's time was mostly taken up nursing her; when there was nothing scarcely in the house; when in fact the wolf was at the very door; - Dan came home with a pocket full of money and swag full of greasy clothes. How Dad shook him by the hand and welcomed him back! And how Dan talked of "tallies" "belly-wool" and "ringers" and implored Dad over and over again to go shearing or rolling up or branding - anything rather than work and starve on the selection.   That's fifteen years ago and Dad is still on the farm.       [32] Chapter V. The night we watched for wallabies.   It had been a bleak July day and as night came on a bitter westerly howled through the trees. Cold! wasn't it cold! The pigs in the sty hungry and half-fed (we wanted for ourselves the few pumpkins that had survived the drought) fought savagely with each other for shelter and squealed all the time like - well like pigs. The cows and calves left the place to seek shelter away in the mountains; while the draught horses their hair standing up like barbed-wire leaned sadly over the fence and gazed up at the green lucerne. Joe went about shivering in an old coat of Dad's with only one sleeve to it-a calf had fancied the other one day that Dad hung it on a post as a mark to go by while ploughing.   "My! it'll be a stinger to-night" Dad remarked to Mrs. Brown - who sat cold-looking on the sofa - as he staggered inside with an immense log for the fire. A log! Nearer a whole tree! But wood was nothing in Dad's eyes. [33]  Mrs. Brown had been at our place five or six days. Old Brown called occasionally to see her so we knew they couldn't have quarrelled. Sometimes she did a little house-work but more often she didn't. We talked it over together but couldn't make it out. Joe asked Mother but she had no idea - so she said. We were full up as Dave put it of Mrs. Brown and wished her out of the place. She had taken to ordering us about as though she had something to do with us.   After supper we sat round the fire-as near to it as we could without burning ourselves - Mrs. Brown and all and listened to the wind whistling outside. Ah it was pleasant beside the fire listening to the wind! When Dad had warmed himself back and front he turned to us and said:   "Now boys we must go directly and light some fires and keep those wallabies back."   That was a shock to us and we looked at him to see if he were really in earnest. He was and as serious as a judge.   "To-night!" Dave answered surprisedly - "why to-night any more than last night or the night before? Thought you had decided to let them rip?"   "Yes but we might as well keep them off a bit longer."   "But there's no wheat there for them to get now. So what's the good of watching them? There's no sense in that." [34]   Dad was immovable.   "Anyway"-whined Joe-" I'm not going - not a night like this-not when I ain't got boots."   That vexed Dad. "Hold your tongue sir!" he said - "you'll do as you're told."   But Dave hadn't finished. "I've been following that harrow since sunrise this morning" he said "and now you want me to go chasing wallabies about in the dark a night like this and for nothing else but to keep them from eating the ground. It's always the way here the more one does the more he's wanted to do" and he commenced to cry. Mrs. Brown had something to say. She agreed with Dad and thought we ought to go as the wheat might spring up again.   "Pshah!" Dave blurted out between his sobs while we thought of telling her to shut her mouth.   Slowly and reluctantly we left that roaring fireside to accompany Dad that bitter night. It was a night! - dark as pitch silent forlorn and forbidding and colder than the busiest morgue. And just to keep wallabies from eating nothing! They had eaten all the wheat-every blade of it - and the grass as well. What they would start on next - ourselves or the cart-harness - wasn't quite clear. [ ]   We stumbled along in the dark one behind the other with our hands stuffed into our trousers. Dad was in the lead and poor Joe bare-shinned and bootless in the rear. Now and again he tramped on a Bathurst-burr and in sitting down to extract the prickle would receive a cluster of them elsewhere. When he escaped the burr it was only to knock his shin against a log or leave a toe-nail or two clinging to a stone. Joe howled but the wind howled louder and blew and blew.   Dave in pausing to wait on Joe would mutter:   "To hell with everything! Whatever he wants bringing us out a night like this I'm damned if I know!"   Dad couldn't see very well in the dark and on this night couldn't see at all so he walked up against one of the old draught horses that had fallen asleep gazing at the lucerne. And what a fright they both got! The old horse took it worse than Dad - who only tumbled down - for he plunged as though the devil had grabbed him and fell over the fence twisting every leg he had in the wires. How the brute struggled! We stood and listened to him. After kicking panels of the fence down and smashing every wire in it he got loose and made off taking most of it with him.   "That's one wallaby on the wheat anyway" Dave muttered and we giggled. We understood Dave; but Dad didn't open his mouth.   We lost no time lighting the fires. Then we walked through the "wheat" and wallabies! May Satan reprove me if I exaggerate their number by one solitary pair of ears - but from the row and scatter they made there were a million. [36]  Dad told Joe at last he could go to sleep if he liked at the fire. Joe went to sleep - how I don't know. Then Dad sat beside him and for long intervals would stare silently into the darkness. Sometimes a string of the vermin would hop past close to the fire and another time a curlew would come near and screech its ghostly wail but he never noticed them. Yet he seemed to be listening.   We mooched around from fire to fire hour after hour and when we wearied of heaving fire-sticks at the enemy we sat on our heels and cursed the wind and the winter and the night-birds alternately. It was a lonely wretched occupation.   Now and again Dad would leave his fire to ask us if we could hear a noise. We couldn't except that of wallabies and mopokes. Then he would go back and listen again. He was restless and somehow his heart wasn't in the wallabies at all. Dave couldn't make him out.   The night wore on. By-and-by there was a sharp rattle of wires then a rustling noise and Sal appeared in the glare of the fire. " Dad!" she said. That was all. Without a word Dad bounced up and went back to the house with her. [37]   "Something's up!" Dave said and half-anxious half-afraid we gazed into the fire and thought and thought. Then we stared nervously into the night and listened for Dad's return but heard only the wind and the mopoke.   At dawn he appeared again with a broad smile on his face and told us that mother had got another baby - a fine little chap. Then we knew why Mrs. Brown had been staying at our place.     [38] Chapter VI. Good Old Bess.   Supper was over at Shingle Hut and we were all seated round the fire - all except Joe. He was mousing. He stood on the sofa with one ear to the wall in a listening attitude and brandished a table-fork. There were mice - mobs of them - between the slabs and the paper - layers of newspapers that had been pasted one on the other for years until they were an inch thick; and whenever Joe located a mouse he drove the fork into the wall and pinned it - or reckoned he did.   Dad sat pensively at one corner of the fire-place-Dave at the other with his elbows on his knees and his chin resting in his palms.   "Think you could ride a race Dave?" asked Dad.   "Yairs" answered Dave without taking his eyes off the fire or his chin from his palms "could I suppose if I'd a pair o' lighter boots 'n these." [39]   Again they reflected.   Joe triumphantly held up the mutilated form of a murdered mouse and invited the household to "Look!" No one heeded him.   "Would your Mother's go on you?"   "Might" and Dave spat into the fire.   "Anyway" Dad went on "we must have a go at this handicap with the old mare; it's worth trying for and believe me now! she'll surprise a few of their flash hacks will Bess."   "Yairs she can go all right." And Dave spat again into the fire.   " Go! I've never known anything to keep up with her. Why bless my soul seventeen years ago when old Redwood owned her there wasn't a horse in the district could come within coo-ee of her. All she wants is a few feeds of corn and a gallop or two and mark my words she'll show some of them the way."   Some horse-races were being promoted by the shanty-keeper at the Overhaul-seven miles from our selection. They were the first of the kind held in the district and the stake for the principal event was £5. It wasn't because Dad was a racing man or subject to turf hallucinations in any way that he thought of preparing Bess for the meeting. We sadly needed those five pounds and as Dad put it if the mare could only win it would be an easier and much quicker way of making a bit of money than waiting for a crop to grow. [40]   Bess was hobbled and put into a two-acre paddock near the house. We put her there because of her wisdom. She was a chestnut full of villainy an absolutely incorrigible old rogue. If at any time she was wanted when in the grass paddock it required the lot of us from Dad down to yard her as well as the dogs and every other dog in the neighbourhood. Not that she had any brumby element in her - she would have been easier to yard if she had - but she would drive steadily enough alone or with other horses until she saw the yard when she would turn and deliberately walk away. If we walked to head her she beat us by half a length; if we ran she ran and stopped when we stopped. That was the aggravating part of her! When it was only to go to the store or the post-office that we wanted her we could have walked there and back a dozen times before we could run her down; but somehow we generally preferred to work hard catching her rather than walk.   When we had spent half the day hunting for the curry-comb which we didn't find Dad began to rub Bess down with a corn-cob - a shelled one - and trim her up a bit. He pulled her tail and cut the hair off her heels with a knife; then he gave her some corn to eat and told Joe he was to have a bundle of thistles cut for her every night. Now and again while grooming her Dad would step back a few paces and look upon her with pride.   "There's great breeding in the old mare" he would say "great breeding; look at the shoulder on her and the loin she has; and where did ever you see a horse with the same nostril? Believe me she'll surprise a few of them!" [41]  ("Look at the shoulder on her! And the Loin she has!") [42]   We began to regard Bess with profound respect; hitherto we had been accustomed to pelt her with potatoes and blue-metal.   The only thing likely to prejudice her chance in the race Dad reckoned was a small sore on her back about the size of a foal's foot. She had had that sore for upwards of ten years to our knowledge but Dad hoped to have it cured before the race came off with a never-failing remedy he had discovered - burnt leather and fat.   Every day along with Dad we would stand on the fence near the house to watch Dave gallop Bess from the bottom of the lane to the barn - about a mile. We could always see him start but immediately after he would disappear down a big gully and we would see nothing more of the gallop till he came to within a hundred yards of us. And wouldn't Bess bend to it once she got up the hill and fly past with Dave in the stirrups watching her shadow!- when there was one: she was a little too fine to throw a shadow always. And when Dave and Bess had got back and Joe had led her round the yard a few times Dad would rub the corn-cob over her again and apply more burnt-leather and fat to her back. [43]  On the morning preceding the race Dad decided to send Bess over three miles to improve her wind. Dave took her to the crossing at the creek - supposed to be three miles from Shingle Hut but it might have been four or it might have been five and there was a stony ridge on the way.   We mounted the fence and waited. Tommy Wilkie came along riding a plough-horse. He waited too.   "Ought to be coming now" Dad observed and Wilkie got excited. He said he would go and wait in the gully and race Dave home. "Race him home!" Dad chuckled as Tommy cantered off "he'll never see the way Bess goes." Then we all laughed.   Just as someone cried "Here he is!" Dave turned the corner into the lane and Joe fell off the fence and pulled Dad with him. Dad damned him and scrambled up again as fast as he could. After a while Tommy Wilkie hove in sight amid a cloud of dust. Then came Dave at scarcely faster than a trot and flogging all he knew with a piece of greenhide plough-rein. Bess was all-out and floundering. There was about two hundred yards yet to cover. Dave kept at her- thud! thud! Slower and slower she came. "Damn the fellow!" Dad said; "what's he beating her for?" " Stop it you fool!" he shouted. But Dave sat down on her for the final effort and applied the hide faster and faster. Dad crunched his teeth. Once-twice-three times Bess changed her stride then struck a branch-root of a tree that projected a few inches above ground and over she went - crash! Dave fell on his head and lay spread out motionless. We picked him up and carried him inside and when Mother saw blood on him she fainted straight off without waiting to know if it were his own or not. Both looked as good as dead; but Dad with a bucket of water soon brought them round again. [44]  "Is that all?' said a pretty sick girl on our steamer who had had her chair brought close to the bulwarks that she might not miss the first sight of Sydney Harbour. "Oh I don't call it much more than just pretty. Seems somehow as if the mountains had been forgotten."  She expressed it exactly. One does feel as if the Creator had forgotten the mountains. And yet indeed how beautiful Sydney Harbour is though one begins to wonder whether it is as beautiful as the harbour of Nagasaki or of Hong Kong or even of Algiers or of many other places one has heard less about. There is always the want of the background.  Strangely enough I didn't seem to be steaming gently into Sydney Harbour in this big Orient boat on this summer afternoon but to have gone back - oh ever so many years - to a certain wild morning when the sea was all grey and dirty-white heaving and growling after a great storm in which a little brig - she was called The Briton's Queen I remember - had gallantly held her own though the English mail steamer was in peril of her life and more than one ship went down off the coast that night. Brave little Briton's Queen! I can scent now in my nostrils the briny freshness of that squally morning and oh the delight of it after a day and a night with hatches down in a cabin half full of water and a smell - an unforgettable and intolerable smell - of decaying apples. The Briton's Queen was freighted with fruit and we had been a fortnight in making the voyage from Tasmania. Nothing of that voyage remains in my memory but the smell of the apples the gale and the feeling of intense exhilaration as our little ship with her sails set scudded over the waves on that tempestuous morning and passed between Sydney Heads into balmy peace. [297]  There it was again - the break in the grey-blue line of cliff the two huge profiles of rock - the boldest with a lighthouse upon it and the ocean roaring against its iron rampart. A little boat with a reddish sail raced the big steamer round the North Head and won the race. And now we were in perfectly smooth water a blue basin with sandy-beached bays curving in and out and a flotilla of boats - it was Saturday afternoon - dancing about the points.  There flashed into my memory another entry into Sydney Harbour - this a night one - after a second voyage from Tasmania; and the thrill of hearing out of the darkness as a boat pulled up to the steamer the news that the Duke of Edinburgh had been shot by Farrell the Fenian. Then next day the mingled excitement and horror of seeing Sydney placarded with posters offering "L 1000 reward for the accomplices of Farrell."  It is all confusing terribly confusing; and the two lightning streaks of impressions are dead trees and hats. Were there always so many dead trees and did Australians always wear such a bewildering variety of hats?  There are hard felt and soft felt broad-brimmed and narrow-brimmed sailor Panama Buffalo Bill Jim Crow cowboy and cavalier; hats puggareed hats bare and even the white "Derby" chimney-pots. It is a nightmare of hats.  And the dead trees! They too have become half a nightmare half a fascination. These are not the few scattered clumps of "rung" gums which used to show here and there round a head-station or stockman's hut in picturesque contrast with the mass of grey-green foliage. All along the railway line there are miles and miles paddocks full whole tracts of these livid corpses of trees which stand bolt upright stretching forth long naked arms that twist up and down and interlace each other in weirdly human fashion. At first their deadness seems a mystery and then one remembers that it is the Free Selector now and not the Squatter who rules the land; and that because of him is its greyness. For it is all grey all the same dull dead monotony of colouring - grey two-railed fences brown-grey grass green-grey leaves - where there are leaves - yellow-grey sawnwood houses; grey shingles grey skeletons grey ashes where the skeletons have been burned and the soil made ready for crops of corn and vines and millet and cotton and all the other good things which the Selector eventually produces. But it takes a long time first to dispossess the gum-trees which are the inheritors of the ground. [298]  Oh the heat and glare of that railway journey between the skeleton-trees and the two-railed fences! Only here and there a little township of weatherboard houses bare and straight with oblongs of windows like the houses in toy boxes and their zinc roofs blazing piteously in the scorching sun. It is a relief to see near the townships beyond the aggressive newness of their stores and public-houses some survival of an old slab-and-bark homestead with its patch of pumpkin vines and a few willows and mulberries and perhaps an orange-tree. That is on the higher land near the border where the air has cooled a little.  Here in a certain region the skeletons give place to queer grey boulders - everything is always grey - scattered anyhow in shape of crouching beasts and altar-stones and fat monoliths. Now as we descend steamy rain falls and the heat is a clammy misery and a prickly aggravation. Night comes. At the different wayside stations friendly hands are stretched forth and there's a ghostly feeling in the sight of familiar-strange faces - the faces of children grown to manhood and womanhood and of the middle-aged become old and grey-haired. It is midnight when at last the thirty hours' train journey is over and I step into the clammy stove-house atmosphere and know that after twenty years I am once again in mine own land amidst mine own people.  Familiar-strange too those bush boys on unkempt bush horses and with the real bush seat an easy slouching oneness with the beast beneath who are waiting in a clearing of the scrub for the mail to be thrown out as the train passes.  Where are the old landmarks? Twenty years ago it took a good three days getting from the township to Murrum and extra horses had to be sent along to pull the buggy through Doondin Scrub. Now it is a question of being three or four hours in a railway carriage and of a fifteen-mile drive over the range. But how much more exciting it used to be! The plunge into the gloom of the scrub the toiling on foot down leafy gullies and up steep muddy pinches the jibbing of the horses the shoutings of the blackboys and all the buggy-breakings and mendings and the uncertainty as to ultimate possibilities! Very little remains of the scrub only a few belts of glossy green and some of the old bottle trees which are like historic monuments of some strange order of architecture. So that one might fancy Lemurian builders had raised pillars of a grotesque topsy-turviness with bulging middle base tapering inwards and over-loaded capitals. All the way are selectors' homesteads set in gardens and orangeries and where once was dense forest homely German settlements with schoolhouses stores and plantations of maize cotton arrowroot and even tobacco.  The Selectors in these parts have long passed the skeleton and grey stage; and all over the hills and on the plains where the scrub used to be are vivid patches of green and yellow and the red-brown of millet. [299] The clearing of the forest has brought the mountains into view and it is such a satisfaction to find that years have not dwarfed their outlines nor imagination magnified their beauty. They are all just as memory painted them - tiers of blue peaks - the border range in the far distance and the Jerra Crag with its encircling precipice and turret top rising between the Murrum hump and twin-peaked Kumbal - as real and good to look at as the Southern Cross and many other things that were of old.  There is with us a little English artist girl who has lived all her life in London and an English boy called Rothwell going to do "colonial experience" at Murrum. The three "M's" Meg (that is the English girl) Marge and Mena make as charming a nosegay of maids as could be seen. And there is Cousin William outrider to the buggy just then a miner by profession and self-appointed instructor-general to Meg on things Australian. And there are Terry Fulvia and the doctor.  "He's a young one" Terry said apologetically as the near horse shied at a stump and tilted Meg almost into the Flagstone Creek. "Only tackled this summer. Never had a better puller. . . . But this won't do. Must attend to my business and not talk. Look out! Here we are coming to a bit of corduroy."  And we found out that "corduroy" meant a road made of little gum trees and that it jolted exceedingly.  Two men with their blankets rolled into swags were boiling their billy of tea in a gully by the roadside.  "They're humping bluey" explained Cousin William.  "What does that mean?' asked the artist girl.  'They're on the Wallabi track" further explained Cousin William.  Meg asked no more but later on she made a sketch of "Humping Bluey".  Meg has the air of one to whom no surprising experience can now be a novelty. She has been given tea for breakfast luncheon and dinner at five o'clock and also at eleven a.m. A monstrous frog stared at her out of her washing basin this morning and she was shown a corrugated black fellow in a ragged shirt and abbreviated trousers with a brass plate - symbol of sovereignty - on his tattooed breast and told that he is a king.  We stopped on the shoulder of the dividing range - not the great Border range but a little one between Cuchin and Murrum. Below stretched the Cuchin plain with its water-hole the Crag beyond and the head station on a green promontory jutting out into the sea of tall grey-green grass. Now it is "eucalyptic cloisterdom" once more; and we seem as we descend to be passing through interminable aisles of red-gum trunks and fretwork of bough. Locusts whirr intermittently. [300]   Never was such rich grass as grows in the furrows of the hills. Meg takes her revenge on Cousin William by drawing his attention to the fine blot of colour which a herd of red cattle make on the grey-green. She wishes him to understand that if he can talk Australese she can talk Art jargon!  Some of the gums have grotesque protuberances - these are what the shepherds and stockmen used to make coolimans out of in the old Bush days; and there are grass trees with spears and tufts and great brown ant-heaps like queer shaped tombstones.  Then comes a splash through the river at Cuchin crossing which is close by Murrum stockyard; and - is it the cornshed of memories?. . - The paddock is clearer than it used to be and the river fringe of ti-tree and she-oak has been broken and there's a grand new Selector's homestead that was not there long ago. The dogs run out barking Fulvia young Marge and Mena and the St Bernard and the cockatoo are at the garden fence - how the lagerstromia and the creepers have grown! - and three peacocks give screeches from the roof of the kitchen gangway. They are moulting poor things and terribly ashamed of their draggled tails but a sense of family obligation and of the dignity of the occasion does not permit them to retire altogether as for the next week or so they consistently do.  It is a funny little cluster of wooden cottages Murrum head station joined together by gangways which are covered with bougainvillea bignonia rinkasporum and ever so many other creepers. There are bowery nooks between the verandas filled in with plants set in stumps and with stag-horn and bird's nest ferns growing upon walls and posts. Here Mena makes a pretty picture in the mornings learning her lessons with the St Bernard panting in the heat at her feet. Inside the walls are of cedar - it isn't the old drawing-room but a new room altogether with windows at the end giving peeps of the Jerra Crag and the Kumbal peaks and showing the old mandarin orange tree and quince orchard and the prickly pear hedge. Outside there is a veranda like the deck of a ship where everybody lounges in cane chairs and the hammock and eats grapes and water melons and where we spend the long hot evenings looking on the dim semicircle of mountains and watching the Southern Cross mount from behind Mount Murrum.  Alas! It is the time of the rains and for five days and nights the heavens have poured forth water. A blanket of steam has covered the mountains. The air is a vaporous oppression and over all broods a clammy stillness broken by the crashing downpour upon a zinc roof and the spattering upon the window-panes and rebound upon the floor of the veranda. Mena's bower is no longer inviting. The ground is strewn with sodden bougainvillea petals and the fern tongues drop wetness. [301] The grey stumps in which a little while ago colcas and calladium plants flourished joyously are now black with moisture and all the slender stalks are bowed and the downy leaves torn to shreds and drooping and flabby. Mena's magpie is taking a bath in one of the stumps. Now he perches on the hedge spluttering and spreading his wings with his head cocked on one side and a wicked look in his little eyes. The Galah parrot toddles up and down disconsolately. There is a soft swish of rivulets blending with the hushed murmur of insects. At night the frogs and crickets are deafening and the roar of the river grows deeper.  The nasty creeping things come out. A fat tarantula crawls up the curtains and there's a hundred-legged spider between Meg's blankets; and ants run about in myriads and get into the jam and sugar and drop their wings uncannily on the tablecloth. We have no joy now in the veranda though we draw the cane chairs close to the wall to avoid driving drops and the doctor and the man from the next station and Cousin William tell grim stones of the bush The fruit is sodden the beast which has been killed has gone bad the wood is too damp to burn in the kitchen Fulvia enters tragically in her arms a bundle of fine damask black with mildew and a snake is killed in the bush house.  That evening the doctor the man from the next station and Cousin William tell snake stones and Meg dreams evil dreams.  The man from the next station has only nine fingers When he was a little boy he and his brother went out into the bush with their tomahawks to play at finding possums As he moved a bit of dead wood a black snake bit his forefinger The man from the next station put his finger straight out on a stump and told his brother to chop it off low down with the tomahawk that very moment The boy chopped and then they sucked the sound and that's how he comes to have only nine fingers  The doctor too had his snake experience One night he camped in a newly built but deserted hut. A sheet of bark was on the ground he spread his blanket over it and laid him down to sleep Several times during the night he fancied that the bark heaved beneath him but he was too tired to take any serious notice In the morning when he had rolled up his blanket again he kicked away the piece of bark and saw a great black snake coiled under it.  Cousin William knows a man on the diggings whose nerve broke after the gruesome adventure of one night. The man was travelling alone and that evening he had camped in the open under a gum tree It was bright moonlight Suddenly in the very small hours he awoke feeling something moving over his chest - he was lying on his back barely covered with his blanket for the night was hot. As he awoke he saw that a brown snake had coiled itself upon his chest. Now a brown snake is deadly; and the man had no brandy nor ammonia nor anything which would save him if he were bitten. [302] For long hours he lay watching. He dared not move he scarcely dared to breathe. He nursed the loathsome Thing a thin shirt only between him and its fang. Cousin William related how the man described the stillness of the night; his horror of a puff of wind of a falling leaf or twig and his dread of the approach of animal or bird which might startle the Thing. Then the breaking at dawn and the twitterings and callings and all the rousing of the bush. He was afraid lest his horse should come and sniff and yet longed that it might come as perhaps the noise might frighten the Thing away. And as the light grew he saw that there were soldier ants close by and knew that if they crawled on him he must let himself be stung till it should please the Thing to move. He studied the flat head of the Thing and its triangular markings and thought he must go mad. At last when the sun was high the snake uncoiled itself and crawled away. And the man got up shaking as if with palsy. "And Lord" added Cousin William "you wouldn't have known that chap when he got to the diggings next day. He was trembling all over and couldn't sleep for weeks. And as for his nerve which was like iron before it clean broke into little bits."  "It's only some magisterial business" says Terry getting up. "I'll be back in five minutes" and presently he is heard calling "Bring me a Bible dear" and young Marge runs off with the Bible remarking "Some of the Free Selectors come to swear."  When they had "sworn" and gone Terry explained the matter. "You see the conditions of their being allowed to own their 160 acres - or less according to what they take up - are that they must reside on the selection for five years but most of them after they have put up a hut leave their wives and children to fulfil the residence condition and hire themselves out on the job. Then they must pay sixpence a year - five sixpences in all - and must make improvements up to the value of ten shillings an acre and at the end of the five years they have got to bring along two witnesses and swear before a magistrate to the residence and the improvements after which they can get a free title. That's what those fellows were doing."  "Seems an easy way of becoming a landed proprietor" said Rothwell the English boy.  "If they want to become bigger landed proprietors still" says Terry "they can lease extra land up to two thousand acres at a rent of threepence per acre; only to fulfil the residence conditions it must be within fifteen miles of the original selection. They must put a fence round the extra bit within four years and when that's over they can buy it at a price fixed by the Land Boad."  Fulvia came along the veranda carrying a silver tray and the teapot Marge and Mena following with cakes and grapes. [303] The lace frills of Fulvia's pretty blouse were tucked up towards her shoulders.  "Please forgive my bare arms. They've been up to the elbows in flour. I'm making bread." Fulvia was very hot and very tired though she contrived to look remarkably dainty in her white cooking apron.  Three days ago Fulvia's cook and parlourmaid had found themselves in bad health and requested to be driven to the Doondin terminus. Then it was suggested that the three Ms should forage among the Selections and see if they could find anyone willing to make the bread and wash for Murrum station.  They make quite a colony the Selectors along this side of the river and slab cottages climb up the slope where scrub used to be. All the wilderness of the river is gone. There are millet and lucerne and Indian-corn patches by each bank and men were ploughing as we passed. The ti-trees have lost their beauty. Of the two great cedars on the Mulgam flat under which we used to boil our afternoon tea one has been felled and the other is naked and dead; and there are deep wheel tracks down to the arum pool where the Selectors' water-carts go to be filled. The settlement having got the number of children required by administrative powers and having built the schoolhouse with the cracked bell which is planted lower down among the gums the government provides at a stipend of £80 a year a schoolmaster who lives in a weatherboard hut on the border of the scrub. The debating club sits too in the schoolhouse; there the balls take place and the Sunday services when a clergyman comes along; and there the election meetings are held. On the whole the community seem to have a pretty lively time.  Mr Hindmarsh whose wife Fulvia considered a hopeful resource in emergency was at work among his crops by the creek.  "And how are you getting on with your maize Mr Hindmarsh"  "Bad bad" answered Hindmarsh mournfully. "Three hundred bags."  "Done well?' asked the doctor. 'Tenpence halfpenny eh?  "Elevenpence" returned Mr Hindmarsh. "Times are wretched. It ain't only the squatters that has got cause to complain. What the country's coming to I dun-'now."  - "It's bimetalism that's at the root of everything" said the man from the next station "and until silver is acknowledged payment again and forty shillings instead of twenty given to the pound the country will never come to any good."  Mr Hindmarsh couldn't see how that could make a difference and another Selector called Bascomb who seems a serious person and is I hear chief spokesman at the debating-society meetings disagreed with him.  "You see it's this way" said Mr Bascomb. "If all the produce in the world was put on this side" (prodding the ground with the butt of his bullock whip) "and all the gold in the world was put on the other side why there wouldn't be gold enough to buy the produce. [304] For those that have the gold it don't matter; and for those who haven't it's a bad job."  "That's about it" said the man from the next station.  Mr Hindmarsh changed the conversation. "My word! it's been terrible hot today. . . . The missus did you say? I dun-'now. Most like you'll find her up yon'." His long upper lips puckered down over his teeth; and he jerked his thumb in the direction of a slab house with a veranda set in a garden of stumps and some pumpkin vines on the side of the hill.  Fulvia felt a delicacy in pressing enquiries. Hindmarsh was known as "a quiet man but given to sulks and awful bad to put up with". His neighbour Garstin who was helping him was loud and masterful and only that morning Garstin up at the station on business had related how the Hindmarshes had had a difference and had given it as his opinion that a chap "mum in his tantrums" like Hindmarsh was more aggravating to a female than the most raging of devils and that therefore Mrs Hindmarsh might not be unwilling to distract her thoughts by a day's baking. "But Lord! I says to Hindmarsh" continued Garstin. "You doan't know how to take the women Hind-marsh. Why you mun give 'en a kick and knock 'en down and they'll coom all right after a time or two. Doan't crush 'en with silence"; which became a family saying at Murrum and when anyone nursed his grievance in dignified aloofness it was customary to remark "Doan't crush 'en with silence."  Mrs Hindmarsh who is a big woman with great black eyes and crinkly hair did not look in the least crushed as she came up from the pumpkin patch with a huge pumpkin under one arm and a baby under the other. She had got a batch of bread coming out of the oven that very minute she said and if we liked we could take it over.  "I am ashamed to ask you into such a dirty place. I've been cleaning after the rains. The bread don't look as nice as it might for it's baked in a camp oven; if there's a cake-tin or two to spare at the station I'd make the loaves a better shape for the table. . . - No I wouldn't come to do the washing at the station you'd best get someone else - there's Mrs Garstin perhaps - but I don't know. . . . You've had a deal of trouble I hear in the kitchen. If you want your moleskins washed Mr Rothwell - or the doctor - tell him I'll do 'em if you send 'em over. There's funny things goes on in the kitchen with them girls ain't there Mr Rothwell"  "There's plenty of funny things in Australia seems to me Mrs Hindmarsh."  "Yes they're queer those servant girls. They objected to the moleskins. I heard the word; you send them over Mr Rothwell." [305]  "Well if you've time Mrs Hindmarsh."  "Oh I'll make time - at threepence the pair So Hindmarsh is going to take a job with the cart up at the station?'  Mrs Hindmarsh was informed that such was the arrangement.  "Hindmarsh hadn't always come down to going out on the job. We were in South Brisbane once in a house of our own; it's the bad times has brought us low. He has lost £800 Mrs Hindmarsh." And Mrs Hindmarsh announced the fact as cheerfully as though she were putting forward a claim to distinction.  We made a little round of calls that afternoon. Rothwell and Meg had already established friendly relations with the Selections and had brought a camera which hung on the pommel of Meg's saddle.  "We've got two plates left Mrs Garstin and Mr Garstin says he'd like you and the little girl to be taken; and we'd like to photograph the house if we may."  "Garstin said as he'd like the two children done" said Mrs Garstin. "It's seventeen year now since I was took - didn't like to somehow. But I'd be pleased to have the children. Garstin he wanted to have little 'Liza done last year but I said (with a smile at the infant) wait a bit and get in two of 'em."  Mrs Garstin was the mother of a large family. The doctor joined us while the photographing was going on and Mrs Garstin had much domestic intelligence to communicate.  "Jimmy was nearly dead doctor since you was here last. Johnny come down from the scrub and says 'Mother I want some eucalypt stuff.' 'What for? I says. 'Jimmy's had a hurt' says he; and sure enough there was Jimmy lying insensible.  - But I'm that used to their getting hurts I don't feel frightened. There was Jo broke his leg and I pulled the bones together and bandaged it and set it in splints; and the doctor there told me he couldn't have done it better himself. . . . Lift up yer trouser Jo and show the doctor and the ladies your leg. . . . And there was Harry as chopped off his fingers  - two of 'em hanging by a bit of skin; and Garstin says 'Give us a pair of scissors and have done with 'em.' But I says 'No I ain't going to have my boy short of fingers if I can help it.' So I sets the fingers back again and binds them up; and they're as good as the others this day. Show the doctor your fingers Harry. And I had to go to Murrum station for sticking plaister and hump him all the way; and Lor'! I don't know how I done it!"  After the rains came a great freshness. Higher up the Ubi is a gorge where in old days we always rode after rains to see the spring swollen into a waterfall. There was a question whether the river would be crossable - it was still a brown turbid torrent. "I don't think we can manage it" said the man from the next station. [306]  Cousin William spurred his horse on. "Keep up" cried Terry.  But Cousin William got through all right and the rest followed even to little Mena in her holland knickerbockers riding man-fashion. The horses swayed unsteadily with the current. The little one couldn't guide hers and he went down slantways with the stream.  "Baby keep up" screamed Fulvia. 'Keep up baby." Then Cousin William dashed back and took hold of Mina's bridle turning her upstream.  "You should never shout to anyone in a flooded creek" said the doctor. "It makes a fellow lose his head - like the mailman on the Jerra the other day who was as near as possible carried down. They kept calling out from the bank 'Keep up! keep up!' till the chap trembled and turned white and at last got so confused that he let the reins drop helplessly and said 'Which is up? I can't tell.'"  We follow a creeklet fringed by she-oaks and bordered on each side by stony ridges. On the top of the ridge the dark distinctive line of scrub stands up like a wall from the blady grass and bracken. By-and-by the ridges swell into high hills and come close blocking the foreground as the valley narrows. The she-oaks thicken and the whispering among their needle points sounds fuller. There is a great side cleft in the hill and a white torrent comes foaming down among the grey-black boulders which are scarred and patched with lichen. Terry and Cousin William drag logs and make a bridge over the torrent the horses are hitched up and the glen swallows those of us who walk foremost.  It is just a chasm torn out of the mountain side. The grey walls of rock overhang it making jagged ledges from which drop ferns and rock lilies - I remember the lilies' feathery plumes in spring but they are not in bloom now - and there are thick withes of hoya festooning the cliff. High on the top native bears and opossums and wallabis have their unmolested dwellings. Slanting outward from the cliff are slim trees of the red-barked mahogany and of mountain ash as well as a fleshy-leaved shrub giving out an aromatic perfume. Down in the bed the torrent roars along the channel it has cut over worn stones and between great grey rocks. It rushes out of a deep pool dark mysterious and still except where another stream falling from a gully at a higher level churns the pool into brown foam.  This is not much of a waterfall. The children climb up the rock ledges close to the fall and are wetted by its spray. And then there is a rare clamber to the upper ravine sacred to the memories of twenty years back; and young Marge comes down presently her arms full of native geranium and red berries off those same plants from which we elder ones used to gather them long ago.  So we went back to the old scenes - went back to the old scenes!  Do we ever indeed get away from the old scenes?  A petition is being signed in Gundowring and the surrounding district on behalf of Maggie Heffernan who is at present in the Women's Penitentiary at Coburg serving a sentence of four years' imprisonment with hard labour for drowning her baby.  In the minds of those who know Maggie Heffernan and the whole history of her case there is absolutely no doubt that she was suffering from puerperal mania when she drowned her baby that she did not receive justice at her trial and strenuous efforts will be made to secure her release.  On December 29th her child was born. She left the Women's Hospital for Mrs Cameron's Home in Armadale where she stayed till January 15th. She left the Home in spite of the protest of the acting superintendent saying she was going to Sydney to obtain help from the paternal grandmother whose address had been given her by the child's father. She had two shillings and fivepence in her purse. All day she wandered about Melbourne trying to get a night's lodging. A lady met her in the Treasury Gardens and struck with the girl's evident illness and distress spoke to her and offered assistance. She replied that she wanted nothing but a room for the night. This lady a Mrs Taylor took her to two institutions but was told that they did not take in girls with babies. Maggie Heffernan then decided to take a room at some hotel. She started off on her tramp again and inquired at several hotels and a coffee palace for a room but she could not get one under half-a-crown. At last she went to a restaurant in Bourke-street where the landlady said she could put her up for eighteenpence.  The next morning the landlady gave her a cup of tea and a piece of toast - the only 'food' she had had since the previous morning; and she left. [140] She bought an 'Argus' to see if there were any advertisements likely to suit her but found none. She walked about the city till nearly one o'clock trying at intervals to feed her baby but there was no milk for it. She also attempted to give it a drink of water from a street tap but that was not very successful. Then she went to the river and walked up and down for an hour trying to quieten the baby who was crying. She sat down on the bank and made another vain attempt to give the wee mite a drink. At last she took off all its clothes and quietly dropped it into the river. This was in broad daylight when anyone might have been passing by. She then walked towards town. As she neared the railway station she suddenly noticed the baby's clothes on her arm. 'My God what have I done with my baby?' she cried and in a flash the whole thing came back to her. Overcome with fear and horror her one thought was how to shield herself. She went to Preston for the night and the next day obtained a situation as wet nurse at Hawthorn. While there she showed her weakness by frequently falling asleep when nursing the baby and the baby itself was unwell while with her. On January 20th she was arrested. She had previously been visited by the police but a wild story she had concocted allayed their suspicions but on the second visit she made a full confession.  The mistress was out when the police arrived and the unhappy girl was taken alone into a room by three officers and instead of being cautioned in the usual way she was led to give the most incriminating answers by their exhortation to 'fear nothing'. She was then removed to the city lock-up but she was in such a state of utter physical and mental exhaustion that a special order had to be obtained for her removal to the gaol hospital at midnight. On the 21st five days after the crime she was examined by the gaol doctors who said she was not then suffering from puerperal mania.  Soon after her arrest a lady visited her in the Melbourne Gaol with the object of hearing her story and consulting her with reference to securing legal assistance. This friend left Maggie on the understanding that she would procure counsel for her defence. The following day she again visited the gaol with a leading lawyer who had promised to take up the case. It was then found that the sheriff had seen Maggie Heffernan the previous afternoon and advised her to accept Mr Moir of Messrs Gillot Bates and Moir as her solicitor and Sir Bryan O'Loghlen as counsel. The girl thinking these were the gentlemen procured for her by her friend did so. It was particularly desired by this lady that Maggie Heffernan should not be defended by the Crown as the small sum allowed for expenses does not mean the proper working up of a case.  However the matter was settled and the case came on in due course. Her parents were not informed of the trouble their daughter was in until the Sunday before her trial. No evidence was brought forward of the girl's weakness of intellect as shown by letters received from her mother and friends; of her previous good character; of the absence of premeditation as shown by her having written a letter to her mother explaining her position and asking for assistance - . . of her physical exhaustion when employed at Hawthorn and the sickness of the child she was nursing; of the father of her child having given her a bogus address in Sydney [...] of the causes of puerperal mania - suppression of milk mental shock distress of mind etc. [141]  These points were withheld and Dr Stawell who held the post mortem examination on the baby was called to give evidence. Judge Hodges . . - questioned Dr Stawell closely as to whether a woman suffering from puerperal insanity could afterwards relate what had happened as Maggie had done. Without a moment's hesitation the doctor answered 'No'. At least two women present in court were dumbfounded at the reply for an intelligent woman does not require any expert knowledge to know that in many cases of puerperal mania the patient can afterwards relate what happened in every detail.  In summing up Judge Hodges laid particular stress on Dr Stawell's testimony but in spite of all the damning evidence against the girl the jury were very unwilling to bring in a verdict of murder. On the evidence however no other finding was possible and Maggie Heffernan was therefore sentenced to death. Public indignation was aroused; a petition signed by upwards of 17000 people was presented to the Executive; and a large public meeting was held to protest against the sentence passed on the unfortunate victim of man's perfidy and the Crown's parsimony . - - The sentence was afterwards commuted to four years' imprisonment with hard labour.  Compare the case of Maggie Heffernan with that of Edward Harrison tried before Judge Hodges a few weeks ago for the brutal murder of a woman. Returning home drunk he cut her throat with a razor almost severing her head from her body. He then went and informed the police that the woman had committed suicide. He was found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. .  Judge Hodges also tried Maggie Heffeman. Had the girl been a drunkard she would apparently have been treated with greater leniency. Four years' imprisonment for a young girl who betrayed and deserted by her partner in sin drowns her starving baby while two years' imprisonment is considered ample punishment for a drunken man who murders a woman under peculiarly brutal circumstances.  A vision of the sandy blight  I'd been humping my back and crouching and groaning for an hour or so in the darkest corner of the travellers' hut tortured by the demon of sandy blight. It was too hot to travel and there was no one there except ourselves and Mitchell's cattle pup. We were waiting till after sundown for I couldn't have travelled in the daylight anyway. Mitchell had tied a wet towel round my eyes and led me for the last mile or two by another towel - one end fastened to his belt behind and the other in my hand as I walked in his tracks. And oh! but this was a relief! It was out of the dust and glare and the flies didn't come into the dark hut and I could hump and stick my knees in my eyes and groan in comfort. I didn't want a thousand a year or anything; I only wanted relief for my eyes - that was all I prayed for in this world. When the sun got down a bit Mitchell started poking round and presently he found amongst the rubbish a dirty-looking medicine bottle corked tight; when he rubbed the dirt off a piece of notepaper that was pasted on he saw "eye-water" written on it. He drew the cork with his teeth smelt the water stuck his little finger in turned the bottle upside down tasted the top of his finger and reckoned the stuff was all right. [19]   "Here! Wake up Joe!" he shouted. "Here's a bottle of tears."   "A bottler wot?" I groaned.   "Eye-water" said Mitchell.   "Are you sure it's all right?" I didn't want to be poisoned or have my eyes burnt out by mistake; perhaps some burning acid had got into that bottle or the label had been put on or left on in mistake or carelessness.   "I dunno" said Mitchell "but there's no harm in tryin'."   I chanced it. I lay down on my back in a bunk and Mitchell dragged my lids up and spilt half a bottle of eye-water over my eye-balls.   The relief was almost instantaneous. I never experienced such a quick cure in my life. I carried the bottle in my swag for a long time afterwards with an idea of getting it analysed but left it behind at last in a camp.   Mitchell scratched his head thoughtfully and watched me for a while.   "I think I'll wait a bit longer" he said at last "and if it doesn't blind you I'll put some in my eyes. I'm getting a touch of blight myself now. That's the fault of travelling with a mate who's always catching something that's no good to him."   As it grew dark outside we talked of sandy-blight and fly-bite and sand-flies up north and ordinary flies and branched off to Barcoo rot and struck the track again at bees and bee stings. When we got to bees Mitchell sat smoking for a while and looking dreamily backwards along tracks and branch tracks and round corners and circles he had travelled right back to the short narrow innocent bit of track that ends in a vague misty point - like the end of a long straight cleared road in the moonlight - as far back as we can remember. [20]  . . . . .  "I had about fourteen hives" said Mitchell - "we used to call them 'swarms' no matter whether they were flying or in the box - when I left home first time. I kept them behind the shed in the shade on tables of galvanised iron cases turned down on stakes; but I had to make legs later on and stand them in pans of water on account of the ants. When the bees swarmed - and some hives sent out the Lord knows how many swarms in a year it seemed to me - we'd tin-kettle 'em and throw water on 'em to make 'em believe the biggest thunderstorm was coming to drown the oldest inhabitant; and if they didn't get the start of us and rise they'd settle on a branch - generally on one of the scraggy fruit trees. It was rough on the bees - come to think of it; their instinct told them it was going to be fine and the noise and water told them it was raining. They must have thought that nature was mad drunk or gone ratty or the end of the world had come. We'd rig up a table with a box upside down under the branch cover our face with a piece of mosquito net have rags burning round and then give the branch a sudden jerk turn the box down and run. If we got most of the bees in the rest that were hanging to the bough or flying round would follow and then we reckoned we'd shook the queen in. If the bees in the box came out and joined the others we'd reckon we hadn't shook the queen in and go for them again. When a hive was full of honey we'd turn the box upside down turn the empty box mouth down on top of it and drum and hammer on the lower box with a stick till all the bees went up into the top box. I suppose it made their heads ache and they went up on that account. [21]  "I suppose things are done differently on proper bee-farms. I've heard that a bee-farmer will part a hanging swarm with his fingers take out the queen bee and arrange matters with her; but our ways suited us and there was a lot of expectation and running and excitement in it especially when a swarm took us by surprise. The yell of 'Bees swarmin'!' was as good to us as the yell of 'Fight!' is now or 'Bolt!' in town or 'Fire' or 'Man overboard!' at sea.   "There was tons of honey. The bees used to go to the vineyards at wine-making and get honey from the heaps of crushed grape-skins thrown out in the sun and get so drunk sometimes that they wobbled in their bee-lines home. They'd fill all the boxes and then build in between and under the bark and board and tin covers. They never seemed to get the idea out of their heads that this wasn't an evergreen country and it wasn't going to snow all winter. My younger brother Joe used to put pieces of meat on the tables near the boxes and in front of the holes where the bees went in and out for the dogs to grab at. But one old dog 'Black Bill' was a match for him; if it was worth Bill's while he'd camp there and keep Joe and the other dogs from touching the meat - once it was put down - till the bees turned in for the night. And Joe would get the other kids round there and when they weren't looking or thinking he'd brush the bees with a stick and run. I'd lam him when I caught him at it. He was an awful young devil was Joe and he grew up steady and respectable and respected - and I went to the bad. I never trust a good boy now. . . . Ah well! [22]  "I remember the first swarm we got. We'd been talking of getting a few swarms for a long time. That was what was the matter with us English and Irish and English-Irish Australian farmers: we used to talk so much about doing things while the Germans and Scotch did them. And we even talked in a lazy easy-going sort of way.   "Well one blazing hot day I saw father coming along the road home to dinner (we had it in the middle of the day) with his axe over his shoulder. I noticed the axe particularly because father was bringing it home to grind and Joe and I had to turn the stone; but when I noticed Joe dragging along home in the dust about fifty yards behind father I felt easier in my mind. Suddenly father dropped the axe and started to run back along the road towards Joe who as soon as he saw father coming shied for the fence and got through. He thought he was going to catch it for something he'd done - or hadn't done. Joe used to do so many things and leave so many things not done that he could never be sure of father. Besides father had a way of starting to hammer us unexpectedly - when the idea struck him. But father pulled himself up in about thirty yards and started to grab up handfuls of dust and sand and throw them into the air. My idea in the first flash was to get hold of the axe for I thought it was sun-stroke and father might take it into his head to start chopping up the family before I could persuade him to put it (his head I mean) in a bucket of water. But Joe came running like mad yelling: [23]  "'Swarmer - bees! Swawmmer - bee-ee-es! Bring - a - tin - dish - and - a - dippera - wa-a-ter!'   "I ran with a bucket of water and an old frying-pan and pretty soon the rest of the family were on the spot throwing dust and water and banging everything tin or iron they could get hold of. The only bullock bell in the district (if it was in the district) was on the old poley cow and she'd been lost for a fortnight. Mother brought up the rear - but soon worked to the front - with a baking-dish and a big spoon. The old lady - she wasn't old then - had a deep-rooted prejudice that she could do everything better than anybody else and that the selection and all on it would go to the dogs if she wasn't there to look after it. There was no jolting that idea out of her. She not only believed that she could do anything better than anybody and hers was the only right or possible way and that we'd do everything upside down if she wasn't there to do it or show us how - but she'd try to do things herself or insist on making us do them her way and that led to messes and rows. She was excited now and took command at once. She wasn't tongue-tied and had no impediment in her speech. [24]   "'Don't throw up dust! - Stop throwing up dust! - Do you want to smother 'em? - Don't throw up so much water! - Only throw up a pannikin at a time! - D'yer want to drown 'em? Bang! Keep on banging Joe! - Look at that child! Run someone! - run! you Jack! - D'yer want the child to be stung to death? - Take her inside! . . . Dy' hear me? . . . Stop throwing up dust Tom! (To father.) You're scaring 'em away! Can't you see they want to settle?' (Father was getting mad and yelping: 'For Godsake shettup and go inside.') 'Throw up water Jack! Throw up - Tom! Take that bucket from him and don't make such a fool of yourself before the children! Throw up water! Throw - keep on banging children! Keep on banging!' (Mother put her faith in banging.) 'There! - they're off! You've lost 'em! I knew you would! I told yer - keep on bang-!'   "A bee struck her in the eye and she grabbed at it!   "Mother went home - and inside.   "Father was good at bees - could manage them like sheep when he got to know their ideas. When the swarm settled he sent us for the old washing stool boxes bags and so on; and the whole time he was fixing the bees I noticed that whenever his back was turned to us his shoulders would jerk up as if he was cold and he seemed to shudder from inside and now and then I'd hear a grunting sort of whimper like a boy that was just starting to blubber. But father wasn't weeping and bees weren't stinging him; it was the bee that stung mother that was tickling father. When he went into the house mother's other eye had bunged for sympathy. Father was always gentle and kind in sickness and he bathed mother's eyes and rubbed mud on but every now and then he'd catch inside and jerk and shudder and grunt and cough. Mother got wild but presently the humour of it struck her and she had to laugh and a rum laugh it was with both eyes bunged up. Then she got hysterical and started to cry and father put his arm round her shoulder and ordered us out of the house. [25]  "They were very fond of each other the old people were under it all - right up to the end. . . . Ah well!"   Mitchell pulled the swags out of a bunk and started to fasten the nose-bags on.     [26] ANDY PAGE'S RIVAL   Tall and freckled and sandy  Face of a country lout;  That was the picture of Andy -  Middleton's rouseabout.  On Middleton's wide dominions  Plied the stock-whip and shears;  Hadn't any opinions ----  And he hadn't any "ideers" - at least he said so himself - except as regarded anything that looked to him like what he called "funny business" under which heading he catalogued tyranny treachery interference with the liberty of the subject by the subject "blanky" lies or swindles - all things in short that seemed to his slow understanding dishonest mean or paltry; most especially and above all treachery to a mate. That he could never forget. Andy was uncomfortably "straight". His mind worked slowly and his decisions were as a rule right and just; and when he once came to a conclusion concerning any man or matter or decided upon a course of action nothing short of an earthquake or a Nevertire cyclone could move him back an inch - unless a conviction were severely shaken and then he would require as much time to "back" to his starting point as he did to come to the decision. [27]   Andy had come to a conclusion with regard to a selector's daughter - name Lizzie Porter - who lived (and slaved) on her father's selection near the township corner of the run on which Andy was a general "hand". He had been in the habit for several years of calling casually at the selector's house as he rode to and fro between the station and the town to get a drink of water and exchange the time of day with old Porter and his "missus". The conversation concerned the drought and the likelihood or otherwise of their ever going to get a little rain; or about Porter's cattle with an occasional enquiry concerning or reference to a stray cow belonging to the selection but preferring the run; a little plump saucy white cow by-the-way practically pure white but referred to by Andy - who had eyes like a blackfellow - as "old Speckledy". No one else could detect a spot or speckle on her at a casual glance. Then after a long bovine silence which would have been painfully embarrassing in any other society and a tilting of his cabbage-tree hat forward which came of tickling and scratching the sun-blotched nape of his neck with his little finger Andy would slowly say: "Ah well. I must be gettin'. So-long Mr. Porter. So-long Mrs. Porter." And if she were in evidence - as she generally was on such occasions - "So-long Lizzie." And they'd shout: "So-long Andy" as he galloped off from the jump. Strange that those shy quiet gentle-voiced bushmen seem the hardest and most reckless riders.   But of late his horse had been seen hanging up outside Porter's for an hour or so after sunset. He smoked talked over the results of the last drought (if it happened to rain) and the possibilities of the next one and played cards with old Porter; who took to winking automatically at his "old woman" and nudging and jerking his thumb in the direction of Lizzie when her back was turned and Andy was scratching the nape of his neck and staring at the cards. [28]  Lizzie told a lady friend of mine years afterwards how Andy popped the question; told it in her quiet way - you know Lizzie's quiet way (something of the old privileged house-cat about her); never a sign in expression or tone to show whether she herself saw or appreciated the humour of anything she was telling no matter how comical it might be. She had witnessed two tragedies and had found a dead man in the bush and related the incidents as though they were common-place.   It happened one day - after Andy had been coming two or three times a week for about a year - that she found herself sitting with him on a log of the woodheap in the cool of the evening enjoying the sunset breeze. Andy's arm had got round her - just as it might have gone round a post he happened to be leaning against. They hadn't been talking about anything in particular. Andy said he wouldn't be surprised if they had a thunderstorm before mornin' - it had been so smotherin' hot all day.   Lizzie said "Very likely."   Andy smoked a good while then he said: "Ah well! It's a weary world."   Lizzie didn't say anything. [29]   By-and-bye Andy said: "Ah well; it's a lonely world Lizzie."   "Do you feel lonely Andy?" asked Lizzie after a while.   "Yes Lizzie; I do."   Lizzie let herself settle a little against him without either seeming to notice it and after another while she said softly: "So do I Andy."   Andy knocked the ashes from his pipe very slowly and deliberately and put it away; then he seemed to brighten suddenly and said briskly: "Well Lizzie! Are you satisfied!"   "Yes Andy; I'm satisfied."   "Quite sure now?"   "Yes; I'm quite sure Andy. I'm perfectly satisfied."   "Well then Lizzie - it's settled!"   . . . . .  But to-day - a couple of months after the proposal described above - Andy had trouble on his mind and the trouble was connected with Lizzie Porter. He was putting up a two-rail fence along the old log-paddock on the frontage and working like a man in trouble trying to work it off his mind; and evidently not succeeding - for the last two panels were out of line. He was ramming a post - Andy rammed honestly from the bottom of the hole not the last few shovelfuls below the surface as some do. He was ramming the last layer of clay when a cloud of white dust came along the road paused and drifted or poured off into the scrub leaving long Dave Bentley the horse-breaker on his last victim. [30]   "'Ello Andy! Graftin'?"   "I want to speak to you Dave" said Andy in a strange voice.   "All - all right!" said Dave rather puzzled. He got down wondering what was up and hung his horse to the last post but one.   Dave was Andy's opposite in one respect: he jumped to conclusions as women do; but unlike women he was mostly wrong. He was an old chum and mate of Andy's who had always liked admired and trusted him. But now to his helpless surprise Andy went on scraping the earth from the surface with his long-handled shovel and heaping it conscientiously round the butt of the post his face like a block of wood and his lips set grimly. Dave broke out first (with bush oaths):   "What's the matter with you? Spit it out! What have I been doin' to you? What's yer got yer rag out about anyway?"   Andy faced him suddenly with hatred for "funny business" flashing in his eyes.   "What did you say to my sister Mary about Lizzie Porter?"   Dave started; then he whistled long and low. "Spit it all out Andy!" he advised.   "You said she was travellin' with a feller!"   "Well what's the harm in that? Everybody knows that -"   "If any crawler says a word about Lizzie Porter - look here me and you's got to fight Dave Bentley!" Then with still greater vehemence as though he had a share in the garment: "Take off that coat!" [31]   "Not if I know it!" said Dave with the sudden quietness that comes to brave but headstrong and impulsive men at a critical moment: "Me and you ain't goin' to fight Andy; and" (with sudden energy) "if you try it on I'll knock you into jim-rags!"   Then stepping close to Andy and taking him by the arm: "Andy this thing will have to be fixed up. Come here; I want to talk to you." And he led him some paces aside inside the boundary line which seemed a ludicrously unnecessary precaution seeing that there was no one within sight or hearing save Dave's horse.   "Now look here Andy; let's have it over. What's the matter with you and Lizzie Porter?"   "I'm travellin' with her that's all; and we're going to get married in two years!"   Dave gave vent to another long low whistle. He seemed to think and make up his mind.   "Now look here Andy: we're old mates ain't we?"   "Yes; I know that."   "And do you think I'd tell you a blanky lie or crawl behind your back? Do you? Spit it out!"   "N-no I don't!"   "I've always stuck up for you Andy and - why I've fought for you behind your back!"   "I know that Dave."   "There's my hand on it!"   Andy took his friend's hand mechanically but gripped it hard.   "Now Andy I'll tell you straight: It's Gorstruth about Lizzie Porter!" [32]   They stood as they were for a full minute hands clasped; Andy with his jaw dropped and staring in a dazed sort of way at Dave. He raised his disengaged hand helplessly to his thatch gulped suspiciously and asked in a broken voice:   "How - how do you know it Dave?"   "Know it? Andy I seen 'em meself!"   "You did Dave?" in a tone that suggested sorrow more than anger at Dave's part in the seeing of them.   "Gorstruth Andy!"   . . . . .  "Tell me Dave who was the feller? That's all I want to know."   "I can't tell you that. I only seen them when I was canterin' past in the dusk."   "Then how'd you know it was a man at all?"   "It wore trousers anyway and was as big as you; so it couldn't have been a girl. I'm pretty safe to swear it was Mick Kelly. I saw his horse hangin' up at Porter's once or twice. But I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll find out for you Andy. And what's more I'll job him for you if I catch him!"   Andy said nothing; his hands clenched and his chest heaved. Dave laid a friendly hand on his shoulder.   "It's red hot Andy I know. Anybody else but you and I wouldn't have cared. But don't be a fool; there's any Gorsquantity of girls knockin' round. You just give it to her straight and chuck her and have done with it. You must be bad off to bother about her. Gorstruth! she ain't much to look at anyway! [33] I've got to ride like blazes to catch the coach. Don't knock off till I come back; I won't be above an hour. I'm goin' to give you some points in case you've got to fight Mick; and I'll have to be there to back you!" And thus taking the right moment instinctively he jumped on his horse and galloped on towards the town.   His dust-cloud had scarcely disappeared round a corner of the paddocks when Andy was aware of another one coming towards him. He had a dazed idea that it was Dave coming back but went on digging another post-hole mechanically until a spring-cart rattled up and stopped opposite him. Then he lifted his head. It was Lizzie herself driving home from town. She turned towards him with her usual faint smile. Her small features were "washed out" and rather haggard.   "'Ello Andy!"   But at the sight of her all his hatred of "funny business" - intensified perhaps by a sense of personal injury - came to a head and he exploded:   Once a jolly swagman camped by a Billabong  Under the shade of a Coolabah tree  And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled  "Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"    Down come a jumbuck to drink at the water hole  Up jumped a swagman and grabbed him in glee  And he sang as he stowed him away in his tucker bag  "You'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me'".    Up rode the Squatter a riding his thoroughbred  Up rode the Trooper - one two three  "Where's that jumbuck you've got in your tucker bag?"  "You'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me".    But the swagman he up and jumped in the water hole   Drowning himself by the Coolabah tree   And his ghost may be heard as it sings in the Billabong   "Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?" 