 The Monitor 9th June 1826  Domestic Intelligence  (A Correspondent writes us as follows:) - I promised to tell you what was stirring at Hunter's River the Court Settlement of New South Wales. The Cutter left Sydney Cove at 8 P.M. and arrived at Newcastle before eight the following morning. This is a pleasant packet and the Captain was a very pleasant gentlemanly fellow. The cabin is well fitted up and ornamented with muskets pistols and cutlasses in case of pirates - there are also two cannon (I don't know how many pounders) on deck. I should have slept soundly the whole way but in the hold there were some bullocks and a fine pig; as the vessel rolled the pig was annoyed by the bullock which caused her to squeal and groan ever and anon as I was dropping asleep; I don't like dumb beasts to be hurt and a pig more especially it is such a voluptuous animal so susceptible and so good - to eat at Newcastle of which I shall give you an account on my return.   An acquaintance engaged a boat to convey both of us and a trifle of luggage up the river - the first ten miles it may be termed an arm of the sea having flat coasts fringed with mangrove; however an agreeable contrast to this is presented at the 7th mile where the neat residence of Mr Platt tops some rising ground with a windmill contiguous - the land in front is cleared down to the river and is sown with wheat which looks well. A man at the mill told me they grind at one shilling per bushel and have as much as they can do. On the same of the river a little beyond we just obtained a glimpse of Mr Sparke's farm which is cleared to a great extent and a decent house built upon it with a verandah and glazed sashes; - Mr S. and his family of sons came from Devonshire and certainly seem to have not left their habits of industry behind. Their neighbour Mr Eales is also of the same stamp and has made a pretty hole in the woods. It is particularly gratifying to hear these Settlers talk in high spirits of their crops cattle and prospects - you would almost think they had found out (nearly!) the philosopher's stone; and so they have for Industry may assume the name of Midas in this country. We next saw the magisterial abode of Mr Close which seems befitting a country gentleman - the grounds about it were well fenced and prosperous.   Night overtook us before we could reach the settlement at Wallis Plains - though it is only 20 miles from Newcastle overland it is more than double that distance by water; you guess the river is circuitous - you are quite correct and I shall therefore not take the tourist's privilege of following it. We endevoured to row as far as we could while the tide was in our favour the moon arose and shed a rich refulgence on the umbrageous scenery which adorns the course of this noble stream - it gave the shades of the forest a deeper gloom - revealed the tall gum trees more distinctly and shone over the curling foliage of the underwood which reached down to the water's edge. Our oars made a monotonous sound which left the mind to its resource; one of the best which struck us was to moor the boat at Nelson's Plains and as the tide was spent and the night chilly we took refuge in the hut and there regaled ourselves with a dish of tea and a nap. (To be continued.)  The Monitor 23rd June 1826  Domestic Intelligence ( Continued from our Paper No. 4)   Our Hunter's River Correspondent Thus Continues.  From Nelson's Plains we proceeded early in the morning to Wallis's Plains and there breakfasted. The navigation of Hunter's River may be said to terminate at this place which provincially is called "the Settlement at the Banks." It consists of a cluster of detached cottages which may be designated a hamlet. You would suppose the inhabitants were only tenants at will who did not care to build on other people's ground. It's a sorry sight to see bad buildings any where and its very grating to an Englishman when he leaves the dusty streets to take a turn amongst the rural virtues of a village life there to find nothing of the sort. At this distance from Sydney I indulged the hope of growing quite poetical and seeing Pan and the sylvan deities dryads and hamadryads - but there was no such thing - perhaps it is that they are like the kangaroos frightened at the approach of settlers or their manners. As this place is the centre of a populous neighbourhood it is in contemplation to beautify it with a church and let the good folks have some excuse for saying their prayers. They in general appear a very hardy race for a great capacity for being industrious cleanly honest and obliging - all special virtues in a peasantry. I put up at the Angel Inn which has every accomodation for travellers; a quarter of a pipe of wine on draft plenty to eat and good beds. A young man (a native) told me he wished to rent it off the landlord and had offered him 100£ per annum; but he asked 200£ per annum! - for an obscure pot-house; only think of that. Passons.   The next night I lodged at the Grange on my estate - this ediface I found more picturesque than agreeable: its shattered condition and numerous loop-holes admitted the cold night-wind from every quarter; I was in the frigid zone. After enduring this till it was no longer tolerable I rose before 3 o'clock roused my servants ordered a calaban to fetch in wood and water and make breakfast. This was done impromptu - a piece of beef was boiled a cake baked and tea made; but before they could be spread on the table a gentle dozing seized me till day-light. I then shortly proceeded out to reconnoitre my possessions. Every thing was strange to me - a great dog which I had brought up from a whelp growled as I passed - my vineyard was trapled down my garden destroyed - the fences though not come to decay were lamentably deficient; and in fine I was constrained to believe that my servants had been slothful while I tarried to come unto them. However during my stay they worked with zeal and alacrity. I felled trees to set up an example till my hands were sore - plucked cobs till I was tired - sowed wheat - and planted trees and tropical productions in the garden - I also visited some of the neighbouring gentry and in a few days returned to Newcastle.  Hunter's River without any flourish is a fine settlement: the whole country appeared as if it wanted mowing - large flocks and herds are fast accumulating and many settlers are investing considerable property in building fencing and clearing. All are rising to that desirable condition of having bread enough and to spare. In a few years they will constitute a power squireality truly enviable if they preserve the tree guileless open and generous character of an English country gentleman.   The Monitor 30th June 1826  Domestic Intelligence  Our Travelling Correspondent continues to write:  Newcastle possesses the American characteristics of a town to wit a church a tavern and a blacksmith's shop. It even exceeds in these particulars; but the number of houses unroofed and going to decay betray the sad tokens of depopulation and poverty.  I have been among the ruins of ancient cities and paused believing that I met the phantoms of romance flitting around - but Newcastle conveys a sensation as much otherwise as is found in eating chalk and cheese. The situation is nevertheless charming and it will one day become ensouled. It stands on the promontory of a sweeping hill which overlooks a large extent of coast and the Southern ocean; like Sydney it is a wonderful place you go up and down it and wonder - what next! - there may be people of sentiment in it for aught I know but I was not lucky enough to meet them. Four Bacchanalians coupled arm in arm following a flute- player was the most classic exhibition that struck me; they appeared such a loving group and reeled so naturally to the music.  From the extreme verge of the head-land which as before stated forms the scite of Newcastle; a pier or mole is built extending towards the Island of Nobby which is half a mile distant. To the South-east a dangerous reef of rocks is visible at low water over which there is a heavy swell in a gale of wind this pier was therefore built as a break-water. It is 950 feet in lenght; 34 in breadth at the top and 10 feet above high water mark. This spirited undertaking was commenced on the 16th August 1818 and in January 1821 it was 626 feet long 21 deep; January 7th 1822 it was 845 feet long 21 deep; and the 31st January 1923 it was abandoned being then 30 feet deep and having in it 25473 cubic yards of materials. The sides are formed of huge blocks of argillacoius sand-stone the top course of which on the South side and several on the North are very much worn by the atmosphere. Where the sea dashes there is little or no decay and the foundation blocks being now encrusted with marine lxuvioe will endure forever. In consequence of the exterior masonry not having been bonded by cross walls a small breach has been effected in the centre of the South side which however it would not be difficult to repair. The general depth of the channel between the pier and Nobby's is 11 feet at low water. Some practical gentlemen have informed me that since the pier has been erected the harbour is 10 or 11 feet deeper that vessels can lay in it now when the weather is bad: that if the pier was finished the harbour would be again deepened; and furthermore that if 50 feet were shaven off the crown of Nobby's the entrance would be facilitated and shipwrecks prevented. This island is about 200 yards long and 40 wide with a perpendicular clift on the South side 133 feet high; and it is this which takes the wind out of the sails of vessels as they are doubling it during which they are liable to drift with the current on the North Shore as two have done recently.  In the vicinity of the pier are the Salt Works of Mr Blaxland. The sea water is pumped out of troughs boiled in hollow vats chrystallized and purified with boiled butter and bullocks' blood. Coals are purchased of Government at 5s. per ton and about 20 tons are consumed per week in making 2 tons of salt. The salt is a fine white crystal sells for 9 or 10s. per cwt. and is in so much demand as to preclude the virtues it might derive additionally from age. The enterprising proprietor it is said intends building a mansion contiguous for his residence; and then no doubt will enlarge his manufactory perfect the process and thus achieve a constant tribute from old Neptune enriching both himself and the revenue of his adopted country.  People here are so beset with opportunities of acquiring wealth that another source little inferior to a gold mine has been strangely overlooked and our kinsfolk on the other side of the globe are coming with the charitable design of instructing us in this particular. There are immense beds of carbon in the stratat of Newcastle and though analytically it is not so pure as the diamond the scientific chemists of England neverthless do conceive that is subjected to a powerful retort it may be found intrinsically as valuable. We shall thus learn something when they come and that ignorance engendered by long rustication in the forest be removed - happily. Of this mineral 4000 tons are raised annually but in a few years it is speculated the ratio will be 50000.   The Monitor 25th August 1826  NEWCASTLE QUARTER SESSIONS PRESENTMENT  The Grand Jurors of our Sovereign Lord the King now assembled in the town of Newcastle the 15th day of August in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and twenty six present to the Court of Quarter Sessions that they have visited the Gaol of Newcastle which on attentive examination they found clean and in good order; the provisions good sufficient and wholesome; the Gaol itself sufficiently spacious for the accomodation of the district.  The Grand Jurors cannot avoid remarking the bad state of the public Wells in the town one only out of two being imperfectly covered.  The Grand Jurors present the dilapidated state of the Wharf at Newcastle.  The Grand Jurors have felt it their duty to visit the Church-yard which for want of a fence has been made a thoroughfare; the pigs being permitted to root the graves; they have also examined the ruinous state of the Church and find the walls in a dilapidated state the same not having been originally built perpendicular.  The Grand Jurors embrance this (their first) opportunity of observing there is but one place of Public Worship in this large and increasing district.  The Grand Jurors present the absolute necessity of the immediate erection of a Bridge over the creek at Wallis' plains for the preservation of the lives and the property of His Majesty's subjects; the creek only being forable after a long drought. Rain or a fresh in the river renders it not only dangerous but almost impossible to cross without the assistance of a boat which is not at command.  The Grand Jurors beg to call the attention of Government to the state of the Roads and respectfully recommend that a person be nominated to survey and mark out the continuation of a line of Road from the town of Newcastle through the several districts His Majesty's subjects suffering much inconvenience from the present tracks being obstructed by fences of the landed proprietors; as also that a Punt be placed in a central situation to forward the communication.  The Grand Jurors present the very great evil arising from the total want of Lock-up-houses for the reception of male and female prisoners at Paterson's and Patrick's Plains.  The Grand Jurors cannot close without assuring the Court that they only bring to their notice a few of the most important and absolute wants of this extensive and populous district.  JAMES REID FOREMAN.  T.V. BLOOMFIELD  J.H. BOUGHTON  JOHN CORY  EDWARD S. CORY  JAMES GLENNIE  S.L. HARRIS  FRANCES LITTLE  J. MUDIE  J.L. MACGILLIVRAY  JAMES PHILLIPS  J.L. PLATT  HERNUS SCOTT  J.G. SMITH  Apprehension of the MONSTER JEFFERIES.  The Tasmanian monster Jefferies we rejoice in stating has been secured. His earthly career shall soon be terminated when he will enter into the presence of the Judge Eternal to answer for crimes of the most awful and revolting complexion. The celebrated Michael Howe of Tasmanian celebrity is in no way comparable to this wretch for Jefferies stands confessed in our opinion the greatest monster that ever cursed the earth. It is with much satisfaction we communicate the following authentic particulars of the providential capture of this worst of monsters in human shape.  EXTRACT FROM A LETTER DATED SOUTH ESK VAN DIEMEN'S LAND JAN. 23 1826.  "On the 22nd instant about 8 o'clock in the morning three parties had met at Mr Davies's hut where they were breakfasting when Jefferies made his appearance. He was first discovered by a boy belonging to Mr Cox of the aboriginal tribe who immediately exclaimed - 'There is Jefferies!'  "The parties remained concealed till he was within reach of a musket ball when one of Mr Davies's men and one of Mr Wedges's party rushed out. As soon as Jefferies perceived them he got behind a tree and observing several others he asked if there was any quarter and was answered in the affirmative by Mr Wedges's man who was just going to fire saying - 'Yes lay down your arms.' With this he readily complied and was taken and brought to Mr Cox's where Mr Batman received the following most horrid particulars from his mouth: - "On Christmas day he fell in with the two men on Mr Sutherland's grazing farm one of whom ran away but the other exchanged a few shots. He was at last wounded by Jefferies in the thigh and his brains blown out by one of the party.  "About a week after this he went to Mr Tibb's house and led captive Mr and Mrs Tibbs their child and a stock-keeper a few miles into the woods when one of Jefferies' associates shot the stock-keeper and the other fired at Mr Tibbs who instantly fell and was expected to have been mortally wounded. Mrs Tibbs was obliged to proceed with them further into the woods but not walking fast enough as Jefferies wished in order to lighten her load he took the child which was but five months old from her and dashed out its brains on a tree-trunk.  "The next barbarous murder he committed was that of Constable Baker of whom he compelled to carry his knapsack and whom he deliberately shot as he was proceeding with it on his back. They were then twelve miles from George Town.  "Some time after this they fell short of provisions and cast lots who should die. The lot fell upon Russell but he did not believe his companions to be in earnest; and therefore in a convenient place lay down and composed himself to sleep. Jefferies took advantage of his defenceless condition and shot him through the head and he and his remaining associate lived on his flesh for four days. When they arrived at a stock-keeper's hut where they killed two sheep they had about five pounds of his flesh remaining.  "The monster arrived in Launceston a few minutes before nine o'clock on Sunday Evening. The Town was almost emptied of its inhabitants to meet the inhuman wretch. Several attempts were made by the people to take him out of the cart that they might wreak their vengeance upon him and it became necessary to send to Town for a stronger guard to prevent his immediate despatch. He entered the Town and gaol amidst the curses of every person whomsoever.  "This morning I had the opportunity of seeing him and a more awful spectacle you cannot conceive. He appeared very anxious to die and is confessing all his sins in writing down his life with the intention of having it published. He is a painter by trade aged 34 having been born in the City of Bristol in the year 1791 He writes a legible and clear hand; his story reads tolerably well; but the orthography is indifferent as might be expected from a creature that has passed his life in the most foul and bloody career ever narrated. He has made some drawings in which he has pourtrayed himself in various circumstances but still keeping in view the demoniac cast which stamps him a very fiend."  The Last of the Infamous Brady's Mob.  HOBART TOWN SATURDAY MAY 6 1826  On Thursday morning the awful execution took place of five of these unfortunate men namely Brady Bryant Jefferies Perry and Thomson and yesterday morning all the others suffered with the exception of Hopkins who stands respited till the 12th Inst.  A most blessed change appeared to have been worked on all these misguided and guilty men. Brady and Bryant were closeted with the Reverend Mr Conolly till the hour approached when the Sheriff was to make his dread visit. The soul of Jefferies which had for some time touched with a sense of his dreadful state was wholly lost to the things around him and Perry who had but a few days before incurred the animadversion of His Honor the Chief Justice for his levity in Court was so overpowered by his internal feelings as nearly to swoon away. The effort to silence conscience was evidently at last ineffectual and never was more fully shewn how deeply they feel their own pain who most disregarded that of others.  Having mounted the scaffold with trembling step and at the conclusion of the final prayer which closed with the word "death" - the executioner withdrew the bolt - the platform fell and the miserable men dropped into eternity.  THE CAREER OF MATTHEW BRADY.  While at Macquarie Harbour Brady was not long contemplating escape. Forming a secret association of desperadoes he sought occasion to seize a boat. On the 9th of June 1824 Commandant Wright the surgeon and others were out some distance from the Settlement. The moment seemed opportune and a rush was made towards his boat; but the officer was on the alert and pushed off just in time. Having secured another boat the party made off for the narrow entrance of the Harbour and were soon tossing on the angry waves of the Southern Ocean. Nine days after they became bushrangers on the eastern coast of the Derwent with Brady as Captain.  Brady's mob became a terror to all the Colonists - no settler could be secure for one moment from their depredations. One day the bushrangers would be committing outrages near Launceston and in an astonishing short space of time they would be striking terror to the inhabitants in the vicinity of Hobart Town - and the most atrocious crimes were committed by them. The audacity with which these men acted is most astonishing; not content with ransacking and putting at defiance the whole of the country they made frequent excursions into Hobart Town; and their leaders have been known to be carousing there for days and days together as if to mock the energies of the Government and the Colonists to capture them. The Government appeared to look on in silent wonder at the outrageous proceedings of this little band of bushrangers.  The bushrangers had been committing their depredations nearly twelve months when the Government finding the Colonists were unable of themselves to bring these outlaws to justice issued a Government Order dated the 14th of April 1825 offering rewards. Twenty-five guineas was offered for the apprehension of either Brady or M'Cabe or a conditional pardon to any convict who should secure either of them. The rewards however were insufficient. So audacious was Brady that three days. after the above Government Order was issued he cooly posted the following notice on the door of the Royal Oak Inn at Crossmarch:  "Mountain Home April 20th 1825.   "It has caused Matthew Brady much concern that such a person known as Sir George Arthur is at large. Twenty gallons of rum will be given to any person that will deliver his person unto me. I also caution John Priest that I will hang him for his ill-treatment of Mrs Blackwell at Newtown. M. Brady."  One effect of the Governor's proclamation was the capture of M'Cabe. Originally of respectable connexions he had received a good education. A lieutenant of the gang he enjoyed the confidence of his chief; but for offering violence to a woman Brady shot M'Cabe through the hand disarmed and thrashed him and expelled him from the gang. M'Cabe then began robbing settlers single-handed but he was soon taken. When M'Cabe was in prison every effort was made to extract information about Brady but without avail; he considered it a point of honor to divulge nothing and upon the scaffold adhered to that principle.  Every expedient employed to take Brady failed. Soldiers were concealed beneath luggage upon drays and so driven through the lonely paths of the bush in the hope to fall in with him. The audacity of Brady's mob seemed to increase with their success. Sometimes as many as twenty-five horsemen were seen following the standard of Brady. The brilliant feats the daring attacks the astonishing escapes produced such an eclat that a thorough bushranging mania seized the community. As many as one hundred armed criminals were out at once each emulous to exceed even Brady himself. The constables and military were dreadfully harassed; but the chief burden of care rested on the responsible head of His Excellency Sir George Arthur. [109] He entreated and threatened; he lavished rewards and severely punished; but Brady's mob still burnt plundered terrified.  Satisfied with their plunder the bushrangers now contemplated the means of their escape from the Colony as a glorious finish to their adventures. Brady left them while he went reconnoitring from a hill the position of the Glory a vessel thought well-adapted for their purpose. The whole party entered a fine boat which they had stolen and sailed three times round the Glory. A discussion then followed as to the propriety of an immediate capture. The wind was foul and so the chance of getting out the Tamar River was diminished; they decided upon another forest campaign with the chances of doubling their foes in the intricacy of the bush.  Before this Jefferies had been captured and true to his character peached upon his mates though without the least expectation of a reprieve. Calling their carrier Watson the bushrangers bade him go to Launceston with their compliments to the Commandant and state their intention to do two things that night; namely rob the residence of Richard Dry Esq and to attack the gaol take Jefferies out of his cell well torture him for a while and then finish him with ball. The man delivered the message which was treated with derision!  At 10 o'clock that night however a man who escaped from Mr Dry came into Launceston to say that the banditti were there. The Commandant instantly started with one sergeant ten soldiers and some volunteers. They surrounded the house just as the bushrangers had packed up their booty when a brisk fire commenced. The bushrangers retreated and all was quite when the Commandant remembered that they had threatened to attack the gaol. He returned post haste with half the soldiers but the outlaws did not make their appearance within the limits of the town.  This outrage more daring than any other committed by Brady during his twenty-one months reign of terror and desolation from one end of the island to the other prompted His Excellency to issue a proclamation offering a reward of one hundred guineas or three hundred acres of land free of all restrictions; or a free pardon and passage to England to any prisoner giving information whereby any one of the twelve principal desperadoes named in the proclamation might be taken.  Almost immediately these terms aroused the cupidity and hopes of many before indifferent to the affair or friendly to the men. The bush was soon searched in all directions most vigorously; the different parties were fell in with and deadly skirmishes took place in which generally the bushrangers were worsted. As their bands became more divided so did the capture become more easily accomplished. But mischief was still abroad for that Brady was still at large. On the night of the 5th of March last the bushrangers set fire and burnt down the stock-yard with all the wheat belonging to Mr Abraham Walker and Commissary Walker. They shot Thomas Kenton dead at the Punt on the South Esk; they called him out of the house and deliberately shot him. One by one however they fell into the hands of those in pursuit of them until finally only Brady was left alone in the wilderness of the Western Tier. He was closely pursued by Mr Batman's party and taken without further resistance.  THE TRIAL OF BRADY'S MOB.  On the 22nd of April last Jefferies and Perry were arraigned for the murder of Mr Tibbs' child. When Mrs Tibbs came into Court and her eye glanced at the insatiate murderers of her babe she was so affected as to be unable to stand. Her situation powerfully excited the commisseration of every one present. The bare recital of the dreadful journey which the monster had compelled her to take was a painful addition to her sufferings.  When it was necessary for her to look at the prisoners in order to prove their persons the suddenness with which she withdrew her eyes and the tears with which the effort was accompanied was an instance of detestation more strongly depicted than any assembly of spectators perhaps ever witnessed.  The child proved to have been taken away from the arms of the mother and killed by Jefferies and Russel and its remains were discovered about a week afterwards in a decayed state and mangled by the carnivorous animals in the woods. When Mrs Tibbs had asked Jefferies who called himself Captain and was dressed in a long black coat red waist-coats and a Kangaroo skin cap to point out the place where she might find the body he said "It was no odds as it had not suffered a moment's pain in leaving the world". Both he and Russel who was afterwards shot and partly eaten by the monster expressed themselves as regarding the life of a child as nothing.  Both the prisoners were found guilty; the trial lasted till 11 at night.  On the 25th of April the bushrangers Brady Bryant Tilley M'Kenney Brown Gregory and Hodgetts were put upon their trial for making an assault on William Andrews a private of the 40th at Bagdad on the 26th of December last and stealing his gun. The jury returned the verdict of guilty except against M'Kenney and Hodgetts who were acquitted.  Brady Bryant Tilley and Goodwin were then tried for having committed the crimes of felony and arson at Mr Lawrence's on the Lake River on the 26th of February when Brady and Bryant pleaded guilty to the charge the former declaring that he should plead guilty to every other information that might be filed against him.  On the 27th of April following Brady and Bryant pleaded guilty to the murder of Thomas Kenton with malice aforethought and at the instigation of the devil on the 5th of March last.  We regret to state that the Court during the trials was crowded with sympathising ladies who wept at the recital of Brady's sufferings and palliated the enormity of his crimes. Brady's chivalrous behaviour to females had won their esteem; gentleness to the weak and the brilliant feats of his career had excited their imagination with pleasure. Following the pronouncement of death we must remark that petition followed petition for Brady's deliverance from the halter. His cell was besieged with visitors and his table loaded with presents - baskets of fruit bouquets of flowers and dishes of confectionery were prepared by these fair admirers and were tendered in abundance to the gaoler for his distinguished captive. Brady's greatest vexation he repeatedly stated was being brought to Hobart Town in company with the monster Jefferies and he bitterly grieved his fate that he should be hanged on the same platform with such a despicable creature.  A Slashing Mill between Currency & Sterling.  SYDNEY Monday October 30 1826  On Friday morning last long ere "the early village cock had once done salutation to the morn" the road to Parramatta resounded with "cheerful note of preparation" all was bustle and activity among those vulgarly called the fancy who had previously made grand requisition upon all the depots for horse flesh of the second quality.  The parties hied to a certain delectable spot two miles short of Parramatta where the intrinsic merit of sterling and currency blood was about to be decided. - For the honour of Old England on the one hand and the fame of Australia's Sons on the other; there were few among the lovers of the barbarous and vicious sport who did not feel a high degree of interest.  A lively sensation had been excited for several weeks past from the known courage and science of both pugilists. George Glew the English champion was backed for £50 to contest the palm of victory with Young Kable the Currency youth by some of the higher orders of the sporting world and heavy bets were depending on the result of the battle.  About nine o'clock the combatants entered a roped ring and stripped in excellent style the coolness and intrepidity which characterizes an Englishman was never more conspicuously displayed. Betting was 6 to 4 on Glew notwithstanding the gigantic stature of Kable who was a mountain of a man when compared with his antagonist.  Twenty-five rounds were fought when an accident decided not the superiority of man but the fate of the battle. A fall on the ropes by which his neck was injured rendered Glew incapable of coming up to time. Kable was dreadfully disfigured. His oponent on the contrary looked a little worse offering to fight him again next day. It was a dreadful battle and it is since reported that Kable is either dead or about to die.  It will be remembered that Young Kable came into prominence when he defeated Clark the celebrated English pugilist on February 20 1824. To the astonishment of all and to the confusion of many hundreds assembled to witness the delightful spectacle Kable beat his much dreaded antagonist in about ten minutes to the great glee of all the Currency lads.  We are sorry thus to have to recount the introduction into this colony of this abominable mode of displaying mere natural brutal courage. We like to see and to hear of the prosperity of the Australian race with whose interests and welfare much of our happiness is connected; but we must confess it is neither congenial to our disposition accordant with the principles of morality nor honorable to them to pride themselves on boxing or any European accomplishment.   If certain men who come to this Colony must continue at their old practices let them horde with one another and glut in each other's blood; but not have for their associates AUSTRALIA'S ONLY HOPE - HER GROWING YOUTH! With equal propriety might one join in a robbery with such characters as enter the pugilistic lists.  D'Entrecasteaux' Channel  From: Aurora Australis; or Specimens of Sacred Poetry  John Dunmore Lang  Sydney G.Eagar 1826   Aurora Australis  D'ENTRECASTEAUX' CHANNEL  VAN DIEMAN'S LAND.  1 SEE! D'Entrecasteaux' Channel opens fair  And Tasman's Head lyes on the starboard bow.  High rocks and stunted trees meet you where'er  You look around; 'tis a bold coast enow.  With foul wind and crank ship 'twere hard to wear;  A reef of rocks lyes westward long and low.  At ebb tide you may see th'Actaeon lye  A sheer hulk o'er the breakers high and dry.  'Tis a most beauteous Strait! The great South Sea's  Proud waves keep holiday along its shore;  And as the good ship glides before the breeze  Broad bays and isles appear and steep cliffs hoar  With groves on either hand of ancient trees  Planted by Nature in the days of yore;  Van Dieman's on the left and Bruny's Isle  Forming the starboard shore for many a mile.  But all is still as death! Nor voice of man  Is heard nor forest warbler's tuneful song.  It seems as if this beauteous world began  To be but yesterday and th'earth still young  And unpossessed. For tho' the tall black swan  Sits on her nest and sails stately along  And the green wild-doves their fleet pinions ply  And the grey eagle tempts the azure sky;  Yet all is still as death! Wild solitude  Reigns undisturbed along the voiceless shore  And every tree seems standing as it stood  Five thousand years ago. The loud wave's roar  Were music in these wilds! The wise and good  That wont of old as Hermits to adore  The God of nature in the desart drear  Might sure have found a fit sojourning here!  May 1823.   LETTER III  An elegant light-house of white freestone with a revolving light built upon the southern side of the entrance to Port Jackson and called Macquarie Tower points out both by day and night the precise Situation of the harbour. Beside the light-house is a signal-post and a telegraph to communicate to Sydney every thing relative to ships leaving or approaching the port.  The coast-line here consists of high mouldering cliffs of whitish sandstone which arrest strongly the attention of the stranger; whilst the country in the vicinity clothed in a livery of evergreen shrubs presents a pleasing and refreshing picture to the eye so long habituated to the dreary and boundless expanse of sea spread out daily in desert magnificence. The stunted appearance of these shrubs however and the patches of white sand scattered among them impress on the mind no high idea of the fertility of the soil from which they draw their subsistence.  You enter Port Jackson between two high bluff points named the North and South Heads about three quarters of a mile apart. Proceeding onwards the Sweet natural scenery of our queen of harbours gradually expands upon your view. You steer nearly west to Sydney which is distant five miles the first glimpse you have of its situation being the tall and slender spire of St. George's church shooting up into the clear horizon before you. The shores onwards are bold and often precipitous agreeably varied in their general outline by romantic little bays which with their white sandy beaches open irregularly to the right and left as you sail along. On each side the land broken and moderately high terminates toward the shore in narrow ridges covered with native shrubs in perpetual summer verdure among which rocks of varied hues peep here and there abruptly out while slender streams of water gurgling down the narrow valleys between the ridges just reveal themselves at intervals and retire again from view.  To the left as you steer up the harbour you first observe the pilot-houses with their clean whitewashed walls and small fairy gardens perched at the bottom of a snug little sunny bay; then the pretty cottage called The Retreat formerly the residence of Sir Henry Brown Hayes; and next the beautiful eastern-fashioned mansion of our excellent naval officer Captain Piper which with its tastefully ornamented lawn and delightful grounds cannot fail to impress the stranger very favourably as to the wealth and height of improvement to which the colony has in its short but prosperous career attained. [28]   A few rocky islands feathered lightly with scrubby brushwood lie carelessly scattered as it were along the course of the harbour but none of them realize the poetical image of Campbell and the long isles of Sydney Cove to view: the most noted being one fronting the Cove bearing the un-poetical name of Pinch gut on account of its having been the primitive prison of the colony and the spot also whereon male-factors were in olden times hung in chains.  Sydney Cove is formed by two ridges running out into the harbour. The one to the left terminates in Bennilong's Point on the low extremity whereof stands Fort Macquarie with its castellated martello towers; and that to the right in Dawes Point with a fort bearing that name which in like manner occupies its extremity. Down the hollow between these ridges a small rill trickles slowly into the head of the Cove in the rocky sandstone bed of which tanks have been cut to retain the water during the summer droughts an arrangement which proves of material service to the town's-people.  Along this hollow for upwards of a mile in a westerly direction extends our main thoroughfare (George Street) which all the other streets either run parallel to or intersect at right angles the town thus occupying the whole of the hollow and creeping up the gradual ascents on either side.  The ridge on the left is successively crowned by the lofty-looking buildings of the horse barracks the colonial hospital the convict barracks and a fine Gothic Catholic chapel. Beyond this lies the promenade of Hyde Park flanked toward the town by a row of pretty cottages and toward the country by a high brick-walled garden appertaining to the government.  On the ridge to the right of the Cove rows rising above rows of neat white cottages present themselves overlooked by the commanding position of Fort Phillip with its signal-post and telegraphic appendages; following which line we behold in succession the military hospital and windmill St. James's Church the Gothic Presbyterian kirk: and beyond these the military barracks forming three-fourths of a large square and opening to George Street with an extensive green plot in the centre for purposes of parade. [29]  The portion of the town to the right is best known by the name of The Rocks from the ridge whereon it is built being nothing more than a bare mass of white sandstone often rising in successive layers (like steps of stairs) from the bottom to the top of the ridge. This is considered the St. Giles's and the division of the town to the left the St. James's portion of Sydney; most of the superior citizens inhabiting the latter and the lower classes chiefly the former though the Rocks can undoubtedly boast of many handsome houses with highly respectable inmates.  A few hundred yards from the head of the Cove toward the left stands the governor's house with its beautiful domain in front ornamented by large trees of the finest and most varied foliage scattered singly or in clumps; with a fine belt of shrubbery closing in the background: the whole occupying a space from beyond the head of the Cove to near Bennilong's Point.  Between the domain and the Cove an agreeable walk has been formed chiefly in the solid rock and fenced off from the domain by a freestone wall which being level at its top with that portion of the enclosure approaching the Point the interior attractions may be thus pleasantly viewed. It is in consequence of this circumstance together with the prospect it commands of the shipping in the harbour and its communicating with the other fine walks around that this promenade has become the favourite of our Sunday pedestrians and fashionables. Along it they pour to enjoy the cool evening sea-breeze among the delightful scenery bordering the shores of the harbour beyond.  But the domain beautiful as it still undoubtedly is has lost much of its attraction since being deprived of the kangaroos and emus seen in Governor Macquarie's time hopping and frisking playfully about which never failed to strike powerfully the eye of a stranger on his first sight of them from ship-board both on account of their novelty to him and their being emblematical of the country upon whose shore he was about to debark.  On casting the eye again from the ship to the right shore of the Cove you first see the handsome mansion of Mr. R. Campbell one of our oldest and most respectable merchants with its garden full of flowers and fruit-trees and wharf and storehouse toward the beach: next you observe the town-house of Captain Piper; then the government dock-yard against the surrounding wall whereof are built the working-sheds and storehouses with its boat-landings and little wet-docks scooped out of the adjoining shore; then the high buildings composing the commissary stores beyond which is the wooden government wharf jutting out into the harbour; and farther on the landing warehouses of the various merchants connected with our export and import trade; a low wall built across its head there terminating the Cove to prevent its being filled up by the alluvial depositions from the rivulet. [30]  Numbers of boats soon surround the ship filled with people anxious to hear news and traffickers with fruit and other refreshments besides watermen to land passengers. A regular establishment of the latter description has long existed here many of whose members formerly plied that vocation on the Thames and among whom were a few years back numbered that famous personage once known by all from Westminster Stairs to Greenwich by the shouts which assailed him as he rowed along of "Overboard he vent overboard he vent!"  King Boongarre too with a boat-load of his dingy retainers may possibly honour you with a visit bedizened in his varnished cocked hat of "formal cut" his gold-laced blue coat (flanked on the shoulders by a pair of massy epaulettes) buttoned closely up to evade the extravagance of including a shirt in the catalogue of his wardrobe; and his bare and broad platter feet of dull cinder hue spreading out like a pair of sprawling toads upon the deck before you. First he makes one solemn measured stride from the gangway; then turning round to the quarter-deck lifts up his beaver with the right hand a full foot from his head (with all the grace and ease of a court exquisite) and carrying it slowly and solemnly forwards to a full arm's-length lowers it in a gentle and most dignified manner down to the very deck following up this motion by an inflection of the body almost equally profound.  Advancing slowly in this way his hat gracefully poised in his hand and his phiz wreathed with many a fantastic smile he bids massa welcome to his country. On finding he has fairly grinned himself into your good graces he formally prepares to take leave endeavouring at the same time to take likewise what you are probably less willing to part withal namely portion of your cash. [31] Let it not be supposed however that his Majesty condescends to thieve: he only solicits the loan of a dump on pretence of treating his sick gin to a cup of tea but in reality with a view of treating himself to a porringer of "Cooper's best" to which his Majesty is most royally devoted.  You land at the government wharf on the right where carts and porters are generally on the lookout for jobs; and on passing about fifty yards along the avenue you enter George Street which stretches on both hands and up which towards the left you now turn to reach the heart of the town.  Near the harbour where ground is very valuable the houses are usually contiguous like those of the towns in England; but generally speaking the better sort of houses in Sydney are built in the detached cottage style - of white freestone or of brick plastered and whitewashed one or two stories high with verandas in front and enclosed by a neat wooden paling lined occasionally with trim-pruned geranium hedges. They have besides a commodious garden attached commonly decked out with flowers and teeming with culinary delicacies. Into the enclosure immediately around the house the dogs are usually turned at night to ward off rogues; and uncompromising vigilant watchmen they certainly are paying little of that respect to genteel exterior which their better-bred brethren in England are so apt to demonstrate.  The streets are wide and neither paved nor lighted at present; but the general dryness of our climate and durable composition of our streets render paving unnecessary; while an elegant set of lamps is now actually in progress to be placed diagonally at fifty yards distance; and by reason of the whiteness of our houses and clearness of our sky an illumination will thus be effected equalling some of the best-lighted London streets.  Although all you see are English faces and you hear no other language but English spoken yet you soon become aware you are in a country very different from England by the number of parrots and other birds of strange note and plumage which you observe hanging at so many doors and cagefuls of which you will soon see exposed for sale as you proceed.  The government gangs of convicts also marching backwards and forwards from their work in single military file and the solitary ones straggling here and there with their white woollen Paramatta frocks and trowsers or grey or yellow jackets with duck overalls [...] all daubed over with broad arrows P.B's C. B's and various numerals in black white and red; with perhaps the jail-gang straddling sulkily by in their jingling leg-chains - a tell a tale too plain to be misunderstood. [32] [33]  the left consists of three two-story buildings of freestone ranged in a line surrounded by a high wall and each story encircled by a veranda. [34] It is capable of containing several hundred patients; is regulated much in the same way as the naval hospitals in England; and may rank with the best of those for the excellent order in which it is kept. It is established for the admission of convicts only and it matters not whether the convict is in the service of government or of a settler provided his case is considered a proper one for admission.  At the colonial dock-yard on the right of the Cove all the government vessels load unload and are repaired; government boats are kept; and the depot of coals for government use is situated. The naval portion of the work is performed by gangs of competent convicts from the barrack; the jail-gang being usually tasked with the lading and unlading of the vessels.  The lumber-yard is a range of workshops forming a square to the left of George Street near the guard-house; here the government carpenters blacksmiths and other mechanics are employed in their various vocations under their respective overseers.  Agreeable amusements are still much wanted to relieve the full monotony of a town like Sydney forming the capital of a small territory and cut off in a manner from all communications with the other parts of the civilized world excepting by the casual arrival of a vessel about once a month bringing broken and garbled accounts of occurrences probably some six months old.  Partly on account of this tediousness and uncertainty in receiving intelligence together with the impossibility of any but a very few ever having access to the English prints to keep unbroken the chain of connexion that links them to home; the affairs of the mother country soon become objects comparatively of no interest to the great body of the colonists; while colonial news colonial politics and conversational discussions about the private affairs and personal good qualities or failings of individuals and families engross here the whole of the public attention.  In all small communities where people know too much of each other's private affairs and where consequently idle gossipings and retailings of personal scandal creep in to fill the blanks occasioned by the flagging of other subjects some such innocent recreation as theatricals balls and evening parties (chiming in now and then to serve for topics of pleasant discussion and divert the mind from objects only serving to engendered feeling) are of manifest utility. [35] But in a place so long distracted with private and party feuds as New South Wales with few subjects "of a day" either of foreign or domestic interest furnished us to talk about such inoffensive sources of enjoyment would become objects of paramount importance both as respects the security of the peace and furtherance of the prosperity of our infant community.  A theatre has long been wanted here to serve such purposes; and a building is now in course of erection which is spoken of as being intended for one by Mr. James Underwood. No regular subscription balls have yet been set on foot; but private ones are occasionally given; and also three annual public balls and suppers by the respective sons of St. George St. Patrick and St. Andrew as their regular jubilee days arrive; while the bachelors of Sydney usually make up a splendid fourth where "bachelor's fare" forms certainly no portion of the evening's entertainment.  Our worthy governor has now however commenced giving his public dinners; and his good lady her even more social soirees. Neither does Mrs. Darling confine her polite attentions solely to the adult but extends them likewise to the juvenile portion of our population who have been gratified with several youthful fêtes. This lady is also one of the most zealous patronizers of the schools for poor children and likewise patroness of the Female Institution lately set on foot for educating twenty of our young currency females in all the requisites necessary to constitute good servants.  A subscription reading-room and library are at this moment too about to be set on foot by the upper classes here which laudable example will doubtless be followed by the respectable shop-keepers and traders as both instruction and amusement may be thus gained at very little cost. [36]    LETTER IV  Dressiness and gaiety of appearance are much affected among our sprightly females and every London fashion most devoutly "bowed the knee to".  The moment a lady blooming fresh from England is known to be tripping along a Sydney street you will see our prying fair singly or in groups popping eagerly out their pretty "repositories for curls" to take note of the cut of her gown the figure of her bonnet and the pattern and colour of the scarf or shawl she displays upon her shoulders that they may forthwith post off to put themselves in the "dear fashion" too. Instead however of sighing after China crapes and India muslins like the English beauties our Sydney belles languish after nothing but what comes with the name of "London" stamped upon it: the products of the Eastern loom being here too common too cheap and too durable for them to bedizen themselves out with - three defects either of which would be quite sufficient to condemn a dress in the critical eyes of the majority of the fair.  The keeping of a fashionable repository for ladies' dresses has consequently been hitherto a most gainful occupation here; and one active individual who flourished in this line has lately returned to England with a fortune which I never heard calculated at less than 12000£ all acquired in about six short years. But the multiplication of show-rooms of this kind of late has dispelled the hopes of any more of these golden dreams being realized.  Neatness of dress and personal cleanliness certainly form a very marked feature among a great proportion of the Sydney inhabitants even when moving in rather an humble sphere which cannot but excite a pleasant feeling in the mind particularly when coupled with the reflection that those who delight in a good exterior are seldom either sottish or depraved.  Among the great majority of the houses too even of mean exterior inside cleanliness and comfort appear most conspicuously; and in passing along one of our back streets about the dinner-hour you will almost uniformly observe a clean newly unfolded cloth spread upon the table with a shining show of dinner-utensils upon it all equally inviting. [37] These together with the pure whitewashed wall and the articles of comfort and even luxury ranged round it convey a very agreeable impression to the mind.  Sobriety however by no means ranks among the conspicuous virtues of our general population; many very many of our dear citizens keeping up devoutly the religious festival of St. Patrick from year's end to year's end.  "Why Dennis" said I to a sottish Hibernian whom I had seen for some weeks in a state of oblivion "surely St. Patrick could not be born on every day of the last month!"  "Och it is only my own bad memory that makes me so particular sir; for having a mighty love for the saint you see I always begin keeping his birth a fortnight beforehand lest I should forget the day; and after it is over why the devil burn me but I always forget to leave off!"  A commodious market-house stands upon the right of George Street beyond the military barracks beside which a large plot of ground is also set apart for the display of articles that may be brought for sale on the market-day. A row of wooden sheds closes in the back-ground where traders trick off their showy wares while numerous stands occupy the open foreground crowded with the various productions of English or colonial manufacture.  The whole is placed under the charge of an officer named Clerk of the Market and good order is preserved throughout by the beneficial regulations in force. It is held on Thursdays and attended by individuals from the distance of forty miles or more with the produce of their agricultural industry. During the preceding day as you journey towards the interior you will encounter file after file of carts loaded with wheat maize potatoes pease carrots turnips cabbages fruit pigs calves poultry and indeed all sorts of commodities for culinary use pouring along the road toward Sydney. A considerable number of oxen are usually sold at the market by auction or private contract and horses also frequently disposed of.  Good bargains may often be got by watching opportunities - that is if you are properly furnished the dealings here being all for money. It must be confessed nevertheless that the general run of the stock realizes the dream of Pharaoh; for indeed you might almost tie your handkerchief in a beau-knot round the bellies of some or detect a fellow picking a pocket through the sides of others; into such delicate shapes have they been refined by the genteel fare whereupon the poor beasts had so long previously subsisted. [38] A row of commodious buildings extending on each side and up the middle of the market square has just been planned out for execution by the government which will when completed confer a great benefit upon the public.  Not the least attractive novelty here however to the eyes of a stranger will be the numerous beautifully-plumaged parrots exposed to sale either young ones from the nest or old ones snared during harvest; all of which when thus newly taken are usually disposed of at from sixpence to one shilling each.  Sydney is divided into six police districts with a lock-up house and a night-watch under the orders of a conductor attached to each. Constables are also on the alert through the town during the day to pick up offenders. The whole is under the direction of the chief constable who again acts under the orders of the head magistrate by whom (with the assistance of two ordinary magistrates) charges are investigated daily at the police office; the offences being either summarily punished or sent for adjudication before the criminal court or quarter-sessions according to their magnitude or as committed by convicts or free men.  The jail is a most wretched structure situated in George Street; but another commodious one is now building on the South-head road. The court-house for civil and criminal proceedings stands close to St. Philip's fronting Hyde Park. When strolling through the streets of Sydney on first landing very singular reflections will naturally intrude upon the mind on perceiving the perfect safety with which you may jostle through the crowds of individuals now suffering or who have suffered the punishment awarded by the law for their offences; men banished often for the deepest crimes and with whom in England you would shudder to come in contact. Elbowed by some daring highwayman on your left hand and rubbed shoulders with by even a more desperate burglar on your right a footpad perhaps stops your way in front and a pickpocket pushes you behind all retired from their wonted vocations and now peacefully complying with the tasks imposed upon them or following quietly up the even path pointed out by honest industry.  But nothing will surprise you more than the quietness and order which prevail in the streets and the security wherewith you may perambulate them at all hours of the night indifferently watched as they are and possessing so many convenient situations wherein robbers may conceal themselves ounce upon you and make their escape with their booty without even a chance of detection. [39] I have frequently been out at very late hours and passed through many gloomy portions of the town but never met with a moment's interruption. Indeed a street robbery is a most rare occurrence.  Petty thefts and burglaries are much more frequent but these also are insignificant in amount. Even robberies of masters by convict servants are far from being common and more is generally made of these than their magnitude intrinsically deserves. In fact the thefts they commit are generally for the purpose of regaling themselves with spirits and this can only be done in the vicinity of towns. They are more strictly watched and by consequence usually more speedily detected than such as have hitherto borne an honest character. They are more certainly punished too because we have no previous sympathy with them; and their offences are also more liable to be construed into crimes of a deeper die inasmuch as knowing them to have been formerly bad we are naturally led to believe that the robbery now brought to light is but one of a long series they have been committing. Therefore we feel little disposed to look over offences in them for which we would possibly never think of prosecuting a free servant in England.  Brick walls however afford but a sorry defence against our expert and ingenious burglars who will pick a hole through one of such in a very few minutes no part of a house being safe; back front and gable proving all equally inviting. They will effect their breach with a celerity and a silence which few newcomers feel disposed to give credit to until they awake some morning vestless and bootless and on prying round in quest of their stray habiliments find themselves unexpectedly assisted in the search by the friendly face of daylight now peeping through a port-hole in the wall where no daylight had peeped before. Stone walls are therefore generally preferred for warehouses and stores where articles of value have to be deposited.  Captain Rossi our present police magistrate has effected most beneficial reforms in his department since his assumption of office the whole police having been remodelled and placed upon a more respectable as well as efficient footing. His zealous efforts to chain down the demon of drunkenness who had long been raging loose among us deserves the very highest praise particularly in reference to a colony like this composed of such dissolute materials. [40] In ability on the bench discrimination sound judgment and a strict undeviating sense of justice we may never probably have one to exceed our late police magistrate Mr. Wentworth; but he was certainly very deficient in the tact of keeping in action a strict surveillance.  Crimes naturally enough form in our small community a considerable portion of the food of our conversational circles. There is in fact frequently so little else to talk about that a bushranger affair or adroit robbery or burglary opportunely chiming in when other topics fail serves often as well as a city procession or lord-mayor's-show to eject the demon of ennui who had quietly taken up his seat in the porch.  The rules of multiplication and addition have long been in such good practice here too that you are often puzzled to recognise an hour afterwards the very entertaining robbery you yourself perhaps had been at so much pains in inventing disguised as it has since become by the various interesting episodes of house-burnings batteries &c. that may have been ingeniously pinned thereto by other fingers. In fact owing to this accumulative system it would be wise in all cases to make a deduction of twenty-five per cent from the gross amount of every frightful story you hear.  Another thing worthy of observation is that so many offences are cognizable by our magistrates here which an English bench would not or perhaps could not take notice of that such may be fairly said to form a full half of those which occur; for instance insolence neglect of work drunkenness running away absence without leave and so on. In mentioning therefore that eight hundred individuals exclusive of those committed to the criminal court had passed examination before the Sydney bench during the three first months of this year (1826) I beg you will not be too much startled; but preserve your equilibrium when I tell you that forty-one police cases were decided upon one day (viz. March 30th whilst on the 12th of the same month not a single offence appeared for investigation before the bench.  Times were really looked on as becoming so stupid from the total eclipse of crime that had now first taken place in the memory of the oldest inhabitant that the worthy magistrates in order to keep up the spirits of the people issued seventy-six spirit licenses on that very day as is duly recorded in the pages of our facetious Australian.  Although twenty constables were on March 30th actually deficient in our Sydney police (from the want of fit persons to fill these situations) yet you saw nobody look the sadder for it nor even shake their heads and sigh on reading the following list of captives in the jail: viz for trial twenty-one; under transportation twenty-five; death recorded three; runaways from Port Macquarie eleven; do. Newcastle eleven; for imprisonment thirty-eight; under transportation by magistrates forty-four; at labour seven; debtors sixteen - grand total one hundred and seventy-six. [41]  I had nearly forgotten to mention an excellent law passed lately subjecting to punishment all convicts found out after eight P.M. without a written pass from their master or a lighted lantern in their hand which lighted lantern only requires to be enforced in all instances after ten to render the regulation most effective.  Sydney is most abundantly supplied with fish which are caught with hooks and lines chiefly towards the heads of the harbour by the native blacks and disposed of to the retailers who hawk them about the town; the sounds of "Fish O" "Hot rolls all hot" and many other English cries often chiming in agreeably upon your ear "right early in the morning"; agreeably I say from their recalling to your remembrance in these unmusical strains scenes you have so newly forsaken.  King-fish mullet mackerel rock-cod whiting snappers bream flat-heads and various other descriptions of fishes are all too found plentifully about. Mud oysters are brought over from Botany Bay where they are abundant; and by fitting yourself out with a few slices of bread and butter and other requisites and taking a pleasant stroll round any of the romantic shores of our beautiful harbour you may quickly secure a cheap and most delicious lunch from the sweet and finely flavoured rock oysters wherewith all its tide rocks are crusted and which are collected by poor individuals and sold shelled at a shilling a quart.  Cray-fish lobsters and prawns are also commonly found while the little bays are perfectly alive with myriads of crabs during their breeding season. These may be observed moving quickly off into the sea on your approach in such numbers indeed that the beach seems as if suddenly endowed with life while those startled hordes are hurrying onwards (in hobbling side long gait) and wheeling themselves down into the soft sand over which the sea ripples.  It is very amusing too to hunt the young crabs into their element in order to witness the way in which they are assailed by the young toad-fish. [42] These appear always on the watch to make them their prey darting to the very edge of the water the moment they perceive the tiny swarm approach in order to seize them before they can burrow into the sand. So eager are many of these to secure a feast that they often run aground in endeavouring to accomplish their purpose. They are rarely successful; but when an unlucky member of the crab brood falls into their clutches they cluster round and each seizing a limb shake and worry their victim as eagerly as a pack of hungry beagles would a helpless hare.  It has often been a matter of wonder to me why the mode of catching fish by means of fishing-baskets as practised by the French Portuguese and Spaniards has never been followed at Sydney; particularly as having already been found to answer so well from the circumstance of two fish-baskets brought by some sailors from the Brazils supplying not only the cabin but the whole crew with abundance of fish daily while the ship lay in the harbour merely by sinking these baskets over the ship's side.  The pleasure-walks and drives in the vicinity of Sydney constitute not the least of its attractions. The delightful promenade round the government domain we have already noticed. Turning to the left in your onward course down the cool shady carriage-drive called Mrs. Macquarie's Road which winds round the long narrow and closely-wooded point facing Garden Island your pleasurable feelings will be still more sensibly excited. The abrupt shores are here romantically diversified with huge masses of rock scattered irregularly along them or jutting out in shelving cliffs affording an agreeable retreat from the rays of the noon-day sun where you may revel in the luxury of the cool sea-breeze and enjoy the variegated marine prospect spread out before you.  Fronting the beach at the extremity of this point is a commodious seat hewn out of the rock which projects like a pulpit canopy over you and at the back whereof is an inscription recording the year of its formation and under whose auspices it was executed.  The South-head road is however the grand equestrian resort along which gigs with well-dressed people and spruce dandies a cheval may be daily seen careering. Sunday is here as everywhere else the great gala day when all the various equipages are most profusely shown off; when the animating bustle here displayed the clouds of starting dust scattering abroad from behind the carriage-wheels and heels of the horses and the passing smiles and congés of the different groups hurrying backwards and forwards present a very lively picture. [43]  The road terminates at the tall and airy light-house perched upon the bold headland forming the southern entrance of the harbour and overlooking the whole southern ocean spread out in boundless expanse before you.  Midway a road to the left carries you to a rising ground named Bellevue level at top and commanding an extensive view of the ocean and all the surrounding wild natural scenery. The country on the route will afford few charms to the mere agriculturist alive to no other attractions save fertility of soil; but to the admirer of untamed nature in all her primeval variety this spot where low undulating hills (of rock and sand) lie scattered about in disorderly array garnished with shrubs in liveries of the freshest green and flowers of the liveliest hue cannot fail to impress its beauty on the heart too deeply to be readily forgotten.  Abundance of gigs may be hired in Sydney at fifteen shillings a day and riding-horses at ten shillings so that you may readily visit every spot worth seeing in the vicinity. A four-horse stagecoach runs twice a day and a caravan once between Sydney and Paramatta (a distance of fifteen miles) and another coach thrice a week to Liverpool (twenty-one miles) while a third proceeds from Paramatta to Windsor (twenty-three miles) three times a week also.  You may thus travel thirty-six miles into the interior westerly and twenty-one miles southerly by stage-coaches alone; a proof of the goodness of the interior communications and of the wealth and populousness to which our infant colony has attained since it can at this early period support such an enterprising and expensive undertaking in the conveniences arising wherefrom even many of the old countries of Europe are yet deficient. [44]    LETTER V  The inhabited parts of the colony cultivated by free people may be divided into four.  First the old settled division comprehending the county of Cumberland (in which Sydney lies) and the county of Camden southerly between Cumberland and Argyle. Secondly the counties of Argyle and Westmoreland and the unnamed country beyond to the left or southward of Sydney. Thirdly the counties of Northumberland and Durham to the right or northward of Sydney situated upon Hunter's River; and Fourthly the counties of Roxburgh and Londonderry beyond the Blue mountains interiorly or westward of Sydney known best by the name of Bathurst.  The three first divisions all lie between the barrier range of mountains stretching parallel to the coast forty miles interiorly and the sea consequently all their waters run into the sea easterly; while the fourth division (Bathurst) lying beyond this barrier range consequently its waters run westerly and terminate in the immense interior swamps the outlet whereof is yet a mystery. Carriage roads lead from Sydney to them all excepting the third division spoken of (upon Hunter's River to the northward) to which there is yet but a cattle track.  The main road from Sydney runs on in a line with George Street toward Paramatta; another road strikes off to the left of this about the sixth milestone towards Liverpool and thence on to the southern counties of Argyle and Westmoreland. Just before reaching Paramatta a road turns off to join that leading to Liverpool which town it connects with Paramatta. One road turning off from the portion of the town of Parramatta situated beyond the river runs backward along the right bank of the stream toward Sydney to communicate with the numerous farms upon that line; while three others branch off toward the interior from near this point. The first toward the right runs on to the town of Windsor situated upon the river Hawkesbury at the foot of the Blue mountains where crossing that river by a punt you join the road leading to Hunter's River. [45]  The second road to the left of this carries you to Richmond (twenty-one miles) situated upon the Hawkesbury at the foot of the Blue mountains also; and crossing the river by the punt or at a convenient ford you may join the Hunter's River road from this too or proceed on to Bathurst beyond these mountains by the new cut now in progress.  The third road farther to the left still passes on to Emu Ford likewise upon the Hawkesbury where it crosses the Blue mountains to Bathurst this being the original route by which that fine portion of country was first discovered. By means of these roads Sydney is therefore connected with all the colonized portions of our territory.  A number of cross-roads in the county of Cumberland either connect these main ones or open laterally other portions of the country. All these roads are regularly cut and levelled and the majority of the principal ones Macadamized. In Cumberland both the main and cross roads are generally fenced too on each side by four-rail fences and toll bars established upon the great thoroughfares throughout from which a considerable revenue is collected; no less than three turn-pikes surrounding Paramatta alone.  Cumberland commences at Broken Bay the outlet of the Hawkesbury sixteen miles beyond Sydney and stretches along the sea-coast to the southward fifty-six miles counting in this line in southerly succession the harbours of Broken Bay Port Jackson and Botany Bay calculated for large ships and Port Hacking for small craft. It is about forty miles broad backed by the Blue-mountain range westerly with the Hawkesbury sweeping round it and forming its northern and western boundaries as the sea does its eastern while the Cow-pasture river from where it joins the Hawkesbury extending south-easterly to an origin within thirty-five miles of the sea forms its boundary in that direction leaving thus only these thirty-five miles on its southern line in which it is not surrounded by water. Cumberland contains the towns of Sydney Paramatta Windsor and Liverpool all fast increasing in population and rising into importance.  Camden lies to the southward between Cumberland and Argyle the Cow-pasture from the S. E. and Wingecarabee [Wingecarribee] from the S. W. forming by their junction with the Hawkesbury its boundaries on these lines lying thus in the fork formed by their meeting. It extends in length sixty miles to the S. E Shoalhaven port and river forming its boundary in that direction thirty-five miles to the south of Port Jackson; the sea in a direct line of thirty-five miles constituting its eastern boundary. [46] Its breadth is about twenty-six miles. Shoalhaven is its only port and this too calculated but for small vessels being very dangerous of entry even for these from the number of its shoals. This port forms the extreme point of coast population southerly Messrs. Berry and Wolstonecroft two of our most eminent merchants having a flourishing and extensive establishment here where timber is sawed for the Sydney market and tobacco and various other valuable products cultivated besides a large herd of cattle maintained.  No towns have yet been founded in Camden and it possesses no artificial cross-roads; but the openness and easy accessibility of nearly all the fertile portion render these in a great measure unnecessary at present. Camden is watered by the branches of the Cow-pasture and Wingecarabee rivers falling into the Hawkesbury and by some stray branches of the Shoal-haven river; while Cumberland has to supply its wants the south and east creeks coming from the S. E. to join the Hawkesbury at Windsor as also the S. W. arm of the latter river terminating in Broken Bay and George's River passing Liverpool and falling into Botany Bay.  Various small streams and chains of ponds are found throughout both; but generally speaking these two counties are very defectively watered and few springs are to be found I know indeed of only two within their boundaries a circumstance chiefly owing without doubt to the impermeable nature of the clay soil which prevails so much throughout neither admitting the rains to filter through into the channels among the under-strata nor permitting the water that may be contained in these strata from bursting forth. The compact nature of the understrata the general dryness of the climate and irregular intervals at which the rains usually fall may all tend too toward the formation of its present character.  Numbers of gullies worn by the rains are to be found about in which deep holes have been excavated at irregular intervals by the occasional torrents that pour through them where water is generally contained for a considerable portion or sometimes the whole of the year. This water is often brackish and thence disliked by the cattle though I have known sheep eagerly drink it in preference to fresh but the nature of the saline ingredient might in this instance have been different. The brackish water has usually a nauseous sweet taste; but in the fresh-water holes the liquid is good and much relished by the cattle as water standing upon clay commonly is. [47]   Digging of wells in the country has not that I am aware of yet been had recourse to; neither has boring been hitherto tried although we have an apparatus here for the purpose; but both I should think would be found in some measure to answer. The digging deep holes however in these gullies; the puddling them well; and the covering them with a bark-shed or planting trees round (to keep the water cool and check its evaporation by the shade afforded) must be eligible and would probably prove a cheaper mode than either sinking or boring while it would certainly be more convenient for the cattle.  I travelled for twelve miles once along one of our main roads in the height of summer during a piping-hot north-wester the country blazing around me a temperature being thus kept up almost equalling a baker's oven yet I could only obtain one solitary drink of hot muddy water throughout all that distance. Another time in crossing through the district of Airds on asking for a glass of water the good dame proffered me milk as a substitute apologizing for the non-production of the simpler element as it had to be brought from a distance of two miles and even then only got in insignificant quantities.  Many fine portions of land throughout the colony are now lying unoccupied on this very account; but as population increases and capital accumulates their value will be so advanced as to tempt individuals to expend a portion of that capital in supplying the lands with water to render them habitable for both man and beast - and how many fair portions of England would at this very time have been just as badly off if digging boring and pond-making had not been had recourse to!  There is certainly a considerable portion of saline matter in most lands throughout the colony. You will see it often in dry weather lying like a hoar-frost upon the ground in the vicinity of ponds; while in the burning of the stumps it covers the outside of the earth-kiln with a thin powdery efflorescence. The water in some of the ponds presented distinctly to me the sweetish astringent taste of alum; but regarding the powder I cannot positively speak.  In Cumberland the land immediately bordering upon the coast is of a light barren sandy nature thinly besprinkled with stunted bushes; while from ten to fifteen miles interiorly it consists of a poor clayey or ironstone soil thickly covered with our usual evergreen forest timber and underwood. [48] Beyond this commences a fine timbered country perfectly clear of brush through which you might generally speaking drive a gig in all directions without any impediment in the shape of rocks scrubs or close forest. This description of country commences immediately beyond Paramatta on one hand and Liverpool on the other; stretching in length south-easterly obliquely towards the sea about forty miles and varying in breadth near twenty.  The soil upon the immediate banks of the rivers is generally rich flooded alluvial but in the forests partakes commonly of a poor clayey or ironstone nature yet bearing usually tolerable crops even without manure at the outset. In Camden the Mittigong [Mittagong] range runs south-easterly through its whole length terminating close to the sea in the Illawarra mountain fifty miles south of Sydney down the steep side whereof passes the rugged bridle-road to the beautiful fertile and romantic district of Five Islands or Illawarra. From this range occupying so much of its interior the quantity of land in Camden capable of cultivation is not very great though making up tolerably by its richness for deficiency of extent; but the pasture land therein is not exceeded in quality by any in the colony.  In Australia you may always quickly tell by the species of timber you see growing what the quality of the land for agricultural purposes is the apple-tree marking the good and the spotted gum and stringy bark the bad as truly as in the American wilds the beech or maple demonstrates the one and the pine the other. On these hungry soils however whereupon when cleared you look but for a wretched crop trees of the stateliest dimensions may be seen growing manifesting that there is a species of nourishment in the ground well suited at least to the growth of some descriptions of vegetable substances; and that a proper cultivation may hereafter produce such a revolution among its constituent particles as to make it equally suitable to all.  You will see here too as in England (and indeed every where else) that as the forests become more open so in proportion will the trees be found more short and branchy so that on the open plains and downs dotted thinly over with timber the trees will be observed branching out at a very little distance from the ground and good for nothing but fire-wood. It requires trees to grow thickly together every where to force them upwards into a long stem.   Notwithstanding all modest men naturally feel a certain degree of diffidence when speaking of themselves a courtesy which is due to the world requires that a person who makes his first appearance in a given character should say something of the pretences whereon he claims attention. Know then most courteous reader that he who this day addresses you is derived from the ancient stock of the Stukeleys of the West Riding of Yorkshire a race "whose men were always brave and women ever fair." Early disappointments of a tender nature led to a seclusion from the noise and discord of a busy world at the very morning of my existence and induced a retirement from whence I could learn much but said nothing. The fame of this distant Island having however reached my abode of privacy and rumour having represented it as a place which was well adapted to my acquired habits and inclinations I determined to judge of it for myself; and changing the disguise which I had long worn for a fashionable suit by Stultze boots by Hoby and hat by Bicknell I took my passage by one of the vessels which were advertised to sail positively on the tenth of the coming month being the seventh positively already announced and destined to be succeeded by three others ere we departed. At length setting sail and patiently enduring the usual ills of a long voyage I put my foot upon Terra Firma a few weeks ago and immediately re-exchanging my west-end fashionables for the Hermit's gown slippers and cap I set about making my observations - but how have I been altogether deceived! [48]  It was not necessary for me to wait the approach to this hemisphere before I found that a ship load of passengers was another term for quarrelling contention and strife - that those who would be peaceable had scarcely an opportunity afforded them of following the bent of their inclinations - those who were viciously disposed had abundant aiders encouragers and supporters - those who were virtuous could scarcely escape calumny and detraction. Ah! thought I as I witnessed scenes to which I had long been unaccustomed as I heard language calculated to stir up anger or to inflame the passions and corrupt the mind when I shall reach my destined shore all this will be over; I shall see only primitive habits and manners - I shall mix with a population who either not having found Old England good enough for them must themselves be the purest of the pure or who having been purified of their sins by punishment must now have repented and upon. the principle that a reformed rake makes the best husband have become the most virtuous of the virtuous! But let no man who may chance to peruse the record of my disappointment ever more presume to indulge in fairy hopes and dreams. It is for the good of all who like myself are of a sanguine and yet a charitable temperament that I have determined to commit my thoughts and observations to paper; but as the routine of certain official forms has placed me already though so recently arrived in all stages of public business from the audience room of His Excellency to the Prisoners' Barracks as either under my real character or in my disguise I have mixed in all societies from the drawing-room at Government-house to the tap-room of the Macquarie Hotel; and as I have been present in the Courts of Law and incog. have witnessed the alternate petulance firmness sparring and cutting between the lawyers who scissars-like ne'er hurt themselves but only what's between - have therein also greatly admired the sudden transition between grotesque gravity and "inimitable humour" - have noticed the mode of conducting commercial affairs so unlike what is practised at home and have in a word been grievously disappointed in the Utopian picture I had formed I think myself qualified to impart my thoughts to the world; and having said thus much for the present may perhaps make my second appearance this day week. In the interim I say to ill those who have honoured me by having perused what I have now written that I am their most obedient servant  SIMON STUKELEY. [49]    It was a remarkably fine clear day when I landed from the ship on the Wharf. What was my surprise to observe the large handsome stone buildings into which porters were busily engaged rolling casks and other packages and at several civil looking well dressed young men who were standing with pens behind their cars and memorandum books in their hands paying the most diligent attention to what was going on. A number of other persons formed little knots or circles; and the hallooing of ferrymen the cracking of whips and the vociferation of carters struck me as creating altogether a scene of bustle and activity which indeed I had little expected. For the moment it occurred to me that our Captain in the hurry and confusion which the quarrels on board had occasioned has missed his reckoning and had made a wrong port; and accordingly seeing a fat portly sleek-looking apparently good-humoured Gentleman' approaching I enquired of him with an apology in what place I was? Judging from my manner and appearance that I must be a stranger he very civilly replied that I was in Hobart Town the capital of Van Diemen's Land adding "Perhaps Sir you would like to walk into our Commercial Room to which I can introduce you." I then accompanied my new acquaintance up a flight of stone steps into a rather elegantly fitted-up room in which were three or four plainly dressed Gentlemen reading Newspapers. One of them who appeared bordering upon sixty wore spectacles and had a considerable degree of eagerness in his manner rose upon my entrance and addressed me "Just from England eh Sir? What news Sir when you left? The Colony is much talked of at home Sir. Suppose you heard of our Association but things are not now as they used to be." Before I could make a reply he offered me a Newspaper farther acquainting me that the town maintained three such publications; one of which said lie is so dull - and prosy that nobody reads it another has lately been at death's door owing to some Government regulations but has now Phoenix-like risen with redoubled splendour; and the other is made up of short paragraphs and country letters written in town but commands an extensive circulation. I expressed my thanks for the information and for my courteous reception and mentally wondering at a commodious Wharf fine Stone. buildings a Chamber of Commerce and three Newspapers felt that so many other things to be in character must still await my attention that I made my bow to the company and proceeded on my tour through the town. The fat portly Gentleman was my companion to the end of the Wharf and then with a true John Bull air and manner left me and turned into one of the stone warehouses. [50]  How great was my astonishment at the magnificent straight line of street extending apparently for more than a mile by which my sight was greeted upon leaving the Quay. I could scarcely credit my senses that I was in a town which is only as it were of yesterday. As I proceeded along my surprise was increased by seeing other fine streets meeting at right angles the one by which I was walking towards a handsome brick church with a steeple like the extinguisher upon a flat candlestick my left being flanked by well laid out gardens and shrubberies in the centre of which stood the Governor's residence; and every here and there the right being ornamented by large two story brick or stone houses. The church door happening to be open I took the opportunity of judging of its interior and I could almost have fancied myself in one of the modern churches of the metropolis of the world. Such regular well-arranged pews so beautifully a finished pulpit and reading desk made of wood which I at first thought was Spanish mahogany quite astonished me; upon a nearer examination however and upon enquiry of a man who was dusting the aisles I learnt that it was the produce of a tree indigenous to the Colony known by the name of Myrtle. While I was thus employing myself a Gentleman wearing a Clerical hat approached and with much affability of manner addressed me as a stranger and gave me some general information respecting the religious institutions of the place. He had a lisp in his speech which was by no means disagreeable and his well cased ribs bore evident marks that whatever other doctrines he might preach that of fasting was not one upon which he laid much stress at least in its practice. He acquainted me that independent of the congregations belonging to this large Church a Presbyterian Chapel a Roman Catholic Chapel and a Wesleyan Meeting House were each well attended every Sunday and it gave me great pleasure afterwards to be told of this Gentleman as he himself had beautifully expressed of his brother labourers in the vineyard that in their lives and conduct the religion they all professed received its brightest ornament - that they each made a well formed cornerstone of the superstructure they supported. Oh! thought I this must be the effect of a virtuous and industrious population. Arts architecture literature religion and commerce must here thrive so well because so many excellent people for whom Old England was not good enough have congregated and because so many others have been cleansed of their sins and are now restored to innocence. [51] Happy people and thrice happy Simon Stukeley to have left your retirement to come among them! Everything seemed indeed greatly superior to my expectations. Well dressed and elegant Ladies were promenading one street well mounted Equestrians were galloping along another respectably attired Pedestrians helped to add to the scene which was still more enlivened by the relief-guard of the Military as it approached the Main-guard House from the Barracks and by the rapid passing and re-passing of gigs carts and other wheel vehicles. I was completely in a reverie scarcely knowing through which street I would perambulate or which object best claimed my attention. The entire absence of all beggars or indigent persons added to my wonder but after a little reflection I accounted for it in my own mind by considering that as all the inhabitants were either pure or purified it was quite of a piece with their religion and virtue to be charitable this being the brightest of the cardinal gems. I continued my walk for a long time each moment more astonished than before at the progress which had been made in laying out and building the town - at the excellent shops in the different streets - at the wide well macadamised thoroughfares and their convenient causeways and at a hundred other matters which excited my admiration until I found myself in a quarter of the town situated on an eminence at some distance from the Church and where the houses and inhabitants seemed rather of an inferior description to those I had before seen. In their manners and style of conversation upon the different subjects respecting which I interrogated them they exhibited however all the easy confidence of virtue. The calls of my appetite now warned me that the day was fast waning and I applied my hand to my fob to ascertain the hour when to my utter dismay I found that one of Hawley's best gold watches with which I had provided myself previous to my departure from England was missing. To have lost it in any other manner than by accident did not cross my mind for an instant and I pictured to myself what delight would be the portion of him who had found it when he should know to whom it was to be restored and therefore pursued my journey to the Macquarie Hotel with the view of taking up my quarters there and obtaining some refreshment.  Having knocked at the door it was opened by a smart dapper waiter who ushered me into a large and well-furnished room which I had scarcely entered before the Landlord an obliging well-behaved man paid his respects and enquired what I pleased to order. Upon my telling him that I was exceedingly hungry he said that if I should not object to dine in a public room dinner was now serving up and that the company who were there were all very respectable. [52] I used to like table d'hote dinners before my seclusion from the world and the idea now pleased me. Accordingly I followed my host into the opposite room in which were the Landlady whose appearance and manners were greatly in her favour and four visitors. They were all men well informed and of lively conversation and as I am ever a good listener I brought this quality into full play on the occasion carefully noting all that passed. It would be tedious to repeat what I then learned; one thing however I discovered to my sorrow that my ideas of purity and virtue were like snow before the sun beautiful but easily dispelled and that most probably my chronometer and I had parted company for ever. I determined however to make my loss the subject of a visit next morning to the Police-office. Ruminating upon the events of the day and full of reflections at what I had heard and seen I retired to my pillow and being weary both in body and mind was soon in the arms of Morpheus.  Amongst my plans for the succeeding day I had purposed paying my respects it Government-house. Perhaps the result of my visit as well there as at the Police-office and the manner in which I spent the remainder of the day may be communicated to my readers when they next hear from me till when I am their obedient servant  SIMON STUKELEY.    The intelligence I had collected from the turn the conversation at the dinner table had taken having determined me as I before said to make the loss of my watch the occasion of a visit to the Police-office I proceeded thither early the following morning and was shewn into the justice Room which is large and well adapted for its intended purposes.  The exterior of the building appeared neat and well finished the tout ensemble being quite in character with the apartment which I first entered. Upon my beginning to mention my business to a smart priggish clerk who was writing at a table he interrupted me by saying "Mr. Siftall will be here directly Sir and will attend to you." Within a few minutes a short plainly dressed man entered apparently between thirty and forty years of age of pale features high forehead and light thin hair but possessing no particular expression of countenance which would induce a bye-stander to look at him a second time. [53] He was closely followed by a person of about the same age fair complexioned dressed in a blue coat and fawn-coloured trowsers with much spic and span neatness and holding in his hand a small gold-headed cane or walking stick. There was a certain consequential air and manner about this personage which rendered it paradoxical to me what could be his calling. A third individual accompanied them and completed the group - aman shabbily dressed' bearing all the marks of dissipation in his squalid features and exhibiting the oddest shaped head I had ever beheld. It was an oblong nearly flat on the top of great length from the crown to the forehead and projecting over towards the eyes forming a broad front and narrowing off like the bow of a vessel towards the occiput. The smart priggish clerk whom I had first seen then said to me "Mr. Siftall Sir will now take your deposition." I immediately began to detail my loss but which of the three was Mr. Siftall nothing that then occurred could lead me to comprehend. - They all seemed of equal power and authority but the short Gentleman who had preceded the others upon entering asked me the most pertinent questions and appeared if any thing to take the lead. During this time the whole party stood close together. After the affair had been fully explained he of the gold-headed cane remarked with a most complacent simper "I see how it is Sir the Gentleman is a new chum and has been up in St. Giles's and I suppose being sharp set after a long voyage he has eaten a slice of a cut-loaf without using his eye-teeth! Ha! ha! ha!" "I cannot allow such observations Mr. Fowler" gravely replied the short Gentleman whom I now found was Mr. Siftall and who immediately turned towards the Bench and taking his seat said "Mr. Scribewell take Mr. Stukeley's deposition." With wonderful rapidity did he perform his task. I never saw a pen so handled and the constant interruption I received from Fowler who still to my great annoyance persevered in acting the Magistrate by perpetually questioning me really made it difficult to keep up with him. My business at length being completed I made my bow and retired. Although the anticipation I had formed of the dignified appearance of a Police Magistrate judging by my recollection of the Barristers who preside as such in the English Metropolis was not realised by Mr. Siftall's manner and deportment he seemed to conduct himself with tolerable tact and acuteness and if he were to keep his myrmidons at a greater distance were to make them confine themselves to the duties of their own situations instead of travelling out of them to lower the dignity of the Magistracy he might pass muster very respectably. [54] I could not however help admiring the perfection of a machinery which could be so admirably kept in motion by such instruments as form the Police Establishment of the town for in no place that I ever visited or have become acquainted with by report is it superior if equal to what I have seen in Hobart Town. I should observe before I take my leave of describing the interview with Mr. Siftall that he gave his head man Fowler directions so to lay his nets and snares as would be likely to lead to the recovery of my watch adding a very significant caution to myself not in future to visit St. Giles's when I might be in search of virtue and innocence.  Some considerable time had been occupied with this affair before it was completed and it was not too early therefore to proceed straight to Government-house. Approaching it through a newly-made road which leads from the main street to the court or yard in which it is situated a sort of half dragoon that is a man dressed in a non-descript light horse uniform received my card and forwarded it by a servant. I was immediately requested to walk into an ante-room communicating with the vestibule or entrance. I had scarcely taken a seat when a door opened and a pleasant looking young Gentleman accosted me forthwith acting as Usher by leading the way into a commodious well-furnished room in which stood a table covered with papers neatly tied in bundles and beyond it towards the fire-place was a handsome escrutoire at which had been sitting till I entered a Gentleman wearing an undress military uniform whom I at once perceived was the Lieutenant Governor. If I had any doubts however they were removed by a few introductory words modestly spoken by my young Gentleman Usher.  I had brought with me from England some letters written by parties of high distinction and addressed to His Excellency which I had previously caused to be delivered and my name and pretensions were not therefore unknown to him. - His style of addressing me was well-bred and gentlemanly his features and general countenance were rather hard favoured than otherwise but expressive; and his eyes denoted quick perception or sagacity which was a quality soon developed by the general tenor of his conversation. "In what manner Sir can I promote your views or wishes in the Colony?" he said to me after a few passing remarks had been made on various subjects. "I fear that your coming here in search of virtue and innocence as you tell me will prove a visionary idea at the best - there is only one way by which your object might by possibility be even hoped to be attained - and that is by the rule of extremes or contraries. If an extreme of vice as some suppose may beget virtue I am sorry to say that vice has so much sway here that its opposite extreme cannot be very remote and according to this reasoning the first step to virtue may be nearer than I fear it is." I immediately felt that His Excellency was ridiculing my Quixotic search for that which I now fear this world does not contain - apure and innocent race of beings - and I was ashamed that I had so exposed myself before him. Perceiving my confusion he very good naturedly changed the subject conversed freely upon the state of the Colony respecting which he seemed astonishingly well informed even to minutiae - entertained me with some well told anecdotes explanatory of the characters over whom he has to rule -exhibiting throughout an interview which lasted upwards of an hour a shrewdness and clearness of intellect with which I was much delighted. I could willingly have staid longer but thought it quite time to take my departure and therefore rose for that purpose feeling really grateful for my very courteous reception. As I was turning round the corner which leads into the street I saw a Gentleman coming quickly across as if to speak to me and I presently recognized my acquaintance of the Commercial Rooms who had spoken to me of the newspapers. "What Sir been to Government-house eh Sir?" "I have Sir and am much pleased with the manner in which His Excellency has received me." "Yes Sir yes Sir all very good to new comers; when you have been here as long as I have you'll find 'twont do Sir. We are too heavily taxed Sir and until we have a House of Assembly and Trial by jury we shall do no good Sir." "Really Sir these are subjects which I do not understand and at present if you will excuse me I cannot enter upon them as I have a pressing engagement but probably at some other time I may thank you for information which doubtless your experience must render valuable." With this I took my leave although he would fain have prolonged the conversation and marched on to the Macquarie Hotel where the same company I had before met and an excellent dinner rendered the remainder of the day equally agreeable as its forenoon. Late in the evening a card from Government-house invited me to dine there the next day with an apology for the shortness of the notice. I determined to accept it but as I have no desire to tire my readers I must defer an account of my visit and of the large party to whom I was then introduced to another opportunity remaining in the mean time their most obedient [55]  SIMON STUKELEY. [56]    Six having been named as the dinner hour in the invitation card I had received from Government House a few minutes before the clock struck I proceeded thither dressed in my very best attire. Upon entering the hall by the front door leading to the shrubbery through which I had approached the house a servant in a plain blue livery received me and led my way to the drawing-room. Already several Gentlemen were assembled all of whom were strangers to me and amongst them were some Military Officers. His Excellency himself appeared in the full dress uniform of a Colonel on the Staff which was not however in my idea so becoming to his shape and figure as the blue frock and trowsers in which I had before seen him. His reception of all his guests Was easy and polite and to myself he paid particular attention.  The room in which we were assembled was well proportioned and neatly furnished. Nothing at all resembling the splendid drawing-rooms which are met with even in private life in England; the furniture being rather good and substantial than fashionable or elegant and certain almost indispensables such as brilliant chandeliers and magnificent mirrors being absent.  The young Gentleman with whom I had become acquainted the preceding day met me with much obliging frankness and introduced me to several of the company - amongst others to a sallow-complexioned Gentleman of a very sad and woful countenance upon which a smile seldom even for a moment banished a certain measured demure look which might have served for an original whereby to have drawn the portrait of some of the Members of' Cromwell's Long Parliament. He spoke but little - indeed he seemed as if he had been transplanted into society to which he had formerly been unaccustomed - but I understood that he was much esteemed by the Lieutenant Governor and that he held an important and confidential place in His Excellency's household. While I was conversing with my young friend upon general chit chat subjects dinner was announced and we proceeded to a large room apparently of recent construction in which was a well covered table laid for fourteen persons. [57] It was my chance to be placed between two Gentlemen about half-way down the right-hand side of the table one of whom was an elderly person habited in a straight cut single breasted coat with upright collar and whom I soon discovered to be a Clergyman of the old school; and the other" appeared to be turned of forty wore spectacles close to his eyes had a single breasted dress coat and an appearance altogether somewhat resembling the celebrated Bob Logic in Tom and Jerry and reminding me of what was said of Sir Joshua Reynold's picture of Garrick when personating one of Shakespeare's finest drawn characters. My Clerical neighbour possessed a remarkably mild placid countenance and his manners were easy and gentlemanly in the extreme; his conversation was lively and agreeable and we soon appeared perfectly to understand each other. Exactly opposite us sat a tall thin Gentleman of solemn melancholy visage apparently a valetudinarian who took snuff largely and seemed as little pleased with himself as with all around him. He was engaged in conversation with another tall thin Gentleman apparently his junior who sat upon his right and with a young man of engaging Countenance dark expressive eyes and wearing his hair which was also dark very thick and bushy; but it became him and helped to set off tolerable features into which when he pleased he knew how to impart much grace and sweetness by a most agreeable smile. He was dressed in the Court-suit of a King's Serjeant exhibiting an unusual display of shirt frill. I gathered from the conversation of those three Gentlemen that they were discussing some point connected with public affairs for I caught from the one whom I first mentioned "I am clearly of opinion that nothing but the most rigorous discipline can do any good; I say that in all cases the very letter of the law should be fulfilled." The youngest of the party replied "I cannot agree with you at all Sir; on the contrary I am much more the advocate of sun than wind and I would always much rather reward than punish." The other tall Gentleman who was like his left hand companion a most immoderate snuff taker then said "I doubt very much as to the abstract question I wish I could find precedents whereon it might be well argued but I confess my doubts have increased the more I have considered it and the cases which I am constantly called upon to decide rather still further add to my doubts than otherwise."  The conversation now became too general for me to understand any more that was said. Had not the last speaker been gaily dressed in a blue coat with corresponding et ceteras I should have taken him for some high authority learned in the law; [58] but as it is as much out of the question to see a Barrister in a party coloured suit as a Clergyman or as a soldier in a sailor's blue jacket and trowsers my doubts as to who he could be were fully equal to his own upon the question which had been before them and as my good manners forbad my making any enquiry I cannot even at present solve the point. I now settled into a quiet cozy chat with my friend the Clergyman whom I soon found to be what is known by the term a choice spirit. With the true scent and knowledge of a kindred soul he speedily discovered that I had been accustomed to follow Lord Fitzwilliam's fox hounds and like an old broken down hunter who will snuff the gale and snort and toss his head at the exhilarating tones of a pack in full cry when lame and spawned he cannot move three paces so did my worthy neighbour's face wear a more than usually expressive smile his voice became more than usually animated as he recounted some of the exploits of his early days and told "each thrice told field of battle once again." The good old Gentleman at length so warmed with the subject that he shook me by the arm and said in an under tone "you must come and see Bob at the cottage - yeoix yeoix! tantivy tantivy!" - to which friendly invitation I immediately assented. My spectacle companion now addressed me. "I fancy Sir you are of Oxford - may I have the honor of enquiring of what College?" "Of Brazen-nose Sir" was my reply. "I also am an Oxonian and have to thank my luck more than my merit perhaps that I hold an honorary degree by which I am able to write A. B."  "Indeed Sir" said I "you are fortunate" "Rather so" he replied "for I was never very fond of learned palaver but I have my degree as well as others." There was a young delicate looking Gentleman sitting next below the last speaker - he had a very consumptive appearance but an agreeable countenance and very sprightly manners. Taking up the conversation he added "not only as well as others but better than most for if you can say B. A. in virtue of your Oxford degree so can you write me down A. S. S. in virtue of your antiquarian honors." A very hearty laugh followed this sally but nothing more was said.  It would be tedious to dilate further upon the conversation of the evening. His Excellency was very attentive to his guests and exerted himself to do the honors of the table. The dinner was good of the kind but "though Heaven sends meat the Devil sends cooks." The wine and dessert were excellent the attendance of the servants might perhaps have been better but in other respects the entertainment passed off extremely well. [59]  Just before we left the dinner table my fox-hunting friend said to me "mind Bob at the cottage" which I assured him I would pledging him my honor. "A fox-hunter's honor is good security" replied he "but there is nothing like a collateral" filling at the same moment two bumpers of Burgundy "come Sir your word's the bond and this is the collateral" drinking at the same moment the wine and handing me the other glass "and now" said he "tis signed sealed and delivered."  We retired to the drawing-room soon after nine when the pleasure of the day was increased by meeting several elegantly dressed ladies and who with my late companions formed a lively conversazione till the Church clock sounding eleven warned us to make our bows and depart.  If I had not already spun out my account of the dinner so unconscionably I might enter into a description of the charming addition thus made to our party. However desirous I might be of employing my pen upon so interesting subject discretion whispers me to beware of fatiguing my readers. My motto is "Agam quam brevissime potero" I wish to be as brief as possible. I therefore for the present subscribe myself their most obedient   SIMON STUKELEY.    Previously to leaving England I deposited in the hands of the Colonial Agent a certain sum of money taking from him a letter addressed to the Local Authorities and which he said would enable me to receive the same amount upon my arrival here. I had been several times advised to claim the grant of land to which my property would entitle me and having no particular occupation one day last week I determined to devote the morning to these objects. Having so arranged my plans I felt inclined to deliver in person the letter which I had received in England as I always like to acquire information and to see how business is conducted. For this purpose I went to a brick two-story building nearly opposite the Government-house and having been received at the door by a man in tolerable attire was conducted by him to a large room up stairs which was approached through a small ante-chamber. At the further end at a table covered with papers apparently in sad confusion sat a man perhaps fifty years of age but of an appearance not gentlemanly or prepossessing. [60] He wore spectacles appearing to be near-sighted as he had a particular manner when be looked at a distant object of screwing his eyes which were of a hazel grey. His clothes had a good deal of the Monmouth-street cut about them but did not seem unsuitable to his tout ensemble. In his tone and gestures he exhibited a wonderful degree of authority for just as I entered the door-way he was severely censuring one of the Clerks for some neglect of duty and it might have been supposed that he was the Minister of War himself pouring forth his phials of wrath  from the style of his language and the expression of his countenance.  The poor fellow who was being drilled was the exact prototype of the Knight of Mancha a tall lank figure without shape or substance dressed in a long sombre coat hanging like a garment oil a clothes horse which contrasted with his pallid features and staring eyes gave him altogether a most woful appearance. He held the door in one hand as I passed him and I heard him say "Pardon me Sir I was up till 3 o'clock this morning and I have prepared several plans to be submitted to Mr. Consumet one of which particularly relates to a suppression of these German dollars which are now" - "Hold your tongue Sir this instant and don't talk to me of your plans and your interferences - go to your room Sir and attend to your business and leave Mr. Consumet alone till he wants you I have had quite enough of your intolerable assurance." "Pardon me Sir" again was heard but he could proceed no further for the peremptory orders he received compelled him to retire taking with him under his arm a large bundle of papers. As soon as I could command Sufficient attention to have the nature of my errand understood I was requested to take a chair for a few minutes when a Messenger presently entered and announced that the head of the department wished to see me. I followed him into a handsomely furnished room on the ground floor where a Gentleman was sitting whom I instantly recognized and who received me with much stiff formality. After a short space occupied in desultory conversation in the course of which I gave him to understand that I should be obliged by his allowing me to be the bearer at once of whatever credentials I was to be furnished with he rung his bell and ordered the attendant to send one of the Clerks to him. Immediately the same gaunt figure I had before seen entered the room bearing in his countenance the utmost obsequiousness almost to fawning and having received his orders withdrew but shortly returned with a paper in his hand which he presented to the Gentleman for signature and which was then given to me accompanied by the information that by presenting it as directed my wishes would be attended to. [61] I then took my leave and departed. The letter being an open one I had the curiosity to see what was the form adopted on these occasions and I found that it was merely to transmit a copy of the document I had brought from England and to say that a warrant from the Governor for paying me the money would be prepared. I proceeded at once to my further destination according to the address of the letter. Upon entering a low narrow building which I understood was the Treasury I was shewn into a small apparently inconvenient room oil the left-hand side of a dark passage and which was divided off by a sort of a stop gate and counter such as I have seen in England at the entrance of a country Theatre which had been fitted tip for the evening by an itinerant corps dramatique having given full employment all the forenoon to the industrious exertions of some sturdy thrasher.  Behind this make-shift money changing board stood a young Gentleman of pleasant open countenance and a person apparently his senior by a few years bearing all the appearance of "un homme d'affaires" and whose deportment seemed marked by obligingness and civility. The young Gentleman having been made acquainted with my business left the room for an instant when he returned and motioned me to follow him. Upon his leading the way into another apartment at the end of the passage a Gentleman who was there seated rose to return my bow and immediately entered into conversation. - There was a hurried quickness in his manner - a sort of absentism if the expression may be allowed - achange from one subject to mother which makes it difficult to relate what passed but upon one or two points the information he bestowed made some impression on me. He had a little of the brogue in his style of language but only such as is met with in the best bred Hibernians -just enough to swear by; but it was not difficult to see that his birth and breeding had been good. "In what part of the Colony do you propose to settle Sir" he asked; "the property you possess will I believe entitle you to a maximum grant but upon this point the Land Board will instruct you." "I really do not know Sir" I replied "I have been here so short a time that I am very little acquainted with the country-indeed I have scarcely made up my mind about taking land for I have been informed by several that paradoxical as it may seem I can buy cheaper than I can have it given to me; but there's a certain pleasure in owning thirty acres and I've not yet determined." [62] "You say quite true Sir" said he "as to the pleasure of owning dirty acres perhaps no man places a higher value upon them than I do. It is to the failure of a large embankment scheme at home whereby I sought to reclaim a few hundred thousands of acres from the sea that I may owe the honor of now addressing you but the unruly element paid no more regard to me than to Canute of old and in one hour the work of years was destroyed. The same love of these same dirty acres has accompanied me hither and I am almost constantly either buying selling or bartering them. If you should determine to buy land I may perhaps have the honor of being allowed to name a farm or two of mine which are in particularly eligible situations." Our conversation was here interrupted by the abrupt entrance of a tall stout person who judging by the easy familiar style in which he addressed the last speaker I suppose is a Gentleman. He appeared to have a defect in his eye sight much resembling in its appearance an infirmity under which some of the Royal Dukes labour. His mien was stately and commanding but its impression was but momentary for no sooner was his mouth opened than my uncertainty as to what rank of life he was filling was two-fold increased. Seeing that the Gentleman with whom I had been conversing was engaged he said in a tone which would have suited Lady Morgan "I'll just be with ye again by and bye I did but just bring ye some money" and not allowing time for a reply retired.  I now made some enquiry as to what was my best course to pursue towards obtaining the land to which my property entitled me as I seemed in such good quarters for information and which the Gentleman gave me with much readiness. - Ithen prepared to depart when the door-keeper announced that somebody whose name I could not collect was waiting to be admitted upon which my companion quickly said "Oh he's the very man himself" and leaving the room re-entered in a minute or two accompanied by a Gentleman of perhaps between forty and fifty rather above the middle height and proportionably stout and who was introduced to me as a person extremely well qualified to impart information respecting the interior of the Colony. I soon discovered that he was a man of sense and talents and a long and interesting conversation ensued. In the course of it several points were made known to me connected with the capabilities of this Island of which I was before ignorant; these however although they may open the door to future observations will not be further pursued at present. Before we parted I made an engagement to accompany him upon a tour of inspection as soon as the state of the roads and bridges rendered travelling practicable for he told me that at this season of the year many of them are nearly impassable; a wide field will therefore be opened to my readers. [63] - I now subscribe myself their most obedient servant  SIMON STUKELEY.    Passing down Macquarie-street a few mornings ago my attention was attracted by seeing a number of persons entering a large unfinished stone building opposite the Church and which upon enquiry I found was the Court House where the Criminal Sessions are held and Civil Causes tried. - Among those who were pressing towards the door-way apparently in great haste was a tall thin Gentleman dressed in black tripping along on his toes in a pace somewhat between a walk and a run. He leant his body forward the projection of his back which was unusually long forming a very considerable angle. In his hand which I noticed as he passed was larger than ordinary he held a bundle of papers. just as he entered the broken enclosure in front of the Court House he stopped for a minute or two to converse with another Gentleman who was travelling the same road but who so far from having any hurry in his look seemed wonderfully quiet and composed. Ever and anon during their short conference the tall Gentleman had recourse to a snuff box of extraordinary dimensions; the box indeed appeared to have been made for the hand and the capacious power of the nose for both. The Gentleman who helped to form the tète a tète was also dressed in black. He was much the shortest of the two - wore his hat a little on one side inclining the head a little further still; - had rather a pleasant smile on his countenance which was likewise full of meaning or expression and I observed that his mode of talking was remarkably quiet. Upon my enquiring of a Gentleman whom I had met at the Macquarie Hotel what all this was about he told me there were some civil causes for trial and I determined therefore to make one of the lookers-on and to see in what form justice was administered. Before I had time to cross the street for this purpose my attention was attracted by the approach of a curricle at a very rapid rate drawn by two ponies who were scampering at full speed the one in a canter with the left leg foremost and the other in a run such as is known in England by the name of the butcher's shuffle. [64] The vehicle turned the corner with such velocity that I was nearly run over and only saved myself by a hasty retreat. It stopped at the entrance of the building and the persona who had been driving alighted and bustled towards the door as if all the affairs of the universe were upon his back. He was short and fat of a very merry countenance somewhat resembling such as a painter would select for the original of the laughter loving God and there was a certain something in his air and manner as much as to say "Ecce magnus sed parvus homo." I followed these personages and several others into the building and passing through a small sort of entrance hall presently found myself in a capacious room or chamber with. a number of windows opposite each other which producing cross light and admitting the full force of the sun's rays from the north side must not unfrequently annoy the persons most requiring a steady and not glaring light. Across the middle of the room about half way from the door was a bar or railing within which stood a large table in size and arrangement not very convenient for the profession two pews or seats resembling those of a Church being on the left close to the wall and one of the same sort on the right and immediately in front was an elevated scat across the room in the centre of which was a sort of desk as if intended for a Chairman or other person holding pre-eminence and over which was an unsightly sounding-board so unsoundly fixed as to threaten a sudden descent and the natural consequence of putting out the light occasionally below it. Upon a chair at the left-hand corner of this desk sat one of the Gentlemen whom I had seen enter from the street; exactly opposite to him in another chair was a young man in the costume of a Barrister and whose countenance seemed familiar to me. -Round the table upon forms were several other Gentlemen amongst whom I recognized the tall snuff-taker and the short curricle-driver whom I had before seen together with many others. Presently a door in one corner of the room opened and a tall Gentleman wearing the gown and wig of an English Barrister entered and immediately proceeded to the desk in the centre of the long seat under the front wall. His countenance did not seem unknown to me although I could riot immediately recollect where I had been introduced to him but afterwards a friend brought to my recollection that it was at the Governor's dinner party. Some little preliminary business having been disposed of and two more Gentlemen in plain clothes having joined him who last entered one of those who were sitting on the form rose and said "if His Honor pleased the cause Fitwell v. Testy was ready for trial." The Court having nodded assent the pleading began. From the opening speech of the Lawyer I found that Fitwell was a tailor and had been employed by Testy to make sundry articles of clothes which he had done and had sent them accompanied by a bill or account amounting to £11 3s. 10d. -Among other articles was a blue coat charged at £5 15s. with the additional demand of fourteen shillings and sixpence for a velvet collar which was the sole ground of action Mr. Fitwell having stated in his bill  "A blue coat and trimmings complete ... £5 15 0  "Velvet collar to ditto ... £ 14 6   Whereas Testy contended that it could not be complete without a collar that it only had one whether velvet or cloth was no matter and that he was not therefore liable to pay as if the coat had been furnished with two collars. His Honor enquired if it could not be settled out of Court but neither party chusing [sic] to accede to this proposal the case proceeded. After witnesses for the plaintiff had been examined the Gentleman who occupied the chair on the floor on the judge's left rose and putting his left hand into his breeches pocket and giving his head the exact proper inclination to the right cross-examined one of them as follows:  What are you? - What am I Sir? a man.  I did not ask you whether you were a man or woman I wish to know what is your trade.  Witness: - A tailor.  Lawyer. - Well now Mr. Mantailor do you know a coat when you see it?  Witness: - I should think so.  Lawyer: - I did not ask you what you thought - answer my question Sir.  Witness.-What sort of a coat do you mean Sir?  Lawyer: - I ask you once more if you know a coat when you see it?  Witness. - Yes Sir.  Lawyer.-Pray how many collars are there to a coat?  Witness: - How many collars are there to a coat Sir why every body knows that.  Lawyer. - Well then if every body knows you can have no difficulty in telling me how many collars are there to a coat I again ask?  Witness. - Why sure Sir you know as well as I how many collars there are to a coat.  Lawyer. - Perhaps I do but still I wish you to tell me; come Sir I'll ask you another question and perhaps we shall come round at last. [66] How many tailors do you reckon there are to a man?  Witness. - One tailor to a coat Sir.  Lawyer. - One what?  Witness. - Collar to a coat.  Lawyer. - (repeating) one collar to a coat.  Witness.-Yes Sir.  Lawyer. - I thought we should come to the point in time; now if there is only one collar to a coat do you consider that a coat is complete without a collar?  Witness. - No Sir.  The cross-examination was pursued much in this way for some time when the case for the plaintiff being ended the Lawyer who had cross-examined the witness rose and addressed the jury on behalf of the defendant commenting very happily on the admission of the plaintiff's witness that a coat had but one collar and that it was not complete without it. - The Gentleman neither wore a gown or wig. After he had ended the young Barrister immediately opposite to him addressed the Court in support of the plaintiff's claim. He had a good clear voice and a wonderful degree of self-possession and his consumptive and delicate appearance would scarcely have warranted the expectation that his physical powers were equal to the deep sonorous tones which proceeded from him or to the exertion which he displayed. The points upon which he chiefly laid stress were that although a coat might not be complete without a collar it did not require a velvet collar that the velvet collar was an extra for which it having been for the defendant's own pleasure and fancy he was as much bound to pay as in a case where a contract might be made to complete a house or other work and if the party afterwards chose to make alterations or additions not included in the contract they were at his own cost and expence - that is £5 15s. had been the price named by Fitwell for the coat to which Testy had agreed and that he afterwards said "let me have a velvet collar." He went on farther to argue that it was by no means incontrovertible that coats might not have more than one collar - that he had seen coats with seven or eight collars and had found the comfort of them when travelling in cold weather. Here he was interrupted by the opposite Lawyer who said "capes not collars" - that even one collar was not necessary to complete a coat for it was within the daily observation of every one that there were some coats of that peculiar make as to shew no collar unless the straight neck-piece might be called a collar and which might with equal propriety be termed a cape as the other pieces of cloth the mention of which had drawn upon him the interruption of the learned Counsel. [67] Under these circumstances he confidently trusted to receive a verdict for the plaintiff.  The Judge then recapitulated the evidence in a husky tone of voice frequently altogether inaudible making constant breaks or hesitations and taking large quantities of snuff as he proceeded. He doubted very much upon which side the evidence preponderated - it was entirely a question of fact rather than law. He explained however what the law was with respect to contracts and left the case wholly in the hands of the Assessors who presently returned a verdict for the defendant. During my attention to the arguments and decision of this cause I discovered how extremely difficult the construction of this building had rendered it to hear what passed - that in fact at a very short distance from the elevated seat before mentioned nothing could be distinctly made out when the voice of the speaker was not raised and when perfect silence was not maintained. As I left the Court I fell into conversation with a Gentleman with whom I was slightly acquainted and who like myself had been a bye-stander observing to him that from what I had that morning witnessed I presumed law was very cheap in this Colony. "Cheap Sir" he replied with the utmost astonishment "you were never more mistaken in your life - Law Sir is not only very scarce here but it is very dear - there is a certain bastard commodity called law which is very current but even this is so much clogged by expenses that it is perfectly ruinous and yet the most surprising thing is almost every person encourages it. "That's very strange Sir" said I "the Gentleman who cross-examined the witness seemed clever and ingenious and I thought the judge explained the law clearly." "Pretty well as to that" my friend replied "the defendant's Counsel is about one of the best of them but many of his geese are swans and the judge would do well enough if he had not so much of the Ex-Chancellor's doubts about him but you must come and dine with me and I will then explain the subject more fully to you. You have only to-day heard or seen two or three of our Law-expounders. I will introduce you to the acquaintance of some more of them and I will also let you into a knowledge of some of the sweets of the profession and of the terrible consequences which attend such infatuation as we have this morning witnessed but which I am sorry to say is very common. The Law Establishment of this Colony is a grievous tax upon the Public and a dreadful scourge to individuals but we will talk more about it over a bottle of wine. Mind my dinner hour is five and I shall expect you." [68]  The information I acquired by my visit will be communicated some other time. In the interim I subscribe myself gentle readers your faithful and obedient  SIMON STUKELEY.    I scarcely know whether or not I ought to enter into a description either of my informant as to the several Law Expounders and other matters connected therewith which I now propose to submit to my readers or of his residence; and of the excellent entertainment with which he regaled me but upon mature consideration I think he has done the State good service and that he will through me be rather honoured than otherwise by my endeavouring to pourtray him. He is of about the middle height rather close set about thirty years of age perhaps a little more dark eyes and hair of a swarthy complexion wears large whiskers in the cut of 1825 or 6 and is unmarried; generally dresses without much regard to appearance oft wearing a coat of a muddy-coloured green the flaps of which are unusually full and the waist longer than Mr. Fitwell would have tolerated. He resides in a house built on the ground floor only and somewhat in the shape of the letter L.  As I was walking leisurely to his residence a little before the appointed dinner hour who should I see coming slowly along just at the crossing by the Church but my clerical friend of the old school mounted on a small cream-coloured pony! Looking at me very pointedly as if full of meaning I thought some words escaped him which I did not distinctly hear and will not therefore venture to repeat but whatever they were those which followed were less equivocal. "So you must be bobbing and bobbing with Bob at the Cottage must ye?" Is that your modern fox-hunting to turn out a "kindred soul" a "choice spirit" to be game for a pack of puppies? With your yeoix and your yeoix and your "collateral security?" I thought the good old Gentleman rather scolded me in laughter than in anger and therefore merely replied to him by enquiring if the pony he was riding was part of his hunting stud adding "he is of a very convenient size for if you happen to come to a gate or fence beyond his leaping powers you would have little trouble in dismounting and in carrying him across on your shoulders." At these words my friend raised himself in his stirrups and making a caracole towards me I felt my safety would best be consulted by flight and bidding him adieu with my hand it was not long ere I reached the Gentleman's house at which I was to dine. [69]  Our meeting was strictly tète a tète and during the repast which was excellent of the sort and the zest of which was heightened by a variety of superior wines a general conversation only took place. When the cloth was removed and the dessert put upon the table drawing our chairs to the fire he filled his glass and passing the bottle to me said "Come Sir one toast - à l'occasion - the glorious uncertainty of the Law." He then proceeded "I have promised you know to explain some particulars respecting law proceedings in this Colony and to make you as wise as myself upon the characters and pretensions of its limbs or pillars. Now you will scarcely believe it but so the case is that a Law process is saddled with heavier charges here than in England and what is worse a system is tolerated by which supposing a Bill of Exchange should be unpaid bearing one doubtful and two or three good names the latter are instantly pounced upon by the Lawyers equally with the other and it is not unusual to see two or three Law suits upon one and the same transaction by which means the original debt is sometimes tripled before it is discharged.  The oil obtained from the Sperm Whale is the purest of all the animal oils employed in commerce; and is consequently the one most valued for domestic illumination as well as for lubricating the more delicate kinds of machinery.  It is peculiar in being almost entirely destitute of odour; while other whale oils [...] although equally prepared from the recent blubber and by a process precisely similar [...] have a strong and disagreeable smell. [395] In the state in which it is received from the whaler Sperm-oil contains a variable proportion of Spermaceti and other gross matters technically named "the foot"; it is separated from these by being strained through woollen bags and is then fit for its ordinary uses.  Spermaceti. [...] is [...] most abundant in the Sperm Whale and commerce is supplied from this species alone. It is very generally diffused through the blubber but obtains in largest quantity and in the greatest state of purity in the fatty structure of the head whence its technical name "head-matter".  Crude Spermaceti as newly obtained from the case of the whale is fluid transparent nearly colourless without odour and has a bland and creamy taste not unlike that of very fresh butter. It does not concrete at the ordinary temperature of the tropics at sea [...] but in low temperatures [...] it assumes a dull-white hue and the consistence of lard.  At present its use in pharmacy is limited to the composition of cerates and ointments. [...] . Its principal commercial value is derived from the extent to which it is employed as a substitute for wax in the manufacture of candles.  Ambergris is the most rare and costly product of the Sperm Whale and one peculiar to this species of Cetacean. [...] . It was usually found floating on the seas of warm climates and was generally considered to be of a resinous or bituminous nature; and when subsequently detected in the intestines of the Cachalot a doubt was still entertained of its true character and whether it had not been swallowed by the animal rather than produced within its body. [...] . Ambergris is a morbid concretion in the intestines of the Cachalot deriving its origin either from the stomach or biliary ducts and allied in its nature to gall-stones.  The only use made of Ambergris in this country is as a perfume and for this purpose it is chiefly prepared in the form of an alcoholic solution or essence. It possesses a peculiar property of increasing the power of other perfumes to which it may be added [...] . .The retail price it bears in London is about one guinea the ounce.  DEATH OF KING BOONGARIE.  SYDNEY Saturday November 27 1830.  We have to announce the death of his Aboriginal Majesty King BOONGARIE Supreme Chief of the Sydney tribe. He expired on Wednesday last at Garden Island after a lingering sickness of several months. A coffin has been despatched thither from the Lumber Yard and he will be interred at Rose Bay beside the remains of his late Queen Gooseberry this day.  The facetiousness of the sable chief and the superiority of his mental endowments over those of the generality of his race obtained for him a more than ordinary share of regard from the white inhabitants of the colony which was testified by frequent donations suited to his condition not only from private individuals but from the Authorities.  At the commencement of his last illness the Hon. Mr. M'Leay procured him admission to the General Hospital where he received every necessary attention and remained some weeks; but becoming impatient to return to his people he was of course permitted to depart and the Government allowed him a full man's ration to the day of his death.  BOONGARIE was remarkable for his partiality for the English costume; and it must be confessed that his appearance was sometimes grotesque enough when he had arrayed his person in such shreds and patches of coats and nether garments as he could by any means obtain; the whole surmounted by an old cocked hat with "the humour of forty fancies pricked in't for a feather."  The late Commodore Sir JAMES BRISBANE was particularly partial to him and on one occasion presented him with a full suit of his own uniform together with a sword of which he was not a little vain. BOONGARIE had long association with the naval service in various ships of the Royal Navy; and his history was not unknown to the late Commodore. BOONGARIE accompanied the late Captain Flinders both in the Norfolk sloop to Moreton Bay and in His Majesty's Ship Investigator to the Gulph of Carpentaria. He also accompanied Commander James Grant in H.M. Colonial Brig Lady Nelson to Port Macquarie. More recently he was with Commander P.P.King in the Mermaid cutter on its voyage to the north-west and tropical coasts of Australia.  For some time past his increasing infirmities rendered it evident that he could not much longer survive his forefathers; and on the day above named in the midst of his own tribe as well as those of Darling Harbour by all of whom he was greatly beloved he ended his mortal career. We have not yet heard of his successor; but the honour of course devolves on the most renowned of his tribe.  What is the state of our criminal law? It is not merely one two or three months that persons are kept in custody previously to trial but frequently a much longer time previously to being committed; and afterwards again how many have remained in gaol a much longer period before their turn comes round than the laws of England which are professedly in force here would award for the offence? Look again at Launceston where there have been only three assizes since December 1825! and at Hobart Town where there are upon an average from fifty to one hundred criminals for trial there has only been two or three general gaol deliveries since the present Chief Justice Pedder assumed the administration of the laws in May 1824. We draw no inference but only state facts - broad unvarnished facts leaving it to those into whose hands this day's paper may come . . . to derive what conclusions from them they may think proper.  [As to the Councils] of the one the Executive the CJ is a member - thus becoming in the memorable words used when Lord Ellenborough was made one of the Privy Council Board - judge jury executioner; for every important question is discussed in the Executive Council frequently even those that come before him in a judicial capacity!! . . . The Legislative Council has the power of making laws and ordinances for the colony and of this also the CJ is a member. What the cause has been is unknown but so it has happened that for the last six months many laws of vital importance to the colonists have been in abeyance owing to the non-assemblage of this body  In the exercise of our calling a sense of duty has now and then led us to express regret that the doubts and difficulties which sometimes delay the stream of justice here should exist; and although in very measured and respectful language we have ventured to offer CJ Pedder some good and wholesome advice we doubt much whether or not it has always been palatable.  Sydney New South Wales 8th Sept. 1830  Sir   From several letters I have recd. of late from my Brother-in-Law H. Reibey & also from my Father in London I find that myself & Mr. R. are under very great obligations to you for the unending Exertions you have made to obtain for us a remuneration for the loss of our Cutter which was piratically taken from Newcastle. [108] Being assured from the [?] Interest you take in the affair that will again Aid us by your Friendly Interference / I have at the request Mr. Reibey forwarded to the Address Messrs Buckles Bagster & Buckles of London agents to Mr Reibey the whole of the [?] left in mistake by him they were found the Secretarys Office lately   The Instructions Mrs Reibey has given to Messrs Buckles & Co are  "to take charge of them until they hear from Mr Hope wether they are to send them to Scotland to him or deliver them to the Colonial Office at once"  I should judge that without doubt it will be better for you to receive inspect & forward all thro such means as you may consider most likely to bring the matter to a favorable conclusion  The papers forwarded to Messrs B & Co [?] as follows Viz  Affidavit of Mr C J Pound Master of the Eclipse  Statement of Captn Allman Commandant at Newcastle / enclosed in Memo to Mr Reibey  Statement of Mr A Livingstone Master of the Lord Liverpool  Letter from Mr Campbell to Mr. Reibey  Valuation of Mr Nicholson / Master attendant of the vessel  Letter from Mr F S Forbes to Messrs R & A  Memorials of R & A for compensation  Statement of particulars of Loss of Eclipse by R & A  Coln. Secretarys Letter to Mr R enclosing [?] Returning the above  Thanks for disinterested kindness & relying in full confidence of a favourable [?]   your unending perseverance I Remain Sir Your much obliged John Atkinson  You will probably have heard before this reaches England that we had a favourable passage and that our stock arrived well and in fine condition with the loss only of eighteen sheep out of seven hundred and thirty. Our seven horses and twelve cows and bulls were landed in good order. This good fortune added much to the interest of the voyage for though greatly favoured by the weather no little anxiety was experienced in keeping the interior of our ark in order to preserve the lives of our precious cargo; you may therefore imagine that I felt in no small degree relieved when we anchored in Sydney Cove. [46]  To those who have never been on long voyages it is not easy to describe the feelings on first seeing the land which you are destined to inhabit after all the tossings and rollings you have suffered for many months on the dreary and trackless ocean.  From the beads (adjoining the sea) of Port Jackson to Sydney the distance is about seven miles: the land on both sides is composed of moderately elevated hills covered with wood. The sun shone brilliantly as we glided on towards the town; the distant roll of the drumto which the soldiers were marching from church-struck upon our cars; and the Garden of Eden to our first parents could not have been more enchanting than the scene was to me heightened no doubt by the joyous feelings of a sea-worn prisoner about to be liberated from his five months' confinement.  There had been no arrival at Sydney before us for three or four months. The inhabitants were therefore anxious for news. Parties of ladies and gentlemen were parading on the sides of the hills above us greeting us every now and then as we floated on; and as soon as we anchored (which was on a Sunday) we were boarded by numbers of apparently respectable people asking for letters and news as if we had contained the budget of the whole world. In a short time I was on shore pleased enough you may imagine with the firmness of my position on earth and with the idea that I should be able to sit down to my dinner without lashing my chair to the table or being so often reminded of the regions between which I had sometimes imagined myself suspended.  Sydney from the Cove has the appearance of a considerable town standing upon an eminence. [47] The buildings streets &c. do not in general remind a person of its recent origin; nor is there any deficiency of accommodation and comforts there more than in a country town in England. It is increasing very fast. The small houses that the first settlers erected are every where giving way to larger structures of hewn stone and warehouses of considerable magnitude are rising up near the water-side indicating the prosperity of the merchants as well as the rapid increase of population. On every side of the town houses are being erected on new ground; steam-engines and distilleries are at work; so that in a short time a city will rise up in this new world equal to any thing out of Europe and probably superior to any other which was ever created in the same space of time.  The less I say of the society the better. As in all small communities there is a jostling of interests and a contention for precedency and power that generate parties which are kept alive by unprincipled individuals who having sprung from nothing and having no characters to lose delight in reducing others to a level with themselves. Let it not however be supposed that I allude exclusively to those who have been involuntary exiles some of whom both in their dealings and general conduct are highly respectable. The greater share I believe of the convertible property of the colony rests with this class; and they therefore possess in the various transactions of life that degree of influence both good and bad which property may be supposed to give them in such a situation and which too frequently renders them the objects of the envy and jealousy of certain of the voluntary exiles whose principles and conduct leave them little to boast of in any state of society. [48]  This country differs in some degree from the ideas I had of it from the representations made to me in England. It is not in general that picturesque and romantie country so much talked of there although the scenery is sometimes very fine. A traveller may go many miles in a wood even in the located districts without seeing any traces of human habitations; and when he approaches a settler's place he sees a house and a few straggling buildings in the centre of fifty or a hundred acres of cleared or more generally of partially cleared land surrounded by an apparently interminable wood or trees without underwood. Occasionally houses of more important consideration are met with surrounded by farm and other buildings as in England and placed in fine situations which command views beyond the surrounding woodland ; but there are not many of these above twenty miles from Sydney. There is seldom if ever any brushwood to be seen. Where the soil is pretty good it is lightly timbered occasionally resembling a gentleman's park; but the traveller soon loses this idea from finding no mansion at the end of the scene. He plods on from park to park as it were all day and rests at night with his horse tethered beside him near some pool of water. He then strikes a light and makes a fire to boil his kettle and fry his bacon. If he can afford a tent with a pack-horse he will of course have one; if not a blanket and the hard ground are his bed and covering. If it rains he strips off a sheet of bark from the nearest tree and lies under it secure from harm. Should he get wet he rarely takes cold or experiences any other than a momentary inconvenience on awaking in the morning.  Since my arrival I have spent a good deal of my time in the woods or bush as it is called here. For the last five months I have not entered or even seen a house of any kind. [49] My habitation when at home has been a tent; and of course it is no better when in the bush. I have now at this place about two hundred and thirty souls lodged in bark huts till we can get better buildings constructed; but in this climate they are comfortable enough for people who are not very fastidious. When I take an excursion in the bush I am generally pretty well attended and never enjoy myself more than at such times. I have several pack-horses with tents for myself and companions when I have any and men sufficient to accompany us if on an expedition of importance and where difficulties in travelling 'g are anticipated from rivers rocky mountains and creeks; and two or three natives always attend as guides and interpreters. We carry as many conveniences as we can; but we have only salt provisions unless we kill a kangaroo an emu or a duck. The kangaroos are too subtle and shy for us to get near and frequently the natives will return from their sporting excursions without game although they are as subtle as the game itself. The climate is so fine that we experience no inconvenience in travelling; and the constant change of scenery in this part of the country and the interest kept up in expectation of making discoveries at every step render journeys of this kind pleasant beyond description.  If we could get rid of two annoyances and introduce two European enjoyments in lieu of them this would be the most agreeable climate in the world. The exportation would be the musquitos and the locusts; (the latter inhabit the trees in swarms and during summer make the most disagreeable singing noise imaginable;) the importation would be your singing birds and cool streams. [50] We have our singing birds too but not like the nightingale or the blackbird. We have the thrush very much like yours in plumage and note; and a bird the concluding note of which is like the of the nightingale ; but they are shy singers. We have the magpie not unlike yours: it is the most constant singer or rather whistler of an agreeable nature and particularly in the morning early. Parrots and parroquets as well as black and white cockatoos are innumerable; and the crow is here exactly as in Europe with a similar " caw" only rather hoarser and longer in its call.  The game consists of quails in abundance the kangaroo and emu. We have at this port great quantities of wild fowl such as ducks teal &c. ; also pelicans cranes herons native companions black swans innumerable and other more curious birds which I can neither name nor describe. Fish also abound here including turtle oysters craw-fish crabs eels &c. I believe we can produce every European fruit and vegetable in perfection and most if not all of the tropical vegetables and fruits more particularly in the neighbourhood of this port.  I am now writing in the midst of winter in my tent with a fire in front of it. The sun has risen seven mornings at least out of ten without a cloud in the horizon and has set the same. About four P. in. it begins to feel cold. much the same as the shutting in of a very fine clear day in England in November. The stars twinkle at night as in a frost and the cold reminds you that a fire is necessary for your comfort. Notwithstanding this I have not yet seen ice although I am told that water has sometimes been very slightly incrusted during the night. [51]  We are near the sea here and consequently milder in winter and cooler in summer than if further from the coast while at the distance of twenty miles I have seen ice as thick as a dollar. I have peas now in my garden in blossom ; and the bills about my tent are bespangled with violets and a delicate white flower that reminds me of the snow-drop: so you may judge what the climate must be. Still the weather in winter is cold enough to the feelings to remind us occasionally of your fine dry weather in March and November with a moderate east wind though it more frequently has the mildness of May with a clear sun. Sometimes we have refreshing showers or heavy rains succeeded always by fine clear weather; and as I have said before seven days at least out of ten exhibit - the blue etherial sky without a spot.  I have now seen three seasons in this country - summer autumn and winter. The summer is a little too hot; but I have felt more inconvenience from hot weather in England than here: it lasts longer in this country but you are sooner cool after exertion and less liable to be chilled. The weather in autumn and winter is truly delightful neither too hot nor too cold. I am told that the spring is equally agreeable; and that although the winters are so mild still nature appears to undergo an invigorating change as in colder regions. Animals lose their long coats ; flowers spring up in the gardens and fields ; birds begin to sing more generally; and the trees although evergreens change their somewhat faded hue for the more refreshing green of spring.  This settlement which is called Port Stephens lies about one hundred and twenty miles north of the town of Sydney by water and by the present track about two hundred from it by land. [52] We hope soon to find a nearer road; but I never expect to reach Sydney with less travelling than a hundred and fifty miles.  The harbour at Port Stephens is very capacious and beautiful : there is water enough to admit ships of the largest tonnage. From the entrance of the harbour to the place where I have formed this establishment on the north shore it is not less than eleven miles. I subjoin a bird's eye view of it.  The spot I have fixed upon for my house commands as fine views of wood and water as can be imagined: the scenery is quite Italian. As I am forming stations up the river Karuah which is navigable about twenty-five miles from the harbour my business will be performed in that quarter by means of boats which will save much fatigue and jolting on horseback besides making the excursions matter of pleasure as well as business ; for in this climate nothing can be more delightful than water excursions particularly when such fine scenery as we have about the river is constantly in view varied at each turn of the river in a manner somewhat resembling the banks of the celebrated Wye.  The hills are every where clothed with wood to their summits with eternal verdure beneath them in their natural state unaccompanied by brush or underwood so that we are often reminded of gentlemen's pleasuregrounds seen from a distance; but we look in vain for the comfortable porter's lodge when we approach the solitary domain. "Ah! there's the rub!" What is fine scenery or all the beauties which these forests present in a state of nature when deprived of the society of those so dear to me? I often repeat to myself the lines of Alexander Selkirk: [53] "I am monarch of all I survey" &c. I fancy my feelings may be sometimes similar to his though my situation is so very different. I seldom however look long on the gloomy side of the picture. My time is fully occupied on matters of business which are congenial to my taste and habits and I endeavour to lay hold of every passing event with a view of turning it either to pleasure or profit; and it is astonishing what a man may do in such a situation towards his own happiness and that of others if he can command his feelings and reason fairly on man and things around him. I am surrounded here by the very dregs of civilized society from the most civilized country in the world intermixed by another race of beings not civilized at all; so that between these extremes and the respectable portion of mankind that left England with me I am in a good school for the study of my own species. I have at present about a hundred and fifty convicts and emancipists besides about eighty souls brought from England; and I trust I shall soon have a considerable accession to the different classes as I could find employment for some hundreds if I had them.  Our sheep and cattle are thriving very well and we are constantly making additions to them by purchases and importations of sheep which occupy directly and indirectly a very large proportion and all the best of our hands. I have every reason to believe that this undertaking will be a flourishing one provided I am well supported. I cannot see any reason why it should not for there are no individuals in the colony who have not succeeded in the same line where their affairs have been conducted with common prudence and judgment. Many failures I know have taken place ; but these have occurred to people who have begun and continued upon a plan not adapted to young colonists. [54] People who come here generally imagine that they can do as in England. They take lodgings in Sydney which is a most expensive place; linger there to make connexions which generally end sooner or later in mischief; and their money goes they know not how. At last they fix upon a grant of land and remove to it with inadequate means; and before returns can be made they have spent all their money. They then become disgusted and alarmed mortgage their grants and are at length disembarrassed of their little remains of property by the connexion they lost so much valuable time in making at Sydney.  When a person lands at Sydney it would be better for him to go to an inn expensive as it is and form no acquaintances of any kind till he has taken a little time to look about him. If he has a friend in the colony he can rely upon it is fortunate for him; but if not let him be cautious before he attempts to make one. He will soon learn by enquiry which of the settlers have more land than they can stock and who are the most respectable of them. When he has ascertained these two things let him purchase as many ewes as his means will enable him before he attempts to settle or even to select his land. Most of the latest settlers are always ready and anxious to receive sheep on their land to feed and manage upon their having one-third or one-fourth of the produce. Suppose they take one-third the young settler has the other two-thirds without a penny of expense to him; and he thus begins to increase his income in a greater degree than he could in any other way. Whilst he is selecting his grant his flocks and herds (for he may do the same with cattle) are increasing beyond his personal expenditure if he is prudent. [55] As soon as he has fixed up on the land for his farm let him build himself a log or a bark house which he may do very cheaply and make it very comfortable too. Then let him clear some land for cultivation make a stock-yard for his cattle enclose as large a paddock as he can for a horse or two and working oxen and have some hurdles made for his sheep. He must also purchase a cart plough and set of harrows at Sydney where he can get them better adapted to his purposes than from England: then three oxen (if he can afford no more) and harness. With these and other necessary articles he must proceed to his grant; and until the enclosure alluded to is fenced off or he becomes intimately acquainted with the country about his farm he must tether the oxen during the night. When his hut is built and stock-yard and hurdles made let him bring home his sheep and cattle with their increase that have been upon thirds but not before if he wishes to avoid trouble vexation and losses. By the time his grant is selected his first crop of wheat harvested and the measures pointed out effected it may he eighteen months or two years. During this interval his sheep and cattle will have increased; he will have had some return from the sale of wool without any advances but the prime cost of his sheep; and he will probably in point of property be as good a man then as when he landed. Upon this plan success is certain and comparatively easy if his land be good and well chosen. But the young settler must take care not to spend too much in clearing for cultivation before the increase of his flocks justify it; for it is here that he must look for his most certain returns. [56] Cattle will soon be sold for their skins; and the production of grain much beyond his own consumption will only answer to a capitalist who can afford to hold it for a market unless the population at Sydney should increase considerably. The soil of Australia is generally poor: some rich patches are found on the banks of rivers and in more distant parts of the coast-line. These will pay to cultivate for a market if one exist [sic] within a reasonable distance. Both the soil and the climate however as far as I have yet seen appear favourable to fine wool which I think will ever be the staple article of New South Wales. This wool is the only production from the soil that can render it a flourishing country ; and as the fine climate renders it a healthy and an agreeable one to inhabit there is no doubt but that population will increase in proportion to. the quantity and quality of the soil that may be found in situations which offer facilities for transporting its productions to a remunerating market.  Let not those who wish to proceed to Australia deceive themselves in regard to its soil and agricultural productions. They must look to exportable articles for an income; and they will not find them either in flesh timber or grain. The population will not be sufficiently dense for many years to come to create a home market worth the attention of settlers behind the mountains so far distant from the metropolis Sydney ; and the mere slip of country which lies between the mountains and the coast and within distance of a market contains but little comparatively worth cultivating for grain; and even this is already occupied. Fine wool must command the settler's attention as the only exportable commodity from his domain for many years to come; and if he entertains other views than this he had better stay at home. [57]  Much has been said of venomous reptiles here. I believe they are not more common than in England. There are black and yellow snakes whose stings are said to cause death ; but accidents are seldom heard of: and I think there is no greater liability to danger than from English adders and vipers. I have seen and killed several and imagine they would like the vipers at home sting if stamped upon ; but they endeavour to get away from you as any snake would in other places. One of our shepherds found a snake in his bed which was supposed to have been attracted there by the warmth of his body' when sleeping on the ground under a tent. It did not attempt to sting him and he killed it on the spot.  The wild dog which is a kind of small wolf is the largest carniverous animal known in Australia. They are however more of the dog than the wolf as has been proved by the breed becoming intermixed in some instances with the European dogs that generally accompany the natives in the woods. The only mischief this animal has been accused of is that of taking young lambs and biting sheep as dogs have often been known to do in England.  The natives are a mild and harmless race of savages; and where any mischief has been done by them the cause has generally arisen I believe in bad treatment by their white neighbours. Short as my residence has been here I have perhaps had more intercourse with these people and more favourable opportunities of seeing what they really are than any other person in the colony. My object has always been to conciliate them to give them an interest in cultivating our friendship and to afford them protection against any injuries or insults from the people on this establishment or elsewhere within my jurisdiction. [58] They have usually been treated in distant parts of the colony as if they had been dogs and shot by convict-servants at a distance from society for the most trifling causes. There has perhaps been more of this done near to this settlement and on the banks of the two rivers which empty themselves into this harbour than in any other part of the colony; and it has arisen from the speculators in timber who formerly obtained licences from the governor to cut cedar and blue gum-wood for exportation upon land not located.  The natives complained to me frequently that " white pellow" (white fellows) shot their relations and friends ; and showed me many orphans whose parents had fallen by the hands of white men near this spot. They pointed out one white man on his coming to beg some provisions for his party up the river Karuah who they said had killed ten; and the wretch did not deny it but said he would kill them whenever he could. It was well for him that he had no white man to depose to the facts or I would have had him off to jail at once. Having from my first landing here done every thing I could to prove to these poor natives that I intended to be their friend and protector a growing confidence has been the consequence between us ; till at length it has from various circumstances settled into a firm belief that I am in reality what I promised to be to them. The following circumstances will serve to show how it has been brought about and throw more light upon their character than any thing perhaps that has been said of them before. [59] No person in this colony has I believe ever had the same advantages for forming a correct judgment of the natives as myself arising from my insulated situation my authority as a magistrate and the means at my disposal of employing and feeding them. It is possible however although I think and hope it improbable that circumstances may occur to interrupt our good understanding; for they are savages in the common acceptation of the term although they exhibit stronger traits of natural gentleness and good feeling towards their white brethren and towards each other than people under that denomination are generally found to do. It is impossible for me to relate one half the anecdotes between the natives and myself at this place. I will however detail as many as I can in order to show what they are; and if I am too tedious the interest I take in them must plead my excuse.  During a short residence at Port Stephens in the month of January and before I returned to the neighbourhood of Sydney to bring the establishment hither I was visited by a considerable tribe of the natives who were very friendly and desirous of further acquaintance I encouraged this disposition by giving them such food as we had and also some tobacco of which they are excessively fond. I presented to each man a tomahawk (or mago as they call it) which they prize above all things. They are exceedingly fond of biscuit bread or flour which they knead and bake in the ashes in the same manner as they see our people do it; but the article of food which appears most delicious to them is the boiled meal of Indian corn and next to it the corn roasted in the ashes like chestnuts: of sugar too they are inordinately fond as well as of every thing sweet. [60] One of their greatest treats is to get an Indian bag that has had sugar in it: this they cut into pieces and boil in water. They drink this liquor till they sometimes become intoxicated and till they are fairly blown out like an ox in clover and can take no more.  Having before I went to Sydney discovered those things which were most to their taste I took care to be well provided with them on my return here. Before I left Port Stephens I intimated to them that I should soon return in a " corbon" (large) ship with a " murry" (great) plenty of white people and murry tousand things for them to eat. Upon this they set up a great shout and expressed the same boisterous pleasure that schoolboys do when a holiday or any very agreeable treat is promised by the master. They promised to get me " murry tousand bark." " Oh! plenty bark massa." " Plenty black pellow massa: get plenty bark." " Tree pour pive nangry" (three four five days) make plenty bark for white pellow massa." "You come back toon ?" " We look out for corbon ship on corbon water" (the sea.) " We tee (see) massa." " We look out." " We get it bark." After this they chattered among themselves laughed incessantly and appeared overjoyed at what was to come. I then gave them a sugar-bag with some sugar and an iron pot to boil it in. They bore these off in triumph to their camp a few rods only from my tent; and when their mess was prepared they sent to inform me that they wished to have a corrobery (dance) if I would allow it. As soon as I signified to them that they might do what they pleased they made an immense fire of dried wood and set their pot of sugar-bag by the side of it. I observed them all to retire to their camp for a short time ; and when they returned they had figured different parts of their bodies with pipeclay in a very curious and even handsome manner. [61] They had chalked straight lines from the ankle up the outside of the thigh which made them appear by firelight as if they had hussar pantaloons on. Their faces had been rubbed with red earth like ochre ; and their breasts chalked with serpentine lines interspersed with dots &c. They were perfectly naked as they always are ; and in this state they began to corrobery or dance.  A man with a woman or two act as musicians by striking two sticks together and singing or bawling a song which I cannot well describe to you: it is chiefly in half tones extending sometimes very high and loud and then descending so low as almost to sink to nothing. The dance is exceedingly amusing but the movement of the limbs is such as no European could perform: it is more like the limbs of a pasteboard harlequin when set in motion by a string than any thing else I can think of.  HOBART-TOWN - The stranger as he sails up the Derwent which is perfectly safe for shipping will observe on each aide several cultivated spots of small extent appearing among the trees. Having cast anchor in the Harbour which is called Sullivan's Cove close to the town Mulgrave battery with the residence of the Port officer at the water's edge appears to the left and Mount Nelson in the distance. [280] Bordering also on the water is Cottage green the residence of the Rev. R. Knopwood. the first chaplain of the colony; also the villas of Mr Read and Mr Moodie and the Burying ground; also on a fine commanding eminence the Military barracks. Directly in front of the harbour is Government house with pleasure grounds pleasantly sloping down to the water's edge. The public landing place is on a small pier or jetty on what was formerly called Hunters island but now connected with the main land by a long stone causeway. Here the principal merchants of the town have erected several spacious and substantial warehouses among which may be mentioned the very extensive stores of the Leith Australian Company as present let to Government as an Ordnance store. On the right is the Town rivulet and beyond it on a promontory called Macquarie point the Engineer's stores or Lumber yard where the blacksmiths carpenters. and other mechanics in the employment of the Government are always at work. On this point the troops arc reviewed on field days and some of the inhabitants of the town occasionally recreate themselves at the game of cricket and other out-door amusements. [281] From Elizabeth-street the buildings extend nearly a mile on the main road to the interior.  NEWTOWN AND GLENORCHY - On leaving Hobart-town Mount Wellington being 4 miles to the left at the distance of 2 miles a small road turns off on the right hand to the lower part of New-town. ...At the seventh mile stone is the Green man kept by Mr Bird and at the eighth is Abbotsfield a point of land stretching smile into the Derwent towards Mount Direction. A quarter of a mile farther is Roseneath ferry on the road to Launceston where Mr Austin keeps an inn with an excellent garden for the accommodation of visiters. [sic]  Sydney 6 April 1831.  It will be remembered that on Saturday the 26th ult the York Captain Leary sailed from Port Jackson for Madras with a detachment of the 57th regiment consisting of Major Hunt Captain Brown Mrs Brown and family Lieutenants Edwards Alexander and E. Lockyer Paymaster Green Mrs Green and family together with 9 sergeants 12 drummers 7 corporals 132 privates 15 women and 39 children. Captain Leary having never passed through Torres' Straits he availed himself of the company of the Edward Captain Gilbert bound for Batavia.  They accordingly proceeded to sea together and agreed to keep as close to each other as possible until they should have cleared the Straits. Having very little wind their progress was slow and on Tuesday last the 29th they had reached no farther than the latitude of Port Macquarie and were about four degrees off that coast. Both vessels were sailing E.N.E the course which had been mutually agreed upon until day-break on the Wednesday morning when they were again to consult for the day. So anxious indeed was Captain Leary to act in concert with his fellow voyager that on Tuesday he wrote a note to the gentleman minutely stating what he understood to be the arrangement for the night and expressed his determination to adhere strictly to it.  About 5 o'clock in the afternoon the hour at which the military gentlemen dined the York was observed suddenly to change her course from E.N.E. to S.E. without any sort of intimation to Captain Gilbert of her reasons for so doing. Her stern sails were set and it appeared that she was pursuing her new tack with all possible des-patch. The ships at the moment this alteration took place were about two or three miles apart the Edward being in advance; but the latter being by far the best sailer Captain Gilbert instantly pursued his comrade to demand an explanation and at about 11 o'clock at night came within hail.  When his approach was observed the York again shifted her course to S.W. Captain Gilbert remonstrated against this strange conduct and called loudly for Captain Leary but without receiving one word of reply the York continuing to "sheer off". Gilbert however still pressed after and on again coming up renewed his calls for Leary when a man dressed in a long frock coat was seen to leap upon the York's poop and cried out in a strange voice "What do you want ?"  "I want Captain Leary" was Gilbert's answer 'and you are steering wrong!"  "No !" replied the same voice "we are going through Bass' Straits."  "Then" said Gilbert "if you have no chart you had better come on board of me for you are steering wrong for the Straits. You are not Captain Leary - Where is he? If you don't bring to I'll run you down."  They sheered off. "I followed" says Captain Gilbert "and came up a third time and hailed them the same as before. They backed the main-yard and endeavoured to get round me as I suppose to board me. Finding what they were about I filled my main-sail and left them at 3 in the morning of Wednesday the 30th. They went steering the S.W. of New Zealand. I heard two guns go off and saw the flashes. In the afternoon I signalled him that if the wind changed in the night to steer N; he directly up stick and steered S. When they did this they hoisted Marriott's signal 'Under orders - bear away ! - come up!' Both myself officers and men then thought the ship was taken for Leary was most anxious that I should not leave them on any account".  Nothing now remained for Captain Gilbert but to put back to Sydney and report the extraordinary transaction. To have attempted to take the York by force filled as she was with armed soldiers would have been madness and the only way in which he had it in his power to serve the cause of humanity and his country was to interupt his own voyage by returning with the mysterious tidings.  Such a lamentable tale we have to tell of the troops embarked on board the York. Lamentable on account of the character of the army which the conduct of those on board had indelibly disgraced; but still more lamentable as to the officer and their families whom the piratical mutineers must necessarily imprison and maltreat to ensure their own safety even though they may feel desirous to soften the rigour of their confinement as much as possible. For we do not suspect any wanton severity will be exercised toward the officers by the misguided men and that they will land them in New Zealand; which we sincerely hope they will do and not carry them prisoners to South America.  POSTSCRIPT 9 O'CLOCK  RETURN OF THE YORK  Sydney 8 April 1831.  We have to announce the gratifying news of the safe return to port of the ship York together with the equally pleasing intelligence that the apprehensions for the safety of the crew which a chain of circumstances occasioned in the public mind turn out to be altogether groundless.  She anchored this evening about dark in Watson's Bay the passengers and crew all well From the hasty particulars which we have been enabled to glean it appears that her parting from the Edward was occasioned by a strong northerly wind which induced Captain Leary to alter his course and endeavour to make the passage through Bass' Straits.  When the ship was hailed by Captain Gilbert from the Edward the wind was so high that nothing more than a confused sound could be distinguished on board and being unable to lay-to she proceeded on her course; the wind subsequently veered to the southward and after beating about the Straits for several days Captain Leary thought it most advisable to return to Sydney.  We are most happy at being thus enabled satisfactorily to allay the ferment which a rumour so astounding in all the alleged circumstances which gave rise to it was calculated to excite not only in this Colony but in every part of the British dominions to which it might reach.  We are rejoiced thus to deliver the army from the greatest reproach. We considered Captain Gilbert's account worthy of credit. We now think that Captain Leary and Captain Gilbert must one or both have acted a most uncandid part towards each other. But in the absence of information we shall be silent.  It behoves Captain Gilbert to clear himself from the odium of having made such representations as to induce the public journals here relying first on his veracity secondly on his good sense as a gentleman and thirdly on his experience as a sailor to believe that part of one of the most gallant and distinguished regiments in his Majesty's service had mutinied and in conjunction with the sailors piratically run away with the ship! It now appears that no such idea ever entered the minds of the brave and loyal soldiers on board and that honour was never absent from their breasts one moment.  On the other hand as according to Captain Gilbert's account Captain Leary altered his course contrary to express agreement with him and had one of Captain Gilbert's charts of Torres' Straits on board which he had borrowed we suppose Captain Leary will explain and set himself right with the public on this score. But why having the superior ship of the two under his feet should Captain Gilbert have been so afraid of being boarded by the York as not to have continued in company with her until he had ascertained her real situation?  Why leave her suddenly and by his insinuations to the public here and through the Journals to the whole world cause all men to consider her a Pirate? Such conduct is really marvellous and will tell very little for Captain Gilbert at Lloyd's when he shews there again.  WATER EXCURSION IN THE NEW STEAM BOAT SOPHIA JANE.  Sydney 18th June 1831  Yesterday morning after having entertained a private party the Steamer Sophia Jane proceeded with about eighty passengers to Middle Harbour. At eleven o'clock she cast off her moorings and was at the head of Middle Harbour (at least as far as she would go) at a quarter to two o'clock having taken the circuit of Watson's Bay to take in Mr. Watson the Pilot and having also stopped to take in Old Cook the Middle Harbour Pilot.  To the entrance of Middle Harbour she was propelled at the rate of about ten miles an hour but was eased several times to about five which afforded the passengers an opportunity of witnessing some of the picturesque scenes for which the coves in Middle Harbour are distinguished. On her return she went a few miles outside the Heads and then it being early proceeded up the Parramatta - river as far as Mr. Squires Kissing Point arriving at Campbell's Wharf about six o'clock having completed a distance of upwards of sixty miles.  The engine itself is one of the most complete of the kind ever put together by Watts & Boulton who are allowed to excel all other Engineers; and the accomodations for parties are elegant and well arranged. About two o'clock the party sat down to a very superior cold collation consisting of ducks fowls ham and sweetmeat and fruit in profusion provided by Mr. Bax of the Australian Hotel at the rate of 2s. 6d. a head which did Mr Bax more than credit. The vessel being at this time between the Heads the motion created the usual sensation in a few of the visitors but not so much so as to destroy the pleasure evinced by every individual on board at the endeavours of the Captain and owners (who were on board) to gratify and accomodate their passengers.  Altogether the delightful views of Middle Harbour the grandeur of the Heads and the softened scenery of Parramatta-river the pleasing melody of the Band (the 39th Keg.) the urbanity of the Captain and Mr. Lamb in pointing out and. displaying the facility of command under which the steam was restrained at pleasure (which was indeed truly astonishing the works being as accurate as the inside of a watch and equally as clean); made the excursion a scene of unbroken delight. Consequently as it was the first of the kind either as to the mode of conveyance or the promiscuous- ness of the company infused universal delight and entitled the owners and Captain Bidduiph to the friendship and hearty good will of the community at large.  Ales wines (including Champaigne) were flowing after the lunch or dinner and the prosperity of the concern was drunk with great cheering. The diningroom is a noble apartment being arranged with the most ingenious regard to utility and comfort. The accomodations between decks are truly admirable. The state cabin is appropriated exclusively to the ladies. The fair sex are always entitled to the best and certainly their claim is fully conceded on board the Sophia Jane their apartment having every convenience they could desire together with superb looking-glass panels which reflect their charms with all the fidelity of truth.  The day was the most favourable that could be desired. Not a cloud obscured the sky; the sun shone in all its chastened splendour and a gentle breeze from the westward seemed to refresh and invigorate the joyous passengers.  The Sophia Jane starts tomorrow for the Hunter to which place she will run regularly. She will also take occasional trips to Windsor Port Macquarie Moreton Bay Norfolk Island and Van Diemen's Land. The Government having promised their support as far as possible in the conveyance of stores &c to our penal settlements.  Of all the murders that have been committed by the Van Diemen's Land natives none have caused such anxiety as the deaths of Captain Bartholomew Boyle Thomas and his faithful farm overseer Mr James Parker who died by the hands of the blacks on the 31st. of August 1881.  Captain Thomas as manager of an agricultural company settled in Van Diemen's Land five years ago landing in Hobart Town from the ship Albion on the 3rd. of May 1826; but subsequently he settled near Port Sore!! on his own sheep run which he called Northdown.  On the day of his death Captain Thomas accompanied by Mr Parker rode down to the usual landing place to superintend the discharge of a large boat loaded with provisions and stores for Northdown that had just arrived from Launceston. Two bullock carts followed them to commence the conveyance of the freight to the homestead. Near to the boat a large tent was pitched for the convenience of the boatmen when on shore.  A goodly detachment of the Big river tribe were at this time sojourning at Port Sorell some of whom were sauntering about the shore but the greater number stood about the tent and the boatmen who being well armed caused the natives to be civil enough; for they are a set of cunning fellows and never attack at a disadvantage. But each side was on the watch the one to rush the boat and the other to entrap the blacks for the sake of the reward of £5 a head that is offered for all who are brought in alive. With this in view the men gave them liberally of whatever they seemed to covet most such as tea sugar tobacco and bread; but they were too wide awake for their would be captors and not one of them would trust himself within the boat.  When Thomas and Parker came down to the port the blacks though bent on mischief appeared to be perfectly quiet and friendly with their new acquaintances which the former who was of a trusting disposition mistook the meaning of. He was one of those kindhearted fellows who never suspect others of being worse than themselves or of entertaining designs that have no place in their own thoughts. He had long held the belief that the natives are poor inoffensive creatures if left alone and that the manifold acts of violence done by them were defensive only and not the result of premeditation. He formed the fatal resolution of visiting their camp alone in order to establish a good understanding with them and thus assisting to effect the conciliation of the two races.  Captain Thomas now dismounted from his horse and asked the natives to take him to their camp which they readily agreed to do - in other words the savages were only too happy to separate him from his party and get him into the bush. But here Parker who had no good opinion of the natives strove hard to dissuade him from engaging in so rash an enterprise saying to him - "Surely Captain Thomas you are never going to trust yourself with those blackguards who'll kill you directly they are out of our hearing."  The infatuated settler was not to be persuaded out of his belief of the harmlessness of their nature and merely replied - "Oh they are not so bad as they are represented I am not afraid and will go by myself."  Parker stood amazed at the indiscretion of the other but mistrustful as he was of the natives himself the noble-minded fellow after a moment's thought would not suffer him to go alone so springing from his horse and shouldering his double-barrel gun he strode after him. Parker was a very robust young man a little over thirty and possessed of wonderful resolution and he had no doubt armed as he was of being able to protect his employer against half a dozen of them if it came to blows; but the poor fellow had no idea of the artifice inherent in the savage and in this one particular they were an overmatch for him.  As Thomas and himself proceeded towards the camp of the blacks their two or three attendants were as if by pre-arrangement soon reinforced by others; one fellow meeting them here another a little further on and a third fourth fifth and sixth somewhere else until they grew into a large but most disreputable looking troop of whom the majority kept an eye on the unarmed captain whilst two or three only but the most resolute of their number marched on either side of his companion of whom the most conspicuous were two named Mac-a-mee and Wow-ee; the former unarmed walking on the right and the other bearing a heavy waddy on the left hand.  The party had moved forward about two miles when the assault commenced by Mac-a-mee as quick as thought snatching the gun out of Parker's hand which he did with such force as to turn him more than half round and then run-fling off as fast as he could with the prize. [134] At this moment Parker's face was turned away from the other savage who swinging his waddy aloft dealt him such a blow on his temple that he reeled and fell to the ground apparently a life-less man.  It is not in the power of language to describe the excitement of the men of the tribe at witnessing the fall of another of the enemies of their race nor the scene that took place at this moment between them and their wives such as no one would expect to read of as an usual incident in savage life the men rushing up with yells of savage joy to finish the fallen man and the women equally as vociferous interposing by entreaty to stay the wrath of their husbands and to save him from death but without effect in the case of either victim.  In the end Parker was literally nailed to the ground by the spears of the blacks twelve of which were driven through and through him every wound being quite sufficient to cause death.  Captain Thomas on seeing the fate of his friend to whom he could give no assistance ran off screaming out murder as loudly as he could (which the natives who are often capital mimics afterwards demonstrated without knowing what he meant by it). He was an uncommonly active man and on fair ground ran with such speed that few could contend against. But swift-footed as he was he was no match here for the agile savage unencumbered by clothes; and several young fellows starting after him were at his heels by the time he had got sixty yards which was the distance he ran when they overhauled him. The captain wore a half military frock coat at the time at the skirt of which the foremost of them made a grasp and though it gave way his speed was so checked that they had him before he could advance another yard. He was knocked over directly and speared to death being pierced quite through in ten places.  We must now go back to the beach where we left the two carters whom Parker had directed to remain until Captain Thomas and himself returned to them and where they awaited until the sun was getting low loitering about till the last minute so as not to go without them and firing their guns for their return but to no purpose for they were both dead long before this; so yoking up their bullocks they reluctantly faced home-wards taking with them the two horses of the now missing men.  By the time the drivers had got about half way to Northdown they were joined by the black women who had sullenly quitted the tribe when the above murders were committed and now followed the carts towards Northdown. They had not gone far before they were overtaken by the three men Mac-a-mee Wow-ce and Calamarowenee who seemed by their gestures to insist upon their immediate return to the camp; but the women were much too excited by the event of the day to obey so they continued to follow the bullock carts the three men walking with them sometimes entreating them to return and at others threatening them with their waddies if they persisted in going on.   It was night when the party reached Northdown and as the blacks seldom travel after dark; there was no help for it but for all of them to remain at the homestead; and Mrs. Parker though very little pleased at her husband's absence having at present no serious fears for his safety kindly directed the men to look after the wants of these most unexpected and none too welcome visitors; thus poor Mrs. Parker entertained but most unconsciously the very individuals who had made her a widow.  Next morning four of Captain Thomas' assigned servants commenced a search for their master; the natives meanwhile remaining at Northdown for the females as sulky as black cockatoos refused to return to the tribe and the men would not go without them. But the natives had not been long at Northdown before the men of Captain Thomas began to suspect foul play as they could not extract any satisfactory explanation from natives as to the disappearance of the two men. Some of the farm servants taking the law into their own hands enticed the blacks into the most secure room in the house locked them up and placed a sentry over them. They were kept there until the boat returned to Launceston where they were all marched down to the beach put on board and sent off to George Town gaol which wretched place chancing to be empty at the time they had it all to themselves.   The search was kept up for ten days until the 9th. day of September when Mr. Alexander M'Kay the young assistant to the protector of aborigines (George Augustus Robinson) arrived on the scene with some soldiers and a black native woman known to our people as Black Sal. M'Kay an excellent bushman saw at once that the search was ill-managed and that the men who instead of finding anyone were constantly getting lost themselves. He decided to interview the natives in George Town gaol as the quickest means of eliciting the whereabouts of the missing men. He reached George Town on Monday the 11th and presenting his credentials was furnished with an order to confer with the prisoners as often as he pleased and with another one directing the gaoler to render him every assistance in his power likely to promote the mission.  On entering this abode of misery he found the prisoners in a condition almost bordering on destitution their wants most imperfectly attended to their cell cold and comfortless and themselves huddled together for a little warmth. [135] Though the weather was icy cold they had not been given a fire the next thing after food that a native had difficulty to dispense with. M'Kay was angry and ordered the gaoler to provide fire and food hot tea bread meat and tobacco without restriction at which they ate and drank like mad.  One of the first effects of good cheer on half famished men and women is to produce good humour; and M'Kay noticed - after they had eaten to repletion - a very marked change in them all; the sullen frame of mind in which he found them having quite passed off. Black Sal had been most assiduous in her attentions to them even though she cared not one straw about them. She now took her place besides one of her own sex an extremely handsome young woman named Nung-in-a-bit-to and after a good deal of pleasant chit-chat about matters quite foreign to the real business she was upon the cunning old faggot by insensible degrees brought about the subject of the two missing men and by dint of coaxing and cajolery (after the ways of woman) wormed the whole truth out of the poor simpleton which was that they had been killed by the men of her own tribe. She spoke of Captain Thomas as Kandownee meaning a superior person such as a chief of an establishment as she divined him to be as distinguished from Rageo which meant a common fellow like a stock-keeper for example a class of persons whom the natives hated Rageo being part of the term by which they designated the devil Rageoroppa.  "When we had got to be good friends" says M'Kay "she confessed that they had died by the spears of her tribe and that two of the three men then in gaol were the most active in the murders which two she declared to be Mac-a-mee and Wow-ce; and she volunteered to show us the bodies of the murdered men."  This offer M'Kay accepted directly and he started for Port Sorell next morning accompanied by the two women and an active constable of the George Town police named George Warren.  The party crossed over the water at Port Dalrymple Heads and soon reached Port Sorell which they passed over and M'Kay reported his progress to Captain Moriarty and his search party informing them at the same time that the new arrival Nung-in-a-bit-to knew where the bodies of the murdered men lay but which from some caprice she refused to show to any other but his party. Her peculiar humour being respected they started under her guidance and she led them straight to where they died.  "She took us" says Warren "about two miles into the bush where the two women stopped and cried and would go no further but pointed to the place where the bodies were to be found." This was about one hundred yards from where they sat down. M'Kay describes the spot as nearly open ground and very inferior and that as they approached the spot where Parker lay many crows flew up from it. Sixty yards further on the body of Thomas was discovered. It was thirteen days since they died but the weather had been so cold that decomposition had not yet set in. Still the body of Parker presented a shocking spectacle that M'Kay can not speak of it without horror. Thomas seemed more like one asleep than dead.  M'Kay next went down to the port and gave information about the bodies and several persons went up with him to where they were. A kind of stage was built on which they were deposited for the night and they were sent on to Launceston next morning. A coroner's inquest was held directly but not concluded for several days owing to the absence of M'Kay. His absence was accounted for thus: - Nung-in-a-bit-to had informed Black Sal (in strict confidence of course but who blabbed directly) that her husband Killmoronia had taken some part in the death of Thomas and had retreated to the Surry Hills towards which M'Kay then directed their footsteps but the party was stopped by the Mersey River greatly swollen and in flood. Here he learnt that the handsome young native intended to give him the slip to rejoin her husband but she being too important a personage to lose sight of just now he marched her off to Launceston where he arrived three days after the first assembling of the Coroner's jury. M'Kay handed the young lady over to the police who very unwisely placed her with her previous companions the native prisoners with the result that when she came before the jury she contradicted all she said before; M'Kay of course being sworn to interpret her evidence.  It then transpired that she had passed the preceding night with the other natives and she so prevaricated that M'Kay at last told the jury that it was evident to him that a plan had been laid to get the prisoners off by contradicting her former evidence. She however still admitted their presence at the murders but contended they took no part in them. The jury however did not believe her story and all three men were adjudged to be guilty were committed to gaol accordingly and M'Kay bound over to appear at their trial.  The Attorney-General of the Territory Alger-non Montagu Esq decided against prosecution and the whole party of natives were therefore discharged but of course still remain in custody in order that shortly they may be sent captive to the settlement Wyba-Luma on Flinders' Island one of the islands in Bass's Straits.  POLICE INCIDENTS TUESDAY Jan. 3. John Garrit assigned to a settler at Brisbane Water was charged with insolence; but it appearing that the district constable in that neighbourhood had taken upon himself the liberty of confining him for several days upon bread and water the Bench dismissed the case.  WEDNESDAY Jan. 4. William McLoughlin was charged by his master with excessive insolence. On being desired to make a Welch rabbit he exclaimed "You're a d--d pretty fellow an't you? I'll see you genteely d--d first;" for which he was ordered to receive fifty lashes.  An assigned servant to Mr. Prout who had been entrusted to bring six cwt. of potatoes to Sydney but thought proper to appropriate half of them to his own use was sent six months to an iron gang.  Mary Palmer guilty of telling lies to the injury of her mistress's good name was sent to the factory for three months. [420]  Catherine Anderson assigned to a Mrs. Gaynor was then charged with patroling the streets at all hours of the night; but it appearing that her mistress kept her for that purpose she was returned to Government and Mrs. Gaynor was directed to be debarred the indulgence of an assigned servant in future.  James Pyne for inhaling the sea breeze on the South-head road for the last nine weeks instead of the smoke in his master's kitchen was sentenced to receive 75 lashes - 50 on that day and 25 on the following Tuesday.  Charles White was charged by his master with refusing to put a coating of Warren's rich Japan on his "understandings" - with striking his master twice on the temples - and with threatening should his master get him punished for these acts of disobedience and assault that he would shorten his days. The Bench ordered him to receive 50 lashes.  A TRUE NARRATIVE OF AN ATROCIOUS ACT OF PIRACY ON BOARD THE COLONIAL SCHOONER CALEDONIA.  SYDNEY May 17 1832.  Our readers are aware that the schooner Caledonia from Sydney was captured in December 1831 by run-a-way convicts at Moreton Bay and had not been heard of until this present time. The vessel was carried to the Navigator's Islands where the commander Mr Browning succeeded in effecting his escape from the pirates and has arrived at Sydney by the American whaler Mito. The following is Mr. B.'s interesting narrative of this atrocious piracy: - The schooner Caledonia of Sydney on a voyage to Loo Island for the purpose of procuring what was saved of the wreck of the ship America purchased by the owner of the Caledonia had occasion to put into Moreton Bay.  About 36 hours after at night the schooner was boarded by 11 armed men who immediately took possession of her obliging her master to deliver up the whole of the arms he had on board consisting of two muskets and two pistols. The master and part of the crew were called on deck and compelled to assist in getting the vessel under weigh; after which the whole of the crew with the exception of the master were sent on shore in the pilot-boat in which the pirates had come off.  So well did the fellows lay their plans that the watch on deck did not suspect anything till they were in the act of jumping on board. The crew when they got ashore of course gave the alarm and two boats immediately put off in chase of the schooner but were unable to come up with her.  The master having made several vain attempts to leave the vessel with the rest of the crew was obliged to assist in navigating her under the threat of having his brains blown out in the case of a refusal. Accordingly under the direction of the pirates he shaped his course for the Island of Rotumah they assuring him that he should sustain no injury if he did not deceive them but that upon the least appearance on his part of an attempt to betray them he should suffer death instantly. The duties of first and second mate were discharged by two of the pirates named Evans and Hastings.  About a week after leaving Moreton Bay the master was ordered by these two men and another named William Smith to go aft and take the helm when a man called John McDonaid one of the pirates was called up and horrible to relate was immediately shot through the head by Evans. Another of the party named William Vaughan was then called up fired at and wounded by Hastings and was then after considerable struggling on his part thrown overboard by the three principal actors in this bloody scene - namely Smith Evans and Hastings. [142]  Another of the party named Connor was next called up and compelled to jump over board; and a man named John Smith who was intended to share the same fate was only spared after the most earnest entreaty.  Nothing particular occurred after this until the vessel made New Caledonia for the purpose of procuring water. There she put into Port St. Vincent and filled up the casks. The day before she again put to sea Evans and Smith quarrelled with Hastings about some grog in consequence of which it was agreed that Hastings should be left behind and he was accordingly put on shore.  The vessel in due course made Rotumah one of the New Hebrides; nothing particular happened in the mean time except a repetition by Evans of the threat that the master should suffer instant death if he showed the least sign of an intention to betray them.  At Rotumah a friendly chief named Emery went on board but Mr Browning was so narrowly watched that it was impossible to communicate to him the circumstances under which he was placed. One of the party called Harry ran from the schooner and remained at Rotomah.  After taking two casks of water the master was directed to make for Wallis's Island where he was told it was the intention of the pirates to land in the whale boat and send him back in the vessel together with three Rotumah women who had accompanied the party from that island. He was however subsequently informed by three of the men that it was the intention of Evans to scuttle the schooner with him and the women on board.  Two of the party named Watson and Hogg who with John Smith had behaved kindly to the master declared to him their suspicion that it was the intention of Evans and others on board to shoot them. The vessel missed Wallis's Island but made Footona where some pigs and fruit were procured from the natives.  On the 29th. of February 1832 she made Davi where John Smith was landed together with the three Rotumah women. Watson and Hogg also acting under the dread of personal violence of Evans and the rest got into a canoe went on shore and remained behind. The master however was still so closely watched that an attempt at escape was impossible.  The vessel stood out to sea. Evans told the master that she was to be scuttled and he expected nothing else but to go to the bottom with her. When about 15 miles off the land however. the master was called by the pirates to assist in packing up some things to put in the boat; and about 12 o'clock on the following day the vessel was scuttled and the whole party got into the boat and stood in for Toofoa where Mr Browning and a man named Thomas Massey were taken by one chief and Evans and Smith by another.  The day after landing on this island the other three men came down with a body of natives and took away the boat. They also told Mr Browning that he was in danger of his life and wished him to go with them; but being in possession of a musket he declined doing so expressing his intention at the same time to leave the island by the first vessel that touched there.   After Mr Browning had been on the island for eight days the barque Oldham came into the offing and he went on board in a canoe. He there learnt that a report prevailed of the Caledonia having foundered at sea. Mr. Browning was asked on board the Oldham who was master of the Coledonia. He of course stated that he was; but the chief officer and some of the crew proceeding on shore the pirate Evans told them he was the master.  A suspicion in consequence arose and enquiries having been made among the natives by means of an interpreter Evans was immediately secured and put in irons. The other three men could not be discovered being doubtless concealed by the natives; but the boat which they took away was found at the place to which Mr. Browning learnt it had been taken.  Such is the gentleman's narrative of as an atrocious an act of piracy accompanied by deliberate murder as is to be found upon record. It is to be hoped that the remainder of the wretches who were engaged in it will yet be discovered by vessels trading among those islands pointed out by Mr. Browning and brought to condign punishment.  FULL PARTICULARS OF THE SAVAGE MASSACRE OF THE UNFORTUNATE CREW OF THE OLDHAM  H. M. Ship ZEBRA Captain Mackmurdo R.N arrived at Sydney last Tuesday 17th of July 1832 after a 19 week's cruise to the Islands and brings interesting intelligence including the following deplorable catastrophe - the outrageous massacre of the crew of the whaling barque OLDHAM R. Johnstone master. The account makes public another instance of the indignant retribution by the savage islanders which we must condemn and deplore but in view of the blamable behaviour of whaling crews we cannot pronounce altogether undeserved on the part of the unfortunate sufferers.  On the 20th May 1832 the ZEBRA discovered at Waffis's Island a vessel at anchor inside the reef close inshore apparently dismantled and without any colours. The ZEBRA then made signals for a pilot but could not procure one; and as the natives would hold no intercourse strong suspicions were excited; and although the only passage which could be discovered after sailing two days around the Island appeared extremely dangerous she attempted to pass it on the 22nd but grazing the larboard reef and having baffling winds she was compelled to bear up and run out to sea again.  On the 23rd. two armed boats were sent in to examine the stranger. In the evening they returned with one man killed and reported that the vessel proved to be the OLDHAM of London whose crew had been (with the exception of one boy) killed by the natives. After a native chief had cut down the man the ZEBRA'S people already maddened at the fate of the OLDHAM'S crew became furious and killed or drove overboard every native found on board her. A whale boat full of natives going off to the assistance of the chief were driven overboard by the 12 lb. carronade of the pinnace.  From the dismantled state of the ship all her yards and sails having been taken away and her standing and running rigging cut combined with the want of ammunition and the distance from the ZEBRA the commanding officer was compelled to abandon her. The same evening she appeared to be on fire; and on the 25th. while seeking for another entrance the ZEBRA fell in with the barque CAROLINE of Hobart Town bound to Wallis's Island. From her she procured the mate of the late BURK schooner of London (which vessel had been wrecked on the 18th April last outside the entrance) as pilot. She accordingly passed through the reef the next day followed by the CAROLINE and anchored within two miles of the burning wreck. Every exertion was used to extinguish the fire but without effect; and on the 28th she went down at her anchors in about 7 fathoms water. On the second day the ZEBRA opened a communication with the chiefs several of whom came off bringing with them Craven Nicholson the boy the only survivor from whom it is learnt that the massacre was occassioned by the wanton aggression of the master and crew. Some articles of property were delivered up and after once more placing relations upon an amicable footing the ZEBRA proceeded to Rotumah where she arrived on the 7th June. She there apprehended John Palmer a runaway convict in the HASHMY of Sydney.  DEPOSITION OF THE SOLE SURVIVOR FROM THE WHALING BARQUE OLDHAM.  On or about the 26th or 27th March 1832 the barque OLDHAM of London - Skelton Esquire of London owner and Robert Johnstone of Lavisham-lane Blackheath master anchored in the harbour of Wallis's Island South Pacific Ocean and found lying there the British ship HARRIET of London and the American whalers Milo of New Bedford and the ALENCIA of Edgar Town.  On or about the 3rd or 4th April the native girl who was living on board with the captain ran away and the next day he went on shore with an armed boat and demanded her. The chiefs ordered her to be brought down to the beach and told him (the captain) they would kill her if he wished: at the same time the boat's crew were forcing the women into the boat against their consent.  About this time three men who had deserted from the British ship CORSAIR entered on board the OLDHAM leaving their clothes in the bush. On going on shore for them some days afterwards they discovered that some of them had been stolen; they returned on board and stated this to the captain who sent two boats to search the native huts for them. They returned bringing some clothes and a quantity of beads tappa mats fish-hooks &c which they had plundered. Some of the old mats and tappas were returned.  The three vessels before mentioned sailed leaving us alone in the harbour. On or about the 11th April several natives came on board; the captain being in a state of intoxication took two of them into the cabin showed them muskets and other arms and told then it was his intention to go on shore the next day and kill the king desiring a negro man named Ruebins who lived on shore to tell them so. The moment they understood this a native went out to the jibboom end and hailed the natives on shore. Two canoes immediately came off.  One of our men who was on the main-chain saw them (the natives) handling cutlasses and axes out of the canoes. He informed the captain of it who immediately ordered them out of the ship. They obeyed and said they would return next day with cocoa-nuts: they accordingly came at daylight and gave away their cocoa-nuts without asking for payment.  At breakfast time the waist-boat [sic] with the second mate four men and a boy went to the King's village to search for four New Zealanders who ran away. About nine o'clock one of our men told the captain that the native women were jumping overboard and that the men were collecting aft. At this time the captain who was on the quarter-deck in liquor and swearing was cut down with an axe and killed and at the same moment I was struck on the head with an axe by a chief who afterwards knocked me down the companion ladder with the flat part of it. He followed me down and struck me on my leg; but seeing a New Zealander preparing to fire upon him with a musket he left me and killed him. During this time I escaped and hid myself behind some casks. Therefore I only saw the captain and the New Zealander killed.  The next day I heard a Portuguese and some Woahoamen talking; I called to the former who gave me some biscuit and water and told me that Captain Russel of an English whaler (outside the reefs) had been alongside but on finding what had taken place he returned on board and was then firing upon us from his ship and said the natives wanted powder to return it. I told him I did not know where it was. He also told me the ship was under weigh and going farther up and that all our people had been killed.  Shortly afterwards he brought a chief's sister to me and she with the chief (the same who cut me down) prevailed upon the other natives to save my life. They afterwards took me on shore and treated me with kindness and affection. The boat's crew who went on shore were (with three Americans belonging to a whaler) also killed. The Woahoa natives assisted the islanders in working the ship up; but I have every reason to believe they acted from compulsion. The leading chief in this melancholy affair was Tauoroa who was killed afterwards by the ZEBRA'S crew when the OLDHAM was boarded by them. The ship had between and 600 barrels of oil on board.  (signed) CRAVEN NICHOLSON.  Sydney September 7th 1832  Sir  Your well known benevolent mind and the kindness I experienced on my arrival here from England in 1820 emboldened me to hope a pardon for my present intrusion.  I believe you some months since received a Memorial from Mrs. Raine formerly Matron of the Female Factory - to several other gentleman she sent similar ones all of whom she assured me were her sincere friends and would enable her to pay the debts (trifling as she called them) then hanging over her head - impressed with this idea and having a darling boy nine years of age my life at the age of seventy two very uncertain I was induced to marry her in March last. - I very soon discovered she was a very different woman from that which she was prior to our marriage and that so far from having gained a friend and protector for my child I had created an enemy - I also found there were heavy debts which it was not in any power to pay a part of which I need not explain as you will most probably have seen my Advertisements in the Sydney Newspapers - I am now reduced to the extreme of poverty and distress and have it in contemplation (if I am able) to get my dear boy into the Orphan School and myself into the Receptacle for the Destitute - When I left my wife which I did by Legal Advice I went accompanied by my son to a Lodging where the business of an Agent in which I was then engaged fabling off. I contracted a debt there to the amount of upwards of six pounds and not being able to pay it the Landlord not only turned us out of the house but detains our Clothes - I have since received a small pecuniary assistance from Mr. Jones (of Hunter Street) and Mr. James Foster (at Mr. Nortons) without which we must have been without food or a place to lay our heads in. - I have been twice arrested for small sums which with the blessing of God I found friendly assistance to save me from the horrors of a Gaol.  I should be intruding too far on your time by entering more at large into the distressed state in which I am now placed I will only add my humble and respectful hope that I may experience your benevolent assistance in relieving me from the present torture of poverty and distress and if it should be in your power to obtain some situation for me in your part of the Country I shall ever feel most grateful.  With ardent prayers for the health happiness and prosperity of yourself and family I remain (with the greatest respect)  Sir Your truly distressed and obedient Servant W.I. Speed  Launceston Van Diemens Land April 1832 Messrs Fleming & Hope Glasgow  Gentlemen  I had the pleasure of addressing you in May last in reply to your favour of the 3rd Decr. 1830 and gave you the history of the Box of tapes as well as the Bale of Carpeting which I informed you had met with a most unfortunate fate in being sold and handed over to the late firm of Payne and Ash who some time afterwards failed and has not as yet paid one farthing to the Several Creditors and leaving me minus 800£.  Since this I have had the pleasure of receiving your favour of the 17th September last per Lord Byron wishing I would hand you an Account Sales of the Box of tapes which I should be most happy to do if there was any funds realised on them / suffice it to say that I had sold them at 40 prs on the Invoice.  I am however anxious that you should be no losers by the Circumstances and will be most happy to pay the Invoice price of the Box of tapes if that would be agreeable a letter from you signyfying your approbation I will remit the amount /[110] somewhere about 40 £ I think it was /  General Darling having positively refused to award any remuneration to Mr Atkinson and myself for the loss of the ECLIPSE we memorialed Lord Goderick on the subject sent one copy thro Lt. Govr. Arthur of this Island and another thro Genl. Darling. Some short time afterwards we where [sic] surprised by the receipt of a Letter from the Colonial Secretary of Sydney in the name of Genrl Darling ordering us the paltry gratuity of 600 Acre of Land jointly / it is worth about 2/6 an Acre. This was after Genl. Darling had left the Colony As the memorial was gone we backed it up with an explanatory Letter to Lord Goderick which we forwarded by Colonel Arthur and I am still in hopes that his Lordship will think it right to make us a more hansome Gratuity or Compensation or whatever they like to call it / all the original Papers are in Buckles & Co hands which Mr Atkinson sent home to you thro them and if you think it would be advisable for you to make another application on our behalf you had better make use of them. General Darling was the most Ferocius Tyrant that ever Governed a Colony / they think more favorably of General Bourke [?]   I Remain Gentlemen Your much obliged Servant  James H. Reibey  It becomes our melancholy duty to record an event of this nature and which for obvious reasons we on the present occasion do in as concise a form as possible reserving a general detail as far as we are acquainted until the termination of the usual Legal proceedings now pending. [289]   On Thursday night August 16 an Hostile message was delivered from G. F. Johnson Esquire merchant of Fremantle to W. N. Clark Esquire Solicitor of the same place in consequence a meeting took place the following morning at 5 o'Clock at the back of Richmond House each party accompanied by a friend and with feelings of deep regret we state that at the first fire Mr Johnson fell mortally wounded. The unfortunate Gentleman was immediately conveyed into Richmond House attended by Surgeon Harrison and shortly after by Surgeon Langly who came express a litter being provided Mr Johnson was conveyed to his own house where he lingered until the following morning when he expired universally regretted.  Thus fell in the prime of life a gentleman of the highest respectability and talent leaving his antagonist (a gentleman equally respectable) in a state of mind past our powers of description. On Sunday the 19th the remains of Mr Johnson were consigned to the silent Tomb attended by a host of sorrowing friends - peace to the ashes of the brave! Immediately after the sad event Mr Clark Captain W. T. Graham and T. N. YouI Esquire appeared before George Leake Esqr J.P and were bound over to appear at the Petty Sessions which was held the following Monday before The Honourable I. Mackie Esqr MC. George Leake Esqr and The Revd Mr Whittenoom when after a patient investigation the parties were committed to prison. An express was immediately dispatched to Perth and His Honor The Lt. Governor was pleased to sanction bail being taken for Mr Youl & Capt Graham who were accordingly liberated the same evening Wm. Lamb Esqr and Mr W. Samson being surety for Mr Youl and Wm. Lamb Esqr. & Mr R. Lewis for Captain Graham the latter gentlemen offered £1000 each bail for Mr Clark which was declined. The greatest commiseration has been shown by the Magistrates. and all Parties to the survivor on this unhappy occasion. After the approaching trial we will give every particular connected with the event.  I think you will be constrained to admit that a punishment by which the offender is stripped of all his property - deprived of his liberty - shut out from intercourse with his family totally separated from them - denied every comfort placed on board a transport - subjected there to the most summary discipline - exposed to ill usage from criminals still worse than himself - conveyed to a distant country in the condition of a slave - then assigned to an unknown master whose disposition temper and even caprice he must consult at every turn and submit to every moment or incur the risk of being charged with insubordination which if proved before the magistrate will be followed by corporal punishment or removal to the service of the Crown where his lot will be still more severe according to the degree and nature of his offences. He has indeed by the regulations of the government sufficient food and clothing but the dread of his master's frown is to him what the drawn sword was over the head of Dionysius's courtier! [...] [149]  The spirit of the convict however is not subdued by unmingled Severity. Encouragement forms part of the plan by which he is reclaimed; and the circumstances under which he is placed are very favourable to his reformation as well as to his punishment. His mind is not dissipated by the example and advice of idle and wicked persons not under a similar restraint with himself. There is presented to him the choice of two opposite paths. The one after patient endurance of fatigue and a resolute continuance in its course will lead him to the possession of a ticket of leave. The other on the contrary will conduct him by a short cut to the government gang or the penal settlement where he will be subjected to every privation compatible with the maintenance of his health.  Thus it is that every man has afforded him an opportunity of in a great measure retrieving his character and becoming useful in society while the resolutely and irrecoverably depraved are doomed to live apart from it for the remainder of their lives.  THE COUNTRY  Beatus ille qui procul negotiis  Happy the man from business free  As ancient mortals used to be  Who far from Sydney's dusty ways  In sweet retirement spends his days  And cultivates the fertile soil  Which once confess'd his father's toil.  The drum and fife ne'er break his sleep  Nor cannons roaring o'er the deep  Nor does the Colonel's dreaded corps  With sticks and stones assail his door.  He cares not with the great to dine  And taste Sir 's sparkling wine;  Or on the weary Jury sit  And shake his sides at 's wit;  But - happy man - he gently twines  Around the fence his tender vines  And as the older boughs decay  He lops the useless load away.  Now in the valley he surveys  His wandering herds of cattle graze  And sheep unnumber'd pour along  Urged by the dog's discordant tongue.  Train'd by his care the opening flower  With fragrant perfumes fills the bower  And luscious fruits of purple dye  At every step delight his eye.  Sometimes at ease supinely laid  Beneath acacias' pleasing shade  Where gliding streamlets steal along  He listens to the warbler's song;  Or sleeps the sultry hour away  Till soothing zephyrs cool the day.  When on the distant mountains' height  The wonted blue is capt with white  And wintery breezes blow again  With chilling fierceness o'er the plain  Then at full speed the sportive horse  Leads forth his master to the course. [18]   Where the swift hounds with joy pursue  The emu and the kangaroo - Then sallying forth with murderous aim  He fills his spacious bag with game  While far and near the woods resound  As numerous victims strew the ground.  But if a chaste and virtuous wife  Crown all the pleasures of his life  And ever smiling ever gay  Drive all the cares of time away  Who - happy thus - would stoop to prove  The pains and aches of wanton love  And view the fair ones o'er and o'er  When Marshall's vessels reach the shore?  Behold she brings the home-made wine  Press'd from the clusters of his vine  And cheese and butter and a hoard  Of unbought dainties for her lord  Anxious alone in all her toil  To win from him a favouring smile.  And who amidst such joys as these  Would long for foreign luxuries - The crusty port the bright champaign  Or cordials wafted o'er the main?  At silent eve he joys to view  The flocks their homeward course pursue  And see the labouring oxen bow  Their languid necks beneath the plough  While as the twilight fades away  And night succeeds the passing day  He views the stars and planets move  In silent harmony above.  Rapt from the earth he fain would fly  Far from the glance of mortal eye  And leave his prison-house of clay  For the bright scenes of endless day.  The merchant said and swiftly he  Resolved to sell his property  And far from Sydney's dusty ways  In sweet retirement spend his days;  But whilst he counts his thousands o'er  And calculates his goods in store  His greedy feelings soon revive  And still in town he vows to live.  In order to show the opinions entertained by some of the convicts as regards the colony I will give an extract from one of sundry letters which I have read written by them to their friends in England using the writer's own language and punctuation but altering the spelling. He requests that his wife will come out and bring their children with her and then proceeds as follows:  'I am perfectly well satisfied with my situation thanks be to God that has placed me under those that does not despise a prisoner. No my love I am [not?] treated as a prisoner but as a free man there is no one to nay a wrong word to me. I have good usage plenty of good meat and clothes with easy work. I have 362 sheep to mind either of our lads could do it with ease. The beat of men was shepherds. Jacob served for his wife yea and for a wife did he keep sheep and so will I and my love we shall be more happy here than ever we should be at home if happiness is to be found on earth. Don't fail to come out I never thought this country what I have found it. I did expect to be in servile bondage and to be badly used but I am better off this day than half the people in England and I would not go back to England if any one would pay my passage. [131] England has the name of a free country and this is a bond country but shame my friends and countrymen where is your boasted freedom. Look round you on every side there is distress rags want and all are in one sorrowful state of want. Happiness and prosperity has long taken their flight from Albion's once happy isle.'  He then alludes to the low price of provisions and adds: 'Except you live in a town you have no rent to pay for each man builds his own house no tithes no poor-rates and no taxes of any kind. And this is bondage is it?  There are some other amusing remarks in this original composition but the above will suffice to show that convicts lead not always the unhappy life they are supposed to do unless through their own bad conduct. The writer of the above letter bears such an excellent character that his master has sent to England for his wife and family with the intention of trying to be of some use to them. Those employed at the stock-stations have little to do save to ride about and look after the cattle or sheep; indeed much of their time is passed in hunting kangaroos or emus and a most independent kind of life they seem to lead as indeed I have already shown.  The white men at the different stations at least some of them have laboured hard to prevent the blacks and their children from coming to me. There is a great spirit of revenge manifested against me because I have opposed the abominable practice of living in adultery and fornication with black women and black girls. Your soul would be horrified in the extreme if you were acquainted with only a fraction of the circumstances that have come to my knowledge. A short time ago we had a little girl about 8 or 9 years of age she went away with her father. I am told that a stockman whom I know well is living with her as his wife and that this monster of iniquity has sometimes 3 or 4 such children living with him at the same time in this manner. 3 weeks ago a girl came here and remains (perhaps she is 10 or 11 years of age) with us. She had the disease and told me it was given her by a stockman about 3 miles from me. Narrang Jackey left a young gin (about 12 years of age) with us 2 months ago very bad of the disease. She got cured and Jackey let her remain. 10 days ago he was going into the bush and wanted to take Nancy away but I had too much reason to believe that he wanted to leave her with the stockman with whom Rachel (King Bobby's gin) lives and who murdered the child which she bore to him. I would not let Nancy go. The stockman infuriated Jackey's mind so much that he told a blackfellow he would spear Nancy when he came back. What did this disappointed stockman do but spread a report that Narrang Jackey had said he was going down to Munore to get a lot of wild blacks and to lay wait for me to kill me the first time I should go into the bush. And he told two black fellows King Bobby and another to tell me that Narrang Jackey told them this but they would not. They told me it was Keller the stockman that wanted them to say so.  (received 16 Aug 1834)  from Messrs. Watson and Handt   (to Hill)  With a view of showing what can be done by a single energetic mind it may be useful to give a slight sketch of what Edwards has accomplished. One of the first things he set about was to prepare materials for a substantial house for which purpose he made and burnt bricks and tiles out of the clay required to be removed to clear the foundation of the house thereby saving the expense and labour of carriage. He had to explore the country to ascertain where the best lime could be procured. This he found at the time no nearer than in one of the bays of Melville Water below Perth; whence after burning he brought it up in boats. The timber which was mahogany cut down on the estate was sawn and prepared by his son the carpenter with the assistance of another man; while he himself was the bricklayer and builder. The house is double consisting of two stories and is one of the largest in the colony.  In the farm-yard he has many ingenious contrivances to meet the wants and habits of its various tribes. His geese and ducks are provided with ample ponds in the sides of which he has constructed dwellings suitable to them where they find protection from the heat and security from the native dog the only animal they have to fear. His cattle and pigs are kept in fine order.  In the improvement of the gardens he takes peculiar delight and is very successful; having a good knowledge of horticulture acquired by serving an apprenticeship to a market gardener. The spot he fixed upon for his first one was a somewhat elevated morass on sloping ground separated from the house by a ravine and covered with rank vegetation owing to latent springs. These after burning off the surface he dug out and formed into circular wells of close and substantial brick-work rising several layers above the surface: from these wells at different elevations he is enabled to conduct the water in channels to almost every part of the garden. [401] When the last accounts left he was constructing earthen pipes for the purpose of completing his plans of irrigation and also for conveying water across the ravine to the height on which the house is situated. In this garden and in another larger one hereafter to be noticed almost every kind of vegetable and as many sorts of fruit-trees as have been introduced from tropical and extra-tropical countries are found to flourish. Among the former was the mangel-wurzel already mentioned as having a root six feet in circumference; the tomato grows here luxuriantly weighed down with the load of its beautiful fruit which gives so fine a flavour to sauces soups &c. Among the fruit-trees he has raised many hundred almonds and Cape-gooseberries the latter a delicious fruit producing every month; and also figs and vines in abundance the latter bearing grapes of a fine and rich flavour.  In front of the house are about two hundred acres of rich meadow encircled nearly by the river. The situation of a part of this meadow attracted his notice from its being inclosed between the river and a natural moat of a semicircular form. This moat he dug out to a considerable depth and breadth throwing the soil of the inner banks of the inclosure which he faced with a firm wall of green turf and made to slope down gradually on the inner side. Along the whole extent of this sloping bank which is of the finest alluvial soil are planted in profusion vegetables and fruit-trees. The bank shelves down to a walk made all round within the inclosure an area of about thirty acres. Most of the interior is now under cultivation bearing crops of wheat oats and barley. He intends both here and in the garden before mentioned to shelter some of the walks from the Sun by trellised vines. There is also adjoining this latter garden and separated from the house by the ravine fore alluded to a small rocky hill favourable for vines and which he has marked out for a vineyard. In addition to the above is laid out - in front of the house and on the slope of the hill where there are no springs - a winter garden in which he has displayed considerable ingenuity and taste. His two smaller gardens are from one to two acres each.  In his agricultural pursuits Edwards has been equally successful. He seems to have acquired his knowledge of farming while following his trade of a master-brickmaker in Gloucestershire in consequence of having purchased a few acres of the Forest of Dean which he reclaimed and made into a farm. At times when the necessaries of life have been very scarce and dear in the colony he has provided for his family in abundance; and has added to their comforts within the last two years by availing himself of his knowledge of malting and brewing. [402] This indefatigable man has found time for performing the location duties on an adjoining estate the half of which amounting to from two to three thousand acres he obtained as a return from the owner himself a merchant at Fremantle. He also made the bricks and constructed the walls of a dwelling-house recently erected by Mr. Bull who resides within a mile of him. The writer has occupied a much larger space than he intended with these minute details partly to do justice to a faithful and valuable Servant and principally with a view of conveying some useful instruction to those who may have yet to learn what are the requisites for a successful colonist.  Observations on the LAMENTABLE MUTINY at NORFOLK ISLAND in 1834 together with the AWFUL DISCLOSURE at the TRIAL of the Mutineers before His Honour MR JUSTICE BURTON Judge of the Supreme Court NEW SOUTH WALES.  Norfolk Island is admirably adapted to the purpose of a penal settlement being remote from the Coast of New Holland and from any of the Islands of the Pacific Ocean; almost inaccessible by boats ; it possesses all that natural beauty which renders the islands of the Pacific so attractive.  Nature has been profuse in her bountiful decorations and thus the contrast is more striking between it and the use to which it is applied - between those beautiful works of the Creator which praise Him and of Men who praise Him not!  But even in that use to which it is applied it might be expected that the soft beauty of the place should have its effect upon the hearts not wholly hardened by the searing effects of Vice. But so it is that the wretched Mortals who are doomed some of them for a term and some for life to labour during that period upon its soil under strict surveillance and control and the hours of whose repose are passed in the Solitary Cell or in the guarded Ward associated with one another Evil Men with Men more Evil - appear to gather no softening effect from the beauties of the Creation around them but to make a Hell of that which else might be a Heaven.  Little has indeed been done and until lately nothing to render their captivity in that place of torment such as they have made it productive of that moral improvement in them which should restore the Creator's image to their souls.  Norfolk Island became a penal settlement of New South Wales in the year 1826; it was not until after a lapse of more than ten years that its wretched inmates received any such Reproof Consolation or Instruction as the Church gives to its Members; they were in the strongest sense of the term souls "cut off from the Congregation of the Lord" and delivered over to Satan What wonder then if they became in temper disposition and habits like to those whom he leads captive at his will and their place of torment like his.  It became the duty of the Writer of these Observations to visit Norfolk Island in the year 1834 as one of the Judges of the Supreme Court The Court having been adjourned to that Settlement in the execution of a power which the Judges possessed under an Act of the Imperial Parliament for the purpose of trying some of the prisoners who stood charged with the Offence of rising upon their Guard then consisting in Officers and Private Soldiers of about 120 men.  It was a deep laid well concocted and very generally extended Conspiracy the object of which was to seize and disarm the Guard to seize the Commandant - with the weapons thus obtained to render themselves Masters of the Island and having done this to entrap the next Government vessel which should visit them with supplies and was then expected and finally make their escape by its means.  This plan well concerted and secretly kept for more than three months was at length attempted Several convenient posts were seized by the Conspirators Prisoners in confinement were released and the irons of those who were in irons at the time removed. The Hospital which was adjacent to the front point of attack was occupied by a large number of them without detection the Guard appointed to receive and conduct to their daily labour those Prisoners who being of the most desperate sort or being Respites in irons from Capital Sentences were confined in the Gaol were suddenly attacked in front and rear and some of them thrown down and their muskets forcibly wrested from them.  A simultaneous movement was made in other parts of the Settlement at the same instant - tool-houses were broken open and large bodies of the Conspirators armed with these weapons made for the same point to support their leaders - and all the Prisoners on the Island who were bad enough to be entrusted by the Conspirators with any knowledge of their plan were ready at their posts to take their part in it.  The Guard however which had been attacked owing to some wavering on the part of those Prisoners who attacked in front extricated themselves with the exception of two or three who were grappled by the boldest and most determined of their assailants escaped to a distance and opened fire upon them which dispersed the attacking party killing some and wounding others. [153]  The firing alarmed the Commandant and the Officers of the Establishment and the rest of the Military; and the affair ended in some being immediately captured others taking to secret retreats in the Island one of them armed with a musket which he had wrested from a Soldier and in others being recognised who were afterwards pursued and secured.  As many of the Conspirators as could he detected were lodged in Gaol loaded with irons and there awaited the result of the Commandant's report of the circumstances to the Governor at Sydney the consequence of which was an application to the Judges of the Supreme Court to make such arrangements for the trial of the offenders as might prevent the necessity of their being brought with the witnesses on both sides to Sydney for the purpose.  The Writer of these Observations accordingly proceeded on that melancholy duty in H.M.S. Alligator and arrived at Norfolk Island in July 1834 and found 130 Prisoners in confinement on that charge.  For their share in this Offence as Principals and Accessories before the fact fifty-five Prisoners were selected for trial by the Crown officers as being considered Ringleaders and against whom also evidence confirmatory of that of some of the accomplices who were admitted as witnesses could be obtained.  In the course of these trials which occupied ten days eighty-seven different witnesses were examined on the part of the Prosecution and for the Prisoners many of the principal witnesses five or six times over during which they underwent a course and mode of Crossexamination by the Prisoners such as no Advocate in the World could conduct; and revealed to the Court a picture of depravity which it may be asserted no human Judge ever had revealed to him before.  This will be fully understood when it is explained that some of the principal witnesses against the Conspirators were Prisoners who had been concerned in the affair as deeply as themselves that almost all of them were their fellow prisoners; that they had passed days and nights together in confinement so many as 120 in a single ward that they had been intimately associated in the commission of other crimes of deeper stain that their occupation and they had none of a Holier kind during their hours of respite from labour and those which should be given to repose was the relation of crimes in which they had been engaged or to which they were privy no Conspirator could desire a better knowledge of the character of his companions than was thus obtained; they proved indeed by their searching questions on cross-examination and abundantly proved to the mind of the hearer by the faint and downcast denial of the Witness that they were intimately acquainted with each other's thoughts and words and works; and each particular of these was appalling.  But beyond all this the unhappy Prisoners themselves when brought up as they were in the order of their conviction (and of the number tried thirty were capitally convicted and received sentence of death) completed the abominable revelation by communicating to the Judge in earnest deep but calm expostulation the crimes committed there upon which to be now particular would not be meet; and he can therefore no otherwise describe the State of the Island than figuratively a mode of expression however which he does not believe to exceed the reality when he says that the picture presented of that place to his mind upon that occasion was a Cage full of Unclean Birds full of Crimes against God and Man Murders and Blasphemies and all Uncleanness.  One of them a man who displayed singular ability and uncommon calmness and self-possession under circumstances so appalling to ordinary minds represented it to be a "Hell upon Earth" and such assuredly it was as far as the torment of that Region is made up of the company of Evil Spirits glorying in Evil Deeds; "let a man's heart" he said "be what it will when he comes here his Man's heart is taken away from him and there is given to him the heart of a Beast." [154]  He represented and others followed him in the same course that the crimes which had brought them there were not of the kind which should condemn them to such a state; that many of them had been decent men possessed of means of support and had wives and families in the world ; and they were condemned to the same place of helplessness and despair with those whose crimes were of the deepest kind.  Banished for life or fourteen years to a spot where the face of Woman is never seen - doomed to daily toil fed upon the most common diet salt beef and maize and water.  "Subject to the lash" said he to use his own expression "if a man looked at an Overseer or a Constable or neglected his work or committed any offence however trivial and often for no offence at all."   "Sentence has been passed upon us before" one of them said "and we thought we should be executed and we prepared to die and we wish we had been executed then. It was no mercy to send us to this place; I do not ask for life I do not want to be spared on condition of remaining here; life is not worth having on such terms."  "I pleaded guilty" said another "to the charge against me because I knew I was guilty and as the only expiation I could make for my offence."  "I have been upbraided by my fellow prisoners for doing so" he continued "because they say that my pleading guilty has been the cause of their being convicted. I was transported from Ireland for an offence of which I was not guilty that of cattle stealing and was again unjustly convicted before your Honour of a like offence and I was innocent of that and I committed the present offence to get clear of this accursed place."  Another took ingenious advantage of some discrepancy in the evidence to make a powerful appeal to the Judge founded upon his assertion of his own innocence and that his person was mistaken And finding that Appeal ineffectual and that he was sentenced to die he broke out in the most moving and passionate exclamations and intreaties that he might not die with out the benefit of Confession.   "Oh your Honour" he said "as you hoped to be saved yourself do not let me die without seeing my Priest. I have been a very wicked man indeed I have committed many other crimes for which I ought to die but do not send me out of the World without seeing my Priest"  Poor he was a Roman Catholic and after this he was taken away to his cell and in miserable agony employed his time embracing and beating himself upon a rudely constructed figure of the Cross which a fellow Prisoner of the same persuasion made for him of wood and incoherently and madly pronounced incessantly those brief exclamations for Mercy which such an one could teach him.  Others spoke in moving terms of the hopelessness of their lot and their despair and another spoke also of what rendered the state they were in one of utter hopelessness; and the statement which he made was perfectly true.  "What is done your Honour" he said "to make us better? Once a week we are drawn up in the Square opposite the Military Barrack and the Military are drawn up in front of us with loaded muskets and fixed bayonets. A young Officer then comes to the fence and reads part of the Prayers and that takes may be about a quarter of an hour and that is all the Religion we see."  To Expostulation such as was thus offered to Appeals like these the Human Heart could not be insensible. The wretched men were returned to their cells and the Judge to his sad meditation The result of which was that he asserted a Power not given him by the Local Laws of the Colony but of which the Local Law could not deprive him he reprieved the whole of the Prisoners until he should have had an opportunity to lay their case before the Executive Government and to obtain for those who should suffer the last penalty of the law at least that Religious consolation and assistance they so much needed.  Eleven of the whole number subsequently suffered those who were Roman Catholics receiving the consolation of their Priest The Rev Mr Ullathorne the Vicar-General and the Protestants that of the Rev. Mr. Stiles who when the warrant for their execution was transmitted to the Island were sent from Sydney to attend them.  Wellington Valley 22 January 1834.   Dear Sir  In reply to your letter dated the 8th Instant the missionaries state:  That with regard to the military no particular arrangements have been made but they have been provided with rations except spirits.  That relative to the fourth resolution the members of the mission agree.  That in reference to the 5th resolution Mr Handt being interrogated as to the nature of the several questions which he propose relative to his personal convenience remarks that he only proposed two questions first with respect to a servant and secondly to an increase of salary. Mr Handt has been able to procure a little soldiers girl of the military here stationed who will be an assistant to Mrs Handt for the present. Should however her assistance fail the missionaries agree that Mr Handt should have one of the assigned servants.  That with reference to the 8th resolution referring to that portion of the aboriginal language prepared by the Rev'd Mr Threlkeld forwarded here some months ago not having been seen by Mr Handt Mr Watson has to observe that having examined it he could find no similarity between it and the dialect spoken by the aboriginal natives in this district. Moreover he has been daily expecting for the last twelve months to receive from the Rev'd R Hill the remaining part of the aboriginal language forwarded to him (Mr Hill) from the Rev'd Mr Threlkeld by desire of the Venerable the Archdeacon in October or November 1832.  That the missionaries agree that Mr Watson should go at present into the bush among the blacks.  signed   J.C.S.Handt   William Watson.  (received 23 June 1835)  This Colony is made the receptacle for the outcasts of the United Kingdom; and is consequently loaded with a vast disproportion of immoral people. That the Colonists have derived many advantages from the transportation of Convicts cannot be denied - but the system has brought with it a long train of moral evils which can only be counteracted by an extensive introduction of free and virtuous inhabitants - and the only means upon which the Colonists can safely rely for accomplishing this vital object is the revenue arising from the sale of lands. It is for these reasons that Your Committee are anxious to record their opinion as well as that of the whole community of the Colony that the funds arising from the sale of lands should be appropriated exclusively to the purpose of introducing a moral and industrious population - that they consider this appropriation alike indispensable to the present interests and the future prosperity and character of the Colony - and that they regard the opinion expressed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies and approved by the Lords of the Treasury in the light of a pledge by His Majesty's Government that the Crown Lands of the Colony shall be held sacred to the promotion of Immigration.  Generally speaking the Free Emigrants are either men who have been reduced by misfortunes or imprudence from wealth to comparative poverty; or those who although they have never possessed wealth are yet eager to realise their expectations of acquiring it : - expectations which perhaps erroneous representations and a sanguine temperament have alone led them to entertain. All are poor at least in proportion to their views of aggrandizement; for we believe few leave their native land to settle in another who either possess a competency or have no other object in view than to earn a mere subsistence. To make a fortune therefore or at least to better themselves in a pecuniary point of view is the aim of all; nor do we deny that it is a laudable one. Their previous conceptions however of the mode in which this is to be done are frequently vague and unformed; and their knowledge of the difficulties they have to encounter is very imperfect; while their pecuniary means are generally inadequate to the end in view. [436]  Men so circumstanced and actuated by such motives are not likely to be deficient in enterprise and industry; though perhaps not always judiciously or perseveringly exerted. But it were unreasonable to suppose that Science and Literature would under such a state of things be generally cultivated; and without these it were perhaps equally unreasonable to look for a high standard of National character. Yet even a money-making and illiterate population may be distinguished by candour integrity and sobriety.  Next to the engrossing desire of wealth considered as affecting the morals of the Community we may class the love of tavern-haunting and tippling. The number of taverns which exist and continue to multiply around us is but too convincing a proof of the existence of these vices which we fear will out-last the causes in which they probably originated; - namely the want of domestic comfort and female society. It is to be hoped however that drunkenness will not continue to be a pervading vice even amongst the lowest classes in a Country in which the wealthy may possess all the luxuries and many of the intellectual enjoyments of civilized life - in which all who are able and willing to work can procure employment and in which every industrious and sober individual can live in comfort and independence.  We have already observed that we consider the too engrossing pursuit of riches as prejudicial to the cultivation of science and literature; and that the means occasionally employed in the Colonies to acquire it are too frequently subversive of candour and integrity. We may add that in a money-making community the shame of poverty is often more powerful than the fear of it. Hence arises on the part of many individuals a display of opulence which their real circumstances are far from justifying. Hence also those incongruities in buildings furniture dress and equipage which we fear cannot fail to strike the observant stranger. This love of display so inconsistent with the character and situation of settlers in a new country may indeed have partly originated. in each wishing to impress upon his neighbour a due sense of his previous circumstances and standing in society. But whatever the cause the effect is too apparent.  On Saturday the free females were landed from the Strathfieldsay. Of all the disgusting abominable sights we ever witnessed nothing ever equalled the scene which took place on that occasion. It is well known that the females of the Strathfieldsay are of a far superior order to those hitherto sent us by the Home Government - poverty being the greatest crime of the greatest part of them. It is true that a small portion of the number are not of that description which ought to have been allowed to have associated with the innocent; but that indiscriminate mixture of virtue and vice is not at present the subject before us. [51] Early on Saturday morning it was known all over the Town that the free women were to be landed at mid day. The Strathfieldsay was bedecked with all the colours on board and great was the preparation. About eleven o'clock some of the women were stowed in one of the ship's boats and then another boat went alongside and was filled - and others followed in succession. Those who had first left the vessel had to remain on the water upwards of an hour before all the boats were stowed when they were all towed together towards the New Jetty. At this time the mob waiting to witness the landing of the women could not be less in number than a couple of thousand. As soon as the first boat reached the shore there was a regular rush towards the spot and the half dozen constables present could scarcely open a passage sufficient to allow the females to pass from the boats; and now the most unheard of disgusting scenes ensued - the avenue opened through the crowd was of considerable length and as each female passed on she was jeered by the blackguards who stationed themselves as it were purposely to insult. The most vile and brutal language was addressed to every woman as she passed along - some brutes more brutal than others even took still further insulting liberties and stopped the women by force and addressed them pointedly in the most obscene manner. Any woman with one spark of the feeling of modesty must have felt this degradation of the most terrible kind and the consequence was that by far the greater portion could bear the insults no longer - scarcely a female was there but who wept and that most bitterly; but this again was made the subject of mirth by the brutes that were present. One of the poor creatures was so overcome that she absolutely fainted - but there was no hand to assist - no one present who appeared to have any power in preventing these disgraceful scenes. After the females had passed through the long passage the ordeal was not over; for men singled out the girls they fancied and went in pursuit of them annoying them till they arrived at the door of the house wherein these friendless beings expected to find security. The greater portion of the most insulting of the men were those apparently prisoners; indeed it appeared as if the whole town had been picked to select the lowest ruffians expressly for the purpose of insulting these helpless females.  Hobart Town 25th June 1835.  Sir - I have the honour of reporting to your Excellency for the information of His Majesty's Government the result of an expedition undertaken at the expense and in conjunction with several gentlemen inhabitants of Van Diemen's Land to Port Phillip on the south-western point of New Holland for the purpose of forming an extensive pastoral establishment and combining therewith the civilisation of the native tribes who are living in that part of the country.  It occurred to myself and some of the gentlemen who are associated with me that inasmuch as the Sydney natives who were living with me had become well acquainted with the English language and manners and had acquired habits of industry and agricultural pursuits they might therefore be considered partially civilised; and as the available lands in this colony were occupied by flocks of sheep and fully stocked it would be a favourable opportunity of opening a direct friendly intercourse with the tribes in the neighbourhood of Port Phillip and by obtaining from them a grant of a portion of that territory upon equitable principles not only might the resources of this colony be considerably extended but the object of civilisation be established and which in process of those would lead to the civilisation of a large portion of the aborigines of that extensive country. [389]  In pursuance of arrangements based upon these principles I proceeded on the 12th day of May 1835 in a vessel from Launceston accompanied by seven Sydney natives and proceeded to Port Phillip on the south-western extremity of New Holland where I landed on the 26th day of May.  On the evening of our arrival at Port Phillip we saw the native fires at a distance of about five miles; I then made my arrangements for the purpose of opening an interview with the natives by means of those under my charge. I equipped them in their native dress and early in the morning we landed. I desired the natives to proceed unarmed and they preceded me a few hundred yards. When we had advanced within half-a-mile we saw the native huts and smoke. My natives then proceeded quietly up to the huts expecting that we should find the tribe asleep but when they had got to the huts it appeared that the natives had fled a few hours previously leaving behind them some of their buckets and other articles.  My natives followed the track which appeared to have been very circuitous and after we had proceeded about ten miles we at length saw a tribe consisting of twenty women and twenty-four children.  My natives then made to them some of their friendly signals which it appeared were understood and in the course of a few minutes my natives joined the tribe and after remaining with them as I judged sufficient length of time to conciliate them and explain my friendly disposition I advanced alone and joined them and was introduced to them by my natives two of whom spoke nearly the same language and so as to be perfectly intelligible to them.  After the strongest assurances on my part of my sincerity and friendly disposition and that no harm would be done to them they proceeded to the huts where I gave them a pair of blankets each tomahawks knives scissors looking-glasses; and I affixed round the neck of each woman and child a necklace. [390]  As soon as I had distributed the presents they were informed by the interpreters that they might depart and join their friends and I left them and proceeded on board the vessel. They appeared by my conduct towards them highly gratified and excited and showed by their manner that the fullest confidence existed.  Some conversation then took place between my natives and the tribe. The object of my visit and intentions were then explained to them and the chiefs then pressed me to proceed with them to see their wives and children which is one of the strongest demonstrations of peace and confidence. Upon my assenting to this request the chiefs then inquired of my interpreters whether I would allow them to take up their implements of war which I immediately assented to and the principal chief then gave me his best spear to carry end I in return gave him my gun.  We then proceeded towards the huts and when a short distance from them the chief called out to the women not to be alarmed and I was then introduced to the whole tribe consisting of upwards of twenty men; containing altogether fifty-five men women and children.  I joined this tribe about twelve o'clock and staid with them until about twelve o'clock the next day during which time I fully explained to them that the object of my visit was to purchase from them a tract of their country that I intended to settle amongst them with my wife and seven daughters and that I intended to bring to the country sheep and cattle. I also explained my wish to protect them in every way to employ them the same as my own natives and also to clothe and feed them and I also proposed to pay them an annual tribute as a compensation for the enjoyment of the land.  The chiefs appeared most fully to comprehend my proposals and much delighted with the prospect of having me to live amongst them. I then explained to them the boundaries of the land which I wished to purchase and which are defined by hills to which they have affixed native names: and the limits of the land purchased by me are defined in the chart which I have the honour of transmitting taken from personal survey. [391]  On the next day the chiefs proceeded with me to the boundaries and they marked with their own native marks the trees at the corners of the boundaries and they also gave me their own private mark which is kept sacred by them even so much that the women are not allowed to see it.  After the boundaries had been thus marked and described I filled up as accurately as I could define it the land agreed to be purchased by me from the chiefs and the deed when thus filled up was most carefully read over and explained to them by the two interpreters so that they most fully comprehended its purport and effect. I then filled up two other parts of the deed so as to make it in triplicate and the three principal chiefs and five of the subordinate chiefs then executed each of the deeds each part being separately read over and they each delivered to me a piece of the soil for the purpose of putting me in possession thereof I understanding that it was a form by which they delivered to me the tract of land.  I have the honour of enclosing herewith a copy of each of the deeds executed by the natives to me which I confidently trust will most clearly manifest that I have proceeded upon an equitable principle that my object has not been possession and expulsion or what is worse extermination; but possession and civilisation and the reservation of the annual tribute to those who are the real owners of the soil will afford evidence of the sincerity of my professions in wishing to protect and civilise these tribes of benighted but intelligent people and I confidently trust that the British Government will duly appreciate the treaty which I have made with these tribes and will not in any manner molest the arrangements which I have made but that I shall receive the support and encouragement of not only the Local Government but that of the British Government in carrying the objects into effect.  I traversed the country in opposite directions about fifty miles and having had much experience in lands and grazing in New South Wales and in this colony I have no hesitation in asserting that the general character of the country is decidedly superior to any which I have ever seen. [392] It is interspersed with fine rivers and creeks and the Downs were extended on every side as far as the eye could reach thickly covered with grass of the finest description and containing an almost indescribable extent of fine land fit for any purposes.  I have the honour &c  BATMAN  To D. Coates Esq Missionary House Salisbury Square Fleet Street London England.  Wellington Valley Dec. 7 1835   Very Dear Sir  May these few lines find you in prosperity both in a temporal and spiritual point of view. Reviewed Gobat's Abyssinia the Hymn Book compiled by the Rev. Ewan Bickersteth and several reports of the Bible and Missionary Society which you sent me and for which I feel much obliged.  Though the great ocean separates our persons I remember our friends in England and on the continent frequently. No ties in the world are so strong as the ties of true Christian love.  This accounts for my addressing you for I have nothing particularly to write as my quarterly journals contain all the news relative to the Mission as far as I am concerned in it. This accounts also for my writing to my dear Christian Brother the Inspector T. Blumhardt in Basel and to another Gentleman and dear Brother in the Kingdom of Wuertemberg. I have addressed their letters to your care requesting you to forward them as soon as possible.  You are I believe anxiously waiting for success with regard to our Mission but we cannot rejoice in the fruit of our labour as yet we have however imparted instruction whenever we found an opportunity. I sometimes feel dismayed for want of success but Mrs Handt generally comforts me and stirs me up when this is the case. I endeavour chiefly to press the love of God and his Son upon the minds of the poor Blacks and have sometimes been encouraged in so doing but frequently I have met with a repulse. May the Lord soon appear with help out of Zion in the behalf of this part of his fallen family who are sunk below all others!  Brother and Sister Watson are pretty well at present and so are we all thank God.  That the blessing of the Lord may rest upon you and all connected with the Missions is the prayer of  Yours faithfully  J.C.S. Handt  To Rev. William Jowett Missionary House  Salisbury Square Fleet Street London.  Wellington Valley Dec. 7 1835.  Dear Christian Brother  Received your two kind and affectionate letters and feel obliged for the interest you take in our missionary affairs in this remote part of the world and among these so deeply fallen race of people. They are indeed sunk to the lowest degree both with regard to their temporal and spiritual circumstances. You are I believe anxiously writing for success of this mission but the time does not seem to be near at present. We are imparting instruction whenever we can meet with an opportunity and the blacks have thus received some spiritual knowledge but their hearts seem to be very hard and insensible and not only so but a great enmity against the word of truth is manifested. I feel sometimes discouraged with regard to them my wife however stirs me up again when this is the case.  My chief endeavour is to make them acquainted with the love of God in Jesus Christ and have several times found some encouragement in doing so but it has frequently happened that I have met with a repulse.  O that the Lord would pity and help them in their low and miserable condition! As yet we do not see them turning unto the Lord the time of their conversion however may come at an unexpected period. In the mean time the Lord is gathering into his fold many of other nations and languages and this is a proof that he is mindful of his promises and his regard unto his covenant.  Brother and Sister Watson are pretty well at present and as are we all through the goodness of Providence. That the blessing may rest upon you and all connected with this Mission is the prayer of  Yours faithfully  J.C.S. Handt.  To the Rev. R. HillMissionary House  Salisbury Square Fleet Street London.  Wellington Dec.11 1835  To the Rev. R. Hill  Dear Sir  Having Several times offered to Mr. Watson to take part of the charge of the secular business connected with the Mission he Mr. Watson in a meeting held on the 7th of December insisted upon the impossibility of liaising the secular business and on the necessity of having an Overseer. I objected on account of the expense that such an additional person would entail but when my remonstrances were of no avail I agreed that the matter should be transmitted to the discretion of the Committee and thus I signed the proposal. Should it be the case as I supposed it will that the Committee cannot afford to expend so much money I herewith again declare any readiness of taking the half part of the charge of the said secular affairs and farther offer my willingness to take the whole of the charge if the Committee think proper and to transact the affairs in as economical a manner as possible 'till the Committee be enabled to act more freely in reference to pecuniary circumstances. I shall at the same time attend as much as possible to my missionary duties.  Yours faithfully  J.C.S. Handt.  THE AWFUL CONFESSION AND Execution of EDWARD and MATTHEW MACCAVOY  Who were Executed at Haubart Town [sic] Van Dieman's Land; for the wilful Murder of 3 of their Fellow Transports and eating them as Food.  On Friday last EDWARD BROUGHTON and MATTH. MACCAVOY who were convicted of absconding from the Penal settlement of Macquarie Harbour were executed.  Whilst the executioner was pinioning the arms and adjusting the rope of the unfortunate Broughton the following statement was read at his express desire as a full confession of his awful crime.  "Broughton said that he was now 28 years of age and had been sentenced to death for robbing in England under aggravated circumstances at the early age of eighteen. He more than once endeavoured to rob his own mother and his horrible conduct was the means of breaking his father's heart and hurrying him to his grave."  "He was confined two years in Guildford Gaol and had altogether spent more years in gaols than at liberty. On his transportation to this Colony he had scarcely landed in Hobart Town when he commenced robberies. He was at last apprehended for an outrage which he had committed at Sandy bay tried and transported to Macquarie Harbour."  "Broughton went on to say that he was one of a party of five convicts which happened to be at one of the out stations at Macquarie Harbour in charge of one man a constable. The convicts consisted of Richard Hutchinson commonly called up- and-down Dick a tall man who had at one time a large flock of sheep and a herd of cattle at Bark Hut Plains between the Clyde and Shannon near the spot where Cluny Park now is the estate of Captain Clarke; of an old man named Coventry about sixty years of age; of a boy of a most depraved character Patrick Fagan about 18 years old; and the two malefactors Broughton and Maccavoy now about to suffer on the Gallows."  "Broughton declared the constable had shewed him many personal kindnesses and refused him nothing in his power; nevertheless on their departure he joined with his four companions of robbing him of every article he had not leaving him even a loaf of bread to subsist on though he was without a morsel and. 3 days must have elapsed before he could obtain any more from the settlement."  "And Broughton had besides at various times tried to be accessory to his death by letting a tree fall upon him without giving him notice or by other means for no other earthly reason than because he was a constable and the unwilling or passing instrument of flogging the men and he therefore hated him."  "One would have thought that these 5 men thus embarked in a most perilous journey would have been knit together in one interest for their mutual safety and protection. But the very contrary was the case as the sequel proved. They viewed each other with the most murderous feeling jealous of the only axe which they carried amongst them lest one should drive it into the head of the other for that was their mode of slaughter upon one another while the wretched victim was asleep."  "The demon of evil had possession and walked in the midst of them. Every principle every feeling of humanity was dead amongst them. Broughton called himself a Protestant and Maccavoy a Roman Catholic that is they had sprung from parents possessing those persuasions; but as for themselves they had neither of the least spark of religion; they knew no more what it was than the earth on which they trod."  "They walked in each other's company the one carrying his luckless body to the support of the other whenever it might be convenient for him to sacrifice him for the meal. [126] Fifty times worse than the wretched horde of Abyssinians who are reported to cut the flesh as they travel from the backs of the living beasts."  "As soon as the provisions which they had contrived to carry with them were exhausted the other four agreed among themselves to kill Hutchinson and to eat his body for support; and they drew lots among them who should be the one to drive the fatal axe into his head. The lot fell on Broughton who carried it into execution."  "They cut the body in pieces and carried it with them with the exception of the hands feet head and intestines. They ate heartily on it as Broughton expressed it. It lasted them some days and when it was nearly consumed a general alarm seized the whole party lest the one should kill the other. The greatest jealousy prevailed about carrying the axe and scarcely one amongst them dared to shut his eyes or doze for a moment for fear of being sacrificed unawares."  "Under these dreadful circumstances Broughton and Fagan made a sort of agreement between them and while the one slept the other should watch alternately."  "'We were always alarmed' said Broughton and Maccavoy's statement was the same."  "The next that was murdered was Coventry the old man he was cutting wood one night and we agreed in the meantime to kill him. Maccavoy and Fagan wanted to draw lots again who should kill him but I said no I had already killed my man and they ought to do it between them that they might be in the same trouble as me."  "Fagan struck him the first blow. He saw it coming and called out for mercy; he struck him on the head just above the eye but did not kill him; myself and Maccavoy finished him and cut him to pieces. We ate greedily of the flesh never sparing it just as if we had expected to meet with a whole bullock the next day."  "I used to carry the axe by day and lay it under my head at night forgetting they had knives and razors I thought I was safe. Before we had eaten all Coventry's flesh Maccavoy one night started up looking horribly and bid me come with him to set some snares to try to catch a kangaroo. We left Fagan by the fire and when we had gone about 100 yards he asked me to sit down. I had the axe upon my shoulder and I was afraid he wanted to kill me for he was stronger than me. So I threw the axe aside but farther from him than me for fear he should try and snatch it and that I might reach it before him if he did."  "But he wanted me to kill Fagan that he might not be evidence against us. I would not agree to it saying 'I could trust my life in his hands; and we returned to the fire."  "On our return to the fire Fagan was lying by it warming himself and I threw the axe down. He looked up and said 'have you set any snares down Ned?'"  "'No' I said 'there are snares enough if you did not know it.'"  I sat beside him Maccavoy was beyond me he was on my right and Fagan on my left. I was wishing to tell Fagan what had passed but could not as Maccavoy was sitting with the axe close by looking at us. I laid down and was in a doze when I heard Fagan scream out I leapt to my feet in a dreadful fright and saw Fagan lying on his back with a dreadful cut in his head and the blood pouring from it. Maccavoy was standing over him with the axe in his hand."  "'You murdering rascal you dog!' I said 'what have you done?'"  "'This will save our life' he said and struck him another blow on the head with the axe."  "Fagan only groaned after the scream and Maccavoy then cut his throat through the windpipe. We then stripped off the clothes and cut the body into pieces and roasted it. We roasted all at once as upon all occasions as it was lighter to carry and would keep longer and would not be so easily discovered."  "About four days after that we gave ourselves up at Macguire's Marsh (a hut belonging to Mr Nicholas at the junction of the Shannon and the Ouse or Big River) Two days before we had heard some dogs that had caught a kangaroo they were wild dogs we saw nobody we got the kangaroo and threw away the remainder of Fagan's body."  "I wish this to be made public after my death."  signed ED. BROUGHTON.  Witness JN. Bidsee.  Melancholy News of the Convict Ship George the Third A Total Wreck with the Loss of 133  Hobart Town Thursday 16 April 1835.  We have the melancholy task to detail one of the most awful and unforseen visitations of Providence that frail and mortal man is subject to. The convict ship George the Third of 400 tons Captain W. Moxey sailed for this place from London on the 14th of December with 220 convicts and a guard commanded by Major Thos. Ryan of the 50th Regiment with Lieut. Minten Assistant Surgeon M'Gregor and 29 rank and file. The vessel made the land on Sunday last about 11 in the morning and later that day in coming up D'Entrecasteaux's channel the weather being fine and the vessel going at an easy rate in the bright moonshine after passing all the reefs called the Actaeons about 2 miles further on struck on a sunken rock hitherto unknown and in a very few minutes was a total wreck with the loss of 133 souls out of 294. Such indeed was the suddenness of the fatal occurrence that it is almost miraculous that every one on board did not perish.  As soon as the ship struck the seas began to break over her. The ship was bilged and struck most violently so that no one could stand on the deck and many were washed off. In a very short time after about 5 shocks the main-mast went over on the starboard side and carried the mizzen-topmast with it breaking the weather bulwarks down to the deck. At this time the boatswain and officers were preparing to get the long boat out. The main-mast being gone they were obliged to cut away the lee bulwarks after lowering the gig. But in consequence of the rolling of the ship the tackle at the bow was entangled and the gig was swamped and lost. The jolly boat which had been successfully lowered picked up a few survivors from the gig and the officer in her Mr. Field was desired to go off and find a landing place as he was dangerously overcrowded with 11 persons in her. The boat proceeded up the river to Hobart-town and brought the first sad intelligence of the disaster.  In the meantime the fore-mast went over on the lee side while the crew were trying to launch the long boat to windward. But a heavy sea struck the ship and stopped them and floated the long boat on the deck. All the main deck was under water at that that time and this was scarcely 15 minutes from the first striking of the ship shortly after 10 p.m. The long boat was full of people floating from one side of the ship to the other and at any moment it was likely that she would be stove in but after much exertion the captain succeeded in floating her out of the ship.  The long boat was quite full having about 42 people in her so she proceeded to the shore about a mile away. In the boat with Captain Moxey were the Surgeon Superintendant (Dr Wyse) the chief officer (Henry Matson) the second officer (John Poore also a part owner of the ship). At last at about 2 a.m. they reached a place where they could land and 36 survivors were put on shore. The captain and five men proceeded back to the wreck but did not reach it until about 6 o'clock.  They were received by the people on board the wreck about 100 in number with three cheers as after the dreadful interval of 8 hours these survivors had almost lost heart and the sight of the boat greatly heartened them. The noble-hearted captain was in the bows and took in his arms every woman and child on board the wreck and also assisted every other individual into the boat including Major Ryan and some of the prisoners as far as the boat could stow them. It landed this time between 40 and 50 people. The boat again returned to the wreck and saw the schooner Louisa making towards it which fortunate circumstance enabled all the survivors to be taken off as well as those that had been landed on shore. The commander of the schooner with utmost promptitude and humanity distributed biscuits tea and provisions to all on board and thereby saved many from perish- ing from cold and exhaustion.  There were 220 prisoners embarked at Woolwich - 12 of them had died on board besides 3 children and 1 woman. There were in all 308 persons embarked including the crew and guard - 2 children were born.  There were 294 alive in the vessel at the time of the wreck. There were saved 81 prisoners 29 soldiers 3  officers 6 women 11 children 31 crew making in all 161 saved and 133 lost. Among the lost are 3 children 1 woman (a sergeant's wife) 2 crew and 127 prisoners.  Dr Wyse the Surgeon Superintendant told of the agonising moments on the prison deck soon after the ship struck - when the sudden shocks caused wild alarm - the prisoners were screaming in a most violent and agitated manner to be let out - they put their hands through the grating and seized the surgeon by the hands saying - "You promised to stand by us." [157]  "So I will replied Dr Wyse I shall remain here with you."  Two of the open stanchions forming the barricade round the main hatchway had been broken down and a few of the convicts were putting their heads and arms through the space. A considerable body of the military formed a compact guard round the hatchway with their muskets levelled in intimidation. It was at this period that the Sentries over the main hatchway in obedience to the positive orders they had received to keep the men below fired - and painful to relate that at such a distressing crisis two or three shots were fired and at least one convict Robert Luker was killed.  That man should add to the desolation of the scene by firing upon his fellow creatures can hardly be credited but it was absolutely necessary that the prisoners should be kept down for had they at that time got on deck the long boat upon which alone the survivors could look with any hope of rescue would have been rendered useless and a much greater loss of life would have ensued. By this action the prisoners remained subdued but they kept crying out that the water was gaining on them and the crashing of the rocks through the ship's bottom was dreadful to hear.  The moment the long boat was launched the guard were withdrawn and the prisoners allowed to come on deck. At the time the ship struck the surgeon had 60 patients 50 of whom were totally unable to help themselves being sick of scurvy in bed and only 2 of these 60 have been saved. Many of the prisoners on deck were washed away by the seas that swept over the wreck; at least 30 perished in this way or from cold during the night. There were 40 boys on board of whom 20 were lost. The great sickness among the convicts made the captain and surgeon very anxious to reach the land which was a strong inducement with the captain to go up the passage expecting the schooner to get a supply of provisions the general scantiness of which the surgeon attributed the inveterate fatal illness then on board.  When the melancholy news was received in Hobart-town the Government vessels Tamar Isabella and Captain Wilson's steam vessel Governor Arthur were instantly despatched with assistance with the Port Officer (Captain Moriarty) the Colonial Secretary (John Montagu Esq.) the Chief Police Magistrate (M. Forster Esq.) the Colonial Surgeon (Dr Scott) and Mr Grant the agent for Lloyd's. The steam vessel soon forged ahead and met the Louisa about 30 miles down the river and after supplying her with provisions it was determined to proceed on to the wreck where the scene of desolation was appalling. The waves had made a complete passage through and through the vessel - the masts overboard - the sides and bottom gone - and the decks and other parts which still hung together floating up and down with the waves - while the anchors were resting on the rocks.  Everything was gone there was nothing on either of the decks but the body of one of the convicts an old man named John Roberts (his third transportation) which was lashed to a ring-bolt in the surgeon's cabin. The poor creature it appears not being able to swim had lashed himself in this way in the hope of being washed on shore with that part of the wreck.  The conduct of the convicts on this trying occasion as well as throughout the whole passage was of the most gratifying and creditable nature shewing what can be done with human beings when duly humanely and intelligently managed as in the present instance by Dr Wyse. On one occasion near the line in drawing off some rum the spirit caught fire and was rapidly communicating itself to the other parts of the ship especially to two cases of gunpowder fortunately agreeable to the recent practice packed in copper. Two of the convicts Nelson and Jones at the imminent risk of their lives snatched them up though so hot with the surrounding flames that the copper actually scorched them in carrying them along.  The captain also reported that these two men together with a prisoner named Shaw as well as a number of others whose names he did not know were particularly useful in getting the boat away from the wreck.  The barque Neva of 337 tons Captain B. H. Peck left Cork on the 8th day of January last with 150 prisoner women nine free women and fifty-five children on board under the superintendence of Surgeon John Stephenson R.N. Her crew was twenty-six in number Captain Peck did not touch at the Cape of Good Hope but having on the 26th. April made the Island of St. Pauls in fine weather he hove-too for a few hours and obtained from the settlers on it some articles of food.  On the noon of the 12th. of May by calculation King's Island bore about 90 miles to the eastward. The weather was fresh and the Captain continued running until about 1 A.M. of the following morning (13th) when a good look out being kept the land (King's Island) was discovered. The wind was in a W.N.W. direction and blew strong - vessel under double-reef topsails close hauled on the larboard tack; the course was good to clear the Harbinger Reef & every danger known to exist to the northward of the Island.  At five A.M a reef was reported to be seen right a-head - put the helm down immediately. - the ship came head to wind and while in stays struck and carried away her rudder - the wheel fell on deck and the vessel being unmanageable payed off before the wind. In a few minutes she took a reef on her larboard bow and struck violently. A sea hove her broadside on and bilged her - the next that followed made a fair breach over c her and swept many of the unfortunate women overboard.  The pinnace was hove out and the Captain Surgeon and several women got in but before she could be shoved from the wreck so many women rushed into her that she sank alongside. The Captain and two others recovered the wreck. The long boat was then launched into which most of the crew and several women consigned themselves but she had scarcely cleared the wreck when a sea capsized her and the whole number excepting the Captain and the Chief Mate met a watery grave. These two a second time recovered the vessel.   She soon after separated into four parts the deck leaving her top and dividing formed two rafts. The scene now became the most heart-rendering that ever was witnessed by human eyes. The number of females some holding children up and at the same time drowning themselves was so dreadful that the survivors turned away from the sight with horror. On one of the rafts the Captain and several of the surviving women held fast; the first officer with some others clung to the other. They floated clear of the wreck and the hapless people after clinging to them for 8 hours were drifted upon them into a sandy bay. The raft upon which was the first officer being disengaged from the rigging and gear went well in shore and most of the people were saved from it. Those upon the Captain's raft were not so fortunate - a large portion of the vessel's foremast stuck through it and occasioned it to ground when about of a mile from it. A tremendous surf rolled upon the beach which broke upon the raft and swept from it every individual - the Captain a seaman and a woman gained the shore the rest of this ill-fated little band perished in the surf.  Twenty-two persons in the whole reached the shore alive - seven of whom died during the next day either from over-exertion or injuries received in the melancholy struggle for life. Out of the Neva's complement of crew and women (240) fifteen only have been saved. These poor people made the best of their distressing situation upon King's Island - built for themselves a tent out of a topmast studding sail and gaff topsail washed on shore and supported themselves upon shell-fish which they procured from the rocks and from the fragments of provisions that were occasionally cast up when it fortunately happened that the attention of some men who had been previously wrecked in a small vessel named the Tartar belonging to Mr Charles Friend upon the southeast end of King s Island some weeks previous was attracted by the pieces of wreck and materials that floated about and undertook a search round the Island. [159] Upon the northern end they fell in with the survivors from the Neva.  By the exertions of the dogs belonging to a sealer who had been passenger in the Tartar some wallaby were procured which proved of much service to the distressed people On the 15th of June Mr Charles Friend made the Island m the Sarah Ann bound to a whaling station at Port Farrie and took all the unfortunate people from it at some risk with the exception of 2 seamen and 1 woman who were in the bush and were not aware of the arrival of the vessel. With these Mr Friend returned to Launceston and arrived on Saturday afternoon 27th. June.  Every kindness that humanity could suggest and Mr Charles Friend's limited circumstances permitted was bestowed upon the sufferers until their arrival at Launceston when we are proud to say the Port Officer Lieutenant Friend personally exerted himself in providing for them every accommodation and necessary that no doubt proved gratifying indeed after the hardships and sufferings they had for so long endured. Lieutenant Friend in a most praiseworthy manner opened a subscription which he liberally started; we trust his example will be followed up by every inhabitant of the town and that a sum may be realized sufficient to reimburse the poor people for their pecuniary loss.  The following are the names of the survivors: - B. H. Peck commander; Joseph Bennett chief mate. Seamen - Thos. Sharpe John Wilson Edward Calthorp Thomas Hines Robert Bullard John Robinson and William Kidney. Female Convicts - Ellen Galvin Mary Slattery Ann Cullen Rose Ann Heland Rose Dunn and Margaret Drury.  Of these Robinson Kidney and Margaret Drury were left at King's Island. The Shamrock Colonial vessel is to be dispatched to King's Island to bring off those persons left behind and to secure any Government stores that may have been washed ashore.  Thus with the destruction of the barque Neva prison ship recalls the wreck of the unfortunate male prison ship George the Third at the entrance of the Derwent while it is still fresh in our minds. The sacrifice of human life in both instances is appalling: - In the first named vessel 224 human beings perished and in the latter no less than 134 making a total of 358 souls that have been hurried into eternity by accidents that we maintain should not have occurred.  We have a Colonial Marine that is now to be supported by the Colonists at an amazing cost and ought to be employed in the only way in which the Colony can be benefitted by its services. One of the vessels might with much advantage be employed in surveying the entrances into the Derwent - the coasts of the Island - and Bass's Straits. The loss of life occasioned by the ignorance of strangers making our ports which cannot be otherwise so long as they are suffered to remain unacquainted with the dangers that exist is agonizing and reflects much reprehension upon the Local Government.  If the means were not provided for the express purpose of rendering the navigation into our ports and in the vicinity of the Island safe we should be crying out against the British Government and upbraiding it for neglecting our interests. - It has provided the Colony with every necessary means to ascertain the existing situations of every danger that the mariner is liable to meet with in approaching the Island and it ought to be done.  After the establishment of the Colony for a period of thirty years - we have a right to expect at the least with the expensive Marine kept up a something approaching to correct charts of the neighbouring seas and coasts.  We cannot suffer this opportunity to pass without again imploring the Local Government if merely for humanity sake to cause the entrance into the Derwent & Bass's Straits to be carefully surveyed and made public and the improvements promised in the river Tamar to be commenced. What will be thought of our coasts and our harbours by Foreigners.  What will strangers think of these repeated losses? The consequences are evident. Merchants and ship owners will not send their vessels and goods without insuring them - the underwriters will exact premiums in proportion to the risk which is of course laid upon the imports and the consumers that is the Colonists have to pay it. We trust His Excellency will command surveying to be done at once and thereby prevent the recurrence of the dreadful calamities it is our duty to record.  The loss of three hundred and fifty eight human beings by shipwreck in less than three months is conclusive of the necessity for adopting immediate measures to prevent such awful shipping disasters for the future by instant surveys of our coasts.  STATE OF CONVICTS  In New South Wales 1835.  THE true nature of the Punishment of TRANSPORTATION is not sufficiently known or it is too slightly thought of by those who are living in a state of continual crime. To such persons this Paper is addressed with the hope that it may induce them to reflect and check their guilty practices before they bring down upon themselves the infliction of the violated Laws of their Country.  Extract from a LETTER written by a Convict in the 9th. year of his banishment to a Gentleman in London dated Montpelier New South Wales.  As regards the State of the Prison Population I have much to say. The Discipline of this Colony has become dreadfully severe; every year has increased its severity since I have been here. - Disobedience or insolence is fifty lashes - first offence not less than twenty-five; second offence seventy-five or a hundred lashes; third offence twelve months to an Iron Gang. Absconding - or Taking-the-Bush as we term it - is fifty lashes first offence; second time TWELVE Months to an IRON GANG and increased each offence.  "Nothing is more dreaded by the men than Iron Gangs; as when their sentence is expired they have all that time spent in irons to serve again as every sentence is now in addition to the original sentence. If a man is nearly due for his ticket of leave and is flogged he is put back for a certain time unless for theft and then he forfeits every indulgence. If an iron-gang man has served any number of years in the country he must begin again; he is the same as a new hand; he has to wait the whole term of years before he receives any indulgence. Now to judge properly of the Punishment I have mentioned you may ask - What is the Punishment adopted in Iron Gangs? It Is this. The delinquents are employed in forming new roads by cutting through mountains blasting rocks cutting the trees up by the roots felling and burning off. They are attended by a Military Guard night and day to prevent escape; wear Irons upon both legs and at night are locked up in small wooden houses containing about a dozen sleeping places; escape is impossible; otherwise they live in huts surrounded by high paling called stockades; they are never allowed after labour to come without the stockade under penalty of being shot; so complete is the confinement that not half-a-dozen have escaped within the last two or three years; they labour from one hour after sunrise until eleven o'clock then two hours to dinner and work until night; no supper. The triangles are constantly at hand to tie up any man neglecting work or insolent. Iron-Gang Men not allowed to be hut keepers cooks or other occupation as such is considered an indulgence; nothing but hard labour. Not one day of liberty will he ever enjoy; he will have all his sentences in addition to his original sentence to again. Picture to yourself this hot climate the labour and the ration and judge for yourself if there is laxity of discipline. It is to places such as I have described that the Judges now sentence men from the English bar - poor wretches! did they know their fate be assured respected Sir it had been well for them had they never been born." "H. W. D.  PORT PHILLIP RIVALRY  Sir  As might be easily forseen the excursion of Mr. Bateman across the Straits to Port Phillip is on the eve of being succeeded by others of similiar description. Mr. Fawkner is nearly ready to start for that place well supplied with every necessary requisite for a Settler and in addition to the usual munitions of war for either attack or defence such as muskets bayonets sabres etc etc he takes out two twelve pounders and some light field pieces with which he intends to join Wedgaree who in right of his grandmother derives his title from the elder branch of the Fudge Family whose cognomen is Fudgaree - Mr. B. deriving his strange title from the junior branch of that family.  Mr. F. takes out a quantity of rum and tobacco and for an extra bottle of the former expects to get a much larger grant than Mr. B as he does not reckon on taking less than five millions of acres and expects with his superior means to drive the rival of Wedgaree out of the field.  It appears from the best authority that the company of which Mr. B. forms a member consists of what is termed the "mistic number" of twelve irreverantly called the Twelve Apostles but it is not true "that his Excellency the Governor is one of the twelve" or that he has promised (as reported) to support their petition to the Colonial Department for a confirmation of their extraordinary grant because others might with equal justice make the same claim and the mode of obtaining it looks like an insult to the Sovereignity of the British Government of which Port Phillip forms a part.  It is reported that Hungaree son of Bongaree (seeing the temptation held out by making presents of rum and tobacco and creating artificial wants of which poor ignorant naked savages had no idea) whose father claimed the hunting ground about Sydney has given Governor Bourke notice that he will dispossess him unless he consents to pay yearly tribute in rum and tobacco.  Mr Fawkner intends to go on a more political and humane principle; he will only give a few presents to gain the good will of the natives but will give them the same right which they now possess over the spontaneous productions of the soil AND ALL THE OPPOSSUMS only asking leave to graze some animals which he will bring into the country and sow some garnivorous and legneous plants and vegetables.  It is reported but it cannot be true that the Sydney blacks are still rationed by the Government of Van Diemen's Land although sent on a private expedition to Port Phillip where they are still detained teaching the natives the use of arms and a craving for unnecessary wants which may at a future period make them troublesome neighbors to new settlers: and that Captain Pigeon and his company are placed on the "Aborigine Establishment" which forms an item in an expenditure of ONLY £1899 per annum.  Port Phillip is not a recent discovery; it is well known for the last twenty years and so is all the adjoining coast; the natives are poor naked savages who bivouac round a fire at the foot of a gum tree and sleep with their fret to the heat: they have no idea of DISTINCT DISTRICTS or boundaries they are here to day and gone to morrow and are the lowest scale of humanity; they cannot for a moment be compared to the Aborigines of America who attained a wonderful degree of civilization and have left monuments of the arts behind them which will descend to the latest posterity; so that a contract made with such people will not bear the least comparison nor has the most distant analogy to the one ATTEMPTED to be made with some half dozen roaming savages placed in the lowest scale of human beings.  A.S.  Launceston June 18 1835.  FISHER'S GHOST; A Legend of Campbelltown.  READER have you ever paid a visit to the town or rather to the village of Campbelltown? If you have then you must have observed as you strolled through the village a large unfinished brick building fast mouldering to decay which seems to have been intended at the time of erection for a store. It is now rapidly falling into decay and the freshness of the grass which covers the sward around it shows that whatever the cause may be the ruins are not much frequented by the inhabitants of the surrounding cottages. The unfinished building and the land which surrounds it were the property some few years ago of a man named Frederick Fisher who occupied an adjoining cottage of which scarcely a trace now remains.  Fisher had been originally a prisoner he had served his time in the employ of a gentleman in the neighbourhood and had removed to the town when he obtained his ticket-of-leave. Some years previous to the commencement of our tale he had received his certificate of freedom having undergone the sentence which had been awarded him by the laws of his country. He had also soon after he became free obtained a grant of a town allotment and had commenced the building referred to intending on its completion to occupy one portion of it as a dwelling-house and to convert the remaining part into a store.  Fisher was but a boy at the time of the commission of the offence which had led to his transportation. His relatives enraged at the disgrace he had subjected them to by his misconduct had taken little notice of him after that period; and as he could put no trust in those whom he saw around him placed in circumstances similar to his own he had consequently formed no friendship which might have enabled him to pass his vacant time; his education also had been much neglected in his youth by those very relatives who were so liberal of their censure after he had gone astray; it is not therefore a matter of surprise that his time should have occasionally hung heavy on his hands.  His own fireside presented few attractions to him; his conduct since his arrival in the colony not having been such as to afford him much gratification in the retrospect; the resolution of amendment he had made whilst in jail and on the passage out had melted like snow when exposed to the demoralizing influence of the example set by those around him. Fisher like most of his class flew for refuge from unpleasant recollections to the society which the neighbouring taproom afforded and sought for that which he found not at home in quaffing the flowing bowl.  The necessary consequences of conduct such as this soon became apparent his business to which on gaining his freedom he had paid strict attention was now neglected but instead of endeavouring by exertion to extricate himself from the difficulties which began to surround him - he plunged yet deeper into a life of dissipation frequenting the purlieus of the tap both day and night. His inevitable ruin became soon so apparent that his creditors resolved no longer to brook delay he was accordingly arrested and lodged in jail at the instance of one of their number for a debt of £150.  Although Fisher had been weak enough to allow the bad example of others to lead him astray he was yet far from having reached the pitch of depravity which many of his associates had attained: although he had neglected his business and spent in dissipation those means which ought to have been applied to the liquidation of his debts he had yet sufficient moral principle remaining to shudder when one of c his drunken associates named Worral suggested the expediency of entering into a scheme to defraud his creditors by making over to him the whole of his property which yet remained; making at the same time a private engagement that it should be restored to him as soon as he was permitted to leave the jail.  The persuasions of Worral who represented to him the ease and safety which he might thus revenge himself on his creditors and regain possession of his property without any incumbrance soon overcame the feelings of repugnance which he had first felt and he consented to make the transfer of all he possessed to Worral under these conditions. Mr. P. . - at whose instance Fisher had been incarcerated finding that he was not the owner of the property he had supposed consented after some time to his liberation as the only means by which he was likely ever to recover the amount of his claim. Fisher immediately on his release returned to Campbelltown exulting in the success of his scheme.  About a week after Fisher's return he left his house one evening with the intention it was supposed of resorting according to his usual custom to some of the neighbouring ginshops. Morning came but his continued absence excited no surprise as it was supposed that he had got so drunk the previous night as to be unable to return home. As the day wore on and no signs of his appearance a neighbour went to inquire at the various public-houses whether he had been there. He had not been at any of his usual haunts nor had any person seen him since the previous evening. Many conjectures were made as to the cause of his protracted absence but no feasible reason could be adduced until the afternoon when Worral returned from Sydney whither he said he had accompanied Fisher on the previous evening who sailed early that morning for England in order to avoid the importunities of his creditors who had lately been rather troublesome to him some of them having even threatened to lodge him again in jail This was corroborated by the fact that a vessel did sail for England on that day.  Worral's statements set completely at rest all the conjectures which had previously been afloat as to the cause of Fisher's disappearance and he was allowed to take undisputed possession of the property on producing Fisher's conveyance. Time wore on and Fisher's name was almost forgotten or never alluded to except by the deluded creditors.  About six weeks after Fisher's disappearance Mr. Hurley a respectable settler in the vicinity of Campbelltown was returning thence to his residence; he had long been acquainted with Fisher and it is by no means improbable that his mind reverted to his sudden disappearance when passing the place where he had so long resided; be that as it may however no doubt as to Worral's statement ever entered his mind. [173] It was about ten o'clock at night when he left Campbelltown; the moon had risen but her brilliance was obscured by clouds.  After he had passed the late residence of Fisher about from five to eight hundred yards he observed the figure of a man sitting on top of the fence on the same side of the road as the house. On approaching nearer what was his surprise to recognize distinctly the features of Fisher whom he had supposed then far on his way to England. He approached the figure with the intention of assuring himself that he had not been deceived by a fancied resemblance. The ghastly appearance which the features presented to his view on his nearer approach struck such a chill of terror in his heart as chained him motionless to the spot. The figure as he gazed rose from the fence and waving its arms pointed in the direction of a small dry creek which crossed the paddock at that place and disappeared gradually from his view apparently following the windings of the creek. The terror which overpowered the faculties of Hurley at this sight defies all powers of description; in a state of stupefaction he left the spot and endeavoured to obtain an entrance into the nearest house.  How he managed to find his way to the house he has no recollection but just as he approached it his senses totally forsook him. The noise caused by his head striking the door as he fell alarmed the inmates who on opening it found him lying in a death-like swoon; he was carried into the house where he lay for a week in the delirium of a brain fever. The frequent mention of the name Fisher in his ravings attracted the attention of those who attended him and conjecture was soon busy at work to ascertain what had driven him into such a state; his known character for sobriety as well as the testimony of those who had parted from him only a few minutes before forbade the supposition that it had been caused by drunkenness; and rumour with her thousand tongues turned the villagers' heads with vain conjectures as to its probable cause. On the morning of the ninth day of Hurley's illness he awoke after a long and refreshing sleep in the full possession of his senses and expressed a wish to those around him that the Police Magistrate should be sent for. William Howe Esq of Glenlee who then filled the situation of Superintendent of Police for Campbelltown and the surrounding districts was sent for and came immediately on being made aware of the circumstances. To him Hurley disclosed what he had seen and the suspicion of Fisher's having met with foul play which that sight had impressed on his mind. As soon as Hurley was able to leave his bed Mr. Howe accompanied by a few constables among whom was a native black named Gilbert went conducted by Hurley to a place where the apparition had been seen. On closely examining the panel of fencing pointed out Mr Howe discovered spots of blood. An active search Was commenced to discover further traces of the supposed murder but nothing more was observed.  It was thought advisable to trace the course of the creek in the direction to which the apparition had pointed and in which it had disappeared. Some small ponds of water still remained in the creek and these Black Gilbert was directed to explore with his spear; he carefully examined each as he approached it but the shake of his head denoted his want of success. On approaching a larger pond than any of those he had before searched the standers by observed his eyes sparkle as he exclaimed in a tone of triumph while yet at some distance from the pool "white man's fat sit down here;" as soon as he reached the bank of the pond he thrust his spear into the water and after some search he pointed to a particular spot in the water saying "white man there."  The constables were immediately set to work to clear away the water which was soon effected - and on digging among the sand the remains of a human being in an advanced stage of decomposition were discovered. It became now obvious to all that Fisher (if the remains which had been found were really his) had met with an untimely end. Suspicion alighted on Worral who was the only person who had reaped any benefit from Fisher's death; and it was remembered also that he it was who had first propagated the story of Fisher's return to. England.  Mr. Howe caused Worral to be arrested and the suspicion being confirmed by a body of circumstantial evidence he was committed to take his trial before the Supreme Court for the murder. The conviction that retributive justice was now about to overtake him had such an effect on his mind that he confessed his guilt. His reason for so barbarous a proceeding arose from the transaction mentioned in the former part of the narrative. Fisher overjoyed at the success of the scheme by which he had defrauded his creditors forgot to regain possession of the deed of conveyance by which he had made over his property to Worral. The thought occurred to Worral that if he could only get Fisher quietly out of the way he would be able to claim possession of the property in right of that conveyance.  Under the mask of friendship he was Fisher's companion during the day - and night after night he watched Fisher's motion from the time of his return from jail until the one on which the murder was committed. On that night he was as usual prowling about Fisher's cottage looking out for an opportunity to attain his ends when Fisher tempted by the beauty of the evening left his house to take a walk followed at some distance by Worral. At the place where the blood was afterwards discovered Fisher stopped and leant against the fence apparently wrapped in deep thought. The assassin had now before him the opportunity he had so long waited for and taking up a broken panel of fence he stole quietly behind him and with one blow of his weapon stretched him lifeless on the ground; he carried the dead body from the scene of the murder to the place where it was afterwards discovered and buried it deep in the sand. A few weeks after he had made the confession he expiated his crime on the scaffold imploring with his last breath the forgiveness of his Maker.  THE MELANCHOLY Affair of CAPTAIN GLUVIAS Late Master of the Bee Whaler.  On Tuesday Captain Gluvias master of the Bee on arrival from New Zealand waited on the owners on shore and was made acquainted with the state of Messrs. Wright and Long's affairs and the assignment of all their effects to trustees for the benefit of their creditors.  It appears that during the conversation Captain Gluvias was informed that the trustees shewed every disposition to satisfy all just claims as the cases of the Proteus and the Roslyn Castle instanced. The result was that as the Captain was going away he expressed his determination to haul the vessel alongside the wharf of Messrs. Walker the next day (Mr. Thomas Walker being one of the trustees) to discharge her cargo.  The cargo consisted of oil and bone - oil for Mr. Jones; oil and bone for Messrs. Wright and Long and oil for Mr. M'Gaa. The circumstances that afterwards occurred will be best explained from stating the case as it appeared before the police.  On Thursday two persons named Abraham Sharing and Woodhall were placed at the bar of the Police-office on the charge of constable Edward Sweenie who stated that about half-past two on Wednesday morning while on duty at the King's Wharf; he observed a boat approaching which he hailed; there were two persons in the boat but they returned no answer.  The constable went on to state that as he saw the boat pulling towards Captain Carter's wharf he then went round and observing that the boat contained a quantity of whale bone and a few other articles he accosted the two persons to know whence they had obtained it at so late an hour. They answered that they had received the property from the Captain of the Bee. Sweenie not thinking this account satisfactory took the persons to the watch-house.  In answer to the charge the two prisoners gave an account of themselves which was such to induce the bench of magistrates to discharge them and grant a warrant for the apprehension of Captain Gluvias of the Bee.  On Friday Thomas Gluvias the master was placed at the bar on a charge of robbing the estate of Messrs. Wright and Long.  Mr. E. D. O'Reilly the solicitor for the trustees and Mr. A'Beckett appeared to prosecute. The evidence which was very lengthy amounted to the following : - On the Tuesday afternoon before mentioned Captain Gluvias called upon Mr. Woodhall where he met Sharing formerly storekeeper to Marsden and Flower and had some conversation with them respecting the situation in which he was placed. After speaking of the precarious state of affairs of Messrs. Wright and Long he said the trustees had guaranteed to pay all just debts but that assertion would not protect him it only extended to the sailors whose wages would be paid but he (the Captain) would have to come in as a creditor. He also said he had property on board which it would be a pity for him to lose for the trustees would come on board the next day and seize all which would be sold.  Captain Gluvias then requested Woodhall and Sharing to come on board with him and assist in removing his property. Woodhall in his evidence stated that - in the conversation just alluded to the Captain wished him to assist him in removing some whalebone from the Bee to remunerate him for his wages; this he said he should acquaint the owners with and would either give it up or account to them for it when paid.  The three then proceeded on board the vessel where they saw the chief officer James George Bailey a New Zealander who requested leave of the Captain to go ashore. Captain Gluvias asked him how long he should be away The mate said half-an-hour; the Captain replied it is no use saying half-an-hour if you mean to stay two or three hours. Bailey then said he would stay two hours.  Captain Gluvias then remarked you had better take some of the crew with you to take care of the boat and bring her off. Bailey said there was only a man and boy on board who would be required for the watch; but being told by the Captain to take the man be Went forward to him but returned without him and went ashore by himself. [188]  The party then consisting of the Captain Woodhall and Sharing went down to the cabin and had some refreshment and returned on deck. The Captain and Woodhall went down the after hatchway with a light to select the whalebone leaving Sharing on deck. This transaction took place about half-past eight o'clock; the night was very dark.  The Captain commenced selecting the bone but observing a light forward he then blew out the candle and went on in the dark and handed up some of the bone. Sharing seeing a boat approaching the vessel told the Captain who jumped on deck and threw down the property into the hatchway.  After the boat had passed the Captain again handed up the bone with which they loaded the boat and the three pulled to Captain Carter's stores where the property was deposited. They then returned to the vessel to leave the Captain. When there Gluvias observed that he had got some more whalebone and that the boat might as well not go back empty he then handed up sonic more whalebone which with that previously sent ashore amounted to about half a ton.  While the bone was being handed into the boat Woodhall said "by God I'll not take more he has already got as much as will amount to his wages."  Sharing stated that the Captain had previously observed he would take nothing but what belonged to him. As they were about to leave the vessel the Captain threw a piece of sailcloth over the whalebone and asked Sharing if he would like to have a piece of pork to which he assented and received a few pieces.  Before leaving the vessel Sharing looked at the muskets in the cabin and observed to the Captain "you may as well let me have this one?"  "Very well" Gluvias said "it will do to shoot pigeons." Sharing and Woodhall then left the Captain aboard and pulled ashore where they were apprehended as before described.  Bailey the mate stated that the bone was shipped at New Zealand by the Captain; some of it belonged to the Captain. The Captain advanced as his reason for acting with secrecy that had the affair got wind with the trustees his property would have been detained and sold with the rest and he would after all his services have to come in as a creditor with little benefit to himself. Captain Gluvias declined calling any witnesses and the case was remanded to Saturday.  On Saturday Captain Gluvias was again brought up. Captain Maughan of the Isabella proved the value of the bone to be about twenty pounds. Mr. O'Reilly stated he had been to the Custom House and inspected the entry of the Bee's manifest which stated the cargo to consist of oil and bone part the property of Messrs. Jones M'Gaa and Long and Wright; respectively the whalebone stated two tons was entered as the property of Messrs. Long and Wright.  In answer to this the defendant observed that quantity of the oil and bone could only be ascertained when the one came to be gauged and the other weighed; he had not entered any of the bone as his own property as when he entered this port he expected to have disposed of his portion to his employers.  He was then asked if he had anything to say why he should not be committed on which he requested the case might be postponed till Monday in order to allow him to consult his counsel in whose attendance he had been disappointed on the previous day. The case was accordingly postponed. He had already applied for to be admitted to bail which request the Bench could not comply with until the examination was concluded.  After he was remanded he was removed to one of the cells of the receiving watch-house where he remained until the female prisoners were brought there when he was removed to the common strong room. About three o'clock on Saturday afternoon Captain Gluvias first appeared unwell and soon exhibited symptoms of a fit of apoplexy; he was then brought out of the cell and laid down on blankets on the floor of the passage a constable was dispatched to the nearest medical man (Mr. Campbell residing opposite the Police Office) with a request that he would come and bleed him. The constable saw Mr. Campbell who said that he was too much occupied to come over. A gentleman connected with the Police Office also endeavoured to induce him to come over but without effect.  Messages were sent to other medical men residing in the neighbourhood but none could be met with at home. Information was then sent to the General Hospital whence a cart was despatched to convey him to that place and Dr. Robertson remained in attendance to receive him. About half-past seven the cart arrived at the Hospital with Captain Gluvias who was speechless; every effort was made by copious bleeding in the arms and temples to relieve him but all without effect; he expired about twelve o'clock.  His head was subsequently opened by the surgeon and it was found that a rupture of some of the vessels had taken place producing apoplexy and causing death. From the appearance of the body and head there was a manifest predisposition to apoplexy but it appears that it was hastened in the present instance by mental despondency.  Since his confinement in the watch-house no one visited him and it appears that he was without the means of obtaining the assistance of counsel; the gentleman to whom he had applied having refused to interfere unless his fee was first sent. Captain Gluvias was at the time without the necessary funds but attempted to procure a loan of money on his watch. In this he was also disappointed and his watch had been detained in the custody of the police.  He never spoke a word after he was remanded on Saturday until he was seized with apoplexy. An inquest would have been held on the body yesterday but for the indisposition of Mr. Ryan Brenan the Coroner which rendered it necessary to procure the attendance of Mr. Hayward the Coroner of Parramatta on whose arrival the inquest will be held.  Our 'WALK' extended a mile and was difficult from the trouble we experienced in keeping upright. When arrived at the end we were bade to take the tools and exercise somewhat. We had hardly expected this; but we were permitted to take it very leisurely that afternoon and in fact for two or three days. In our weak condition the travelling was about all we could do. Our implements were the shovel pick-axe and wheelbarrow. At sundown we were allowed to return greatly fatigued. [119] The third day carts made their appearance which were quite large to be propelled by human muscles - the bodies measuring six feet in length two in depth and four and a half in breadth with the other parts to correspond. To each cart were attached four men. These men had leathern collars passing over one shoulder and under the other to which were fastened hooks that might he attached to the tongue for the purpose of pulling. Near the extremity of the tongue were two cross-bars against which the 'team' could push.  When the carts made their appearance I was taken from the shovel and placed in one of the 'teams'. Though the change was for harder work yet I was heartily glad for my hands were so sore that I could scarcely use them. This was the case with all our men. They had been so long and so closely confined and were so enfeebled that their hands were almost as tender an those of an infant. The consequence was that being compelled to labor with those rough heavy tools - for convicts are ever furnished with the poorest kind - the hands blistered and the skin peeled away leaving in many instances a good share of the hand raw. [120] I remember particularly the case of Orrin W. Smith who was a single man of considerable property in the States. He had never been bred to manual labor - was small of stature and naturally of a delicate constitution. His hands were more tender than most of the others; and when he was forced to swing the heavy pick it came sorely upon him. His hands blistered so that the skin peeled from the whole palm and inner surface of the fingers and even between the fingers. And still he was compelled to work on without scarcely a cessation leaving the very flesh upon she handle of his pick. The pick itself was too large for even a robust man of his size. Passing him one day with our cart and seeing him thus toiling the blood trickling from his raw hands- - I said to him 'Ah Smith you have a hard tune of it'. 'Oh my God! Gates I can never stand this!' he almost shrieked as he sank exhausted on the ground.  As the days increased in number so were our tasks increased in amount till we were compelled to do what their tyranny demanded. The superintendent of the station frequently came round and when there was not so much done as he fancied should be he would spur up the overseer and Hewitt the overseer would spur up the men most cruelly. The second or third day the superintendent Skeane thus came along. Says he 'How is it Hewitt that you don't get along faster?' Hewitt replied 'Some of the men are sick and the others are not strong yet' 'But' says Skeane 'I'll send up a doctor. He'll look into the matter. I believe that your company can add to a little' - meaning that more labor can be forced from them. Well she doctor comes feels of the pulse looks into the mouth asks a very few questions turns on his heel wills a 'Humph! get along well enough - not much sick: take a-few pills and go to work again.' Such was almost universally the case.  So long as we could possibly crawl about or could lift a finger we were brutally compelled to the task. The fourth day the overseer began to lay the work to us in good earnest. He was anxious to hold his petty situation and therefore strove to please his superior tyrants. So almost the first greeting from him that morning was - 'Come we must have some work done to-day. The superintendent says we don't make much progress here and the gentlemen are complaining too. The principal superintendent thinks you won't be prisoners long. He is coming out this way soon and we must see how much we can get done. 'T wont do; I shall lose my place. The doctor says you can work; and work you must.'  And accordingly work we had to. We were put to labor without any regard to our several capabilities. Whatever was done seemed to be done by mere accident or as caprice dictated It mattered not how weak and enfeebled one was he was compelled to work just as hard if he did not do as much an the most stalwart of the company. Though a number of our gang were really too unwell to labor and might perhaps have succeeded in staying behind yet they chose to follow us to the roads rasher than to stay alone in the miserable huts that always swarmed with fleas and lice--subject so the grossest and most insolent abuse of the lackeys and menials that infested every station. The company of friends and of old companions was sweet indeed though those friends were toiling in pain and misery and though to be with them they too must toil in yet greater misery. It was thus that the pleasure of sympathy overcame the will; and he who in other circumstances would have been an invalid confined to his room if not to his bed crawled to his daily work and reeled under the task which was if possible more onerous more grievous than that wherewith Pharao tasked the poor children of Israel. [121]  It was on Friday afternoon the fifth day that Lysander Curtis who had been sick for several weeks gave out. He was engaged wheeling dirt with a barrow when he remarked to some one near him that he felt himself failing fast - so fast indeed that he could not stand it much longer. He was advised to speak for permission to stop but answered it was of no use to ask such a brute. At length feeling still worse he ventured the request - which was replied to with the cold assurance that as the doctor had declared him able to work work he must whether he lived or died by it. Some of his comrades expostulated with Hewitt but with the only effect of calling down the choicest abuse of his overseer-ship who ordered Curtis with an oath to wheel on. It was with the greatest difficulty the poor victim could move. He stood it but a short time; his sight grew dim - he reeled and fell on his barrow - unable again to rise. His comrades laid him on the grass with his coat beneath him and then asked permission to carry him to the station. The inhuman-brute denied them saying with a great and an angry-oath 'He will stand it well enough till the gang turns in. And there he had to lay uncared for till at dusk when he was placed in the cart of which I was one of the 'team' and then taken with us to the station.  His bunk was in the same hut as my own - and there he had to lay on the hard boards in his misery through the dark cold night (the nights were cold though the days were warm) in that damp unwholesome place without a spark of fire or gleam of light; and though we importuned the superintendent and the clerk to send for the doctor who lived at another station the cold hearted wretches refused to stir a finger. We ministered to his comfort by all that was in our power and yet that comfort was only our sympathy and the effort to make his last moments cheerful by mingling our compassions. Several times during the night we thought him dying. The morning came with its few first faint streaks. Soon after the bell was heard rousing us for our daily task. The sentry stood guard outside the huts unlocked the door peeped in his head and cried out 'How is that sick one getting along?' Being told he was but just alive 'Oh never mind' says he 'one dead man is nothing. I suppose he'll have to stay behind today but never mind; get ready for your skilly.'  There was but a short time before muster and we all employed it in bidding the poor fellow farewell. He was too feeble to say much. Speaking of Canada he said 'How I wish she was free from England and her tyrants- - and I would to God that we were all out of their hands; but thanks be tot he Lord' he exclaimed as he feebly grasped our hands to bid us goodbye 'I soon shall - be beyond their power. [122] God bless you all! I shall never see you again this side of Heaven. Oh! how glad I am that I am going; and if you ever see my wife and children oh! tell them I die happy - sweetly resting in the arms of Jesus. May God protect them!' These words and a few others were spoken in broken sentences and before the last was finished we were called away to muster. By this time the doctor had come and seeing his case was indeed a desperate one our 'team' were ordered to take him in the cart to Hobart town. To us it was a cheerful task. He grew weaker and fainter till we arrived at the hospital within whose walls we bore him in our arms and received his faintly whispered 'farewell'. We then had to return immediately. Some of us asked permission to visit him from the station but were flatly refused. We learned soon after that he died the succeeding day. And we envied the poor fellow's fortune for Death brought a reprieve for his woes and snatched him from the iron hearted tyrants that were fattening on our toil and blood and our very heart's agony.  To the Rev W Jowitt   Mission House Wellington Valley 21 May 1835.  I received several letters from you full of X'n sympathy and advice for which I return you my most cordial thanks. It comforts our souls in this moral wild to receive such evidences of X'n affection. As our Diaries contain all the information we have generally to communicate I have not thought it necessary to trouble you with any letters. But I am unwilling that you should deem me guilty of ingratitude therefore I just write a line by a friend who is going to Sydney. It will afford you comfort to learn that through Divine goodness we are preserved in health and not weary of our appointment. We are far from being destitute of hope that the glorious Redeemer will gather home to himself some of these so long neglected and so deeply degraded natives. We have no conversions to the faith of our Immanuel to record but I rejoice to say we have many instances of moral feeling among them when we are speaking of the great things of God. Our children frequently shed tears while receiving religious instruction and more elderly natives have voluntarily acknowledged that they were very wicked. Hitherto we have had but little prospect of being useful to them being able to address them only through the medium of a broken and mixed up language. I admire the maxim of the Greenland missionaries not to speak on the subject of religion before they could address the natives in the vernacular tongue but I confess that however plausible the theory I have found it impracticable. To see them sunk in moral wretchedness and be silent I felt impossible though it is very probable no real good has been done under such circumstances. Now our way seems opening as we advance in the knowledge of the language we shall have reason to hope for brighter scenes. Not indeed that we imagine the word of God will then act as a charm but because we trust that the Lord according to His promise will bless it to the conversion of some. May it be of multitudes. We have lately had 70 natives here now only about 20. I preach to them every Sabbath in their own language as well as teaching them morning and evening prayers. And it would cheer your mind to see as I have done 40 or 50 (nearly naked) savages running up at the sound of the bell that summoned them to worship. Last Sabbath I preached in the morning to the natives here and after the English service rode 20 miles and preached to another company of about 20. The idea of my going so far to preach to them seemed to affect them. Our girls continue to improve in religious knowledge but as yet have not given sufficient evidence of [NN] of heart to authorise me to baptise them. One of them is particularly fond of reading and indeed they all are much interested in hearing us read to them. Missionary records and accounts of pious children &c are very useful to us. I have forwarded several portions of the aboriginal language for the consideration of the Corr. Comm. in Sydney as to the propriety of publishing in a small book. I feel very much the want of a book in the native language in which to teach my children and I think their reading such a publication would facilitate our attainment of the language. Moreover I fancy some elderly natives might then be induced to learn. But they have no desire to learn English reading. Mr Threlkeld's Grammar has just appeared. Rev R Hill has kindly [sent] two copies to Mr Handt and myself. I think it will be very useful as I cannot say that it will serve as a model but as far as I have been able to proceed with my grammar the principle of both seems to be the same. I am exceedingly obliged by the books and medicines sent out by the Committee. And yet I am bold to ask for more. I should esteem it a great kindness to be favoured with a copy of Dwights Theology and I think Reece's Family Medical Book. The liquor Ammonia Fortiss that I brought out with me has under providence wrought almost miraculous cures amongst both Europeans and natives especially among the latter who are very much afflicted with pains in the joints and bones. Under such circumstances they are sure to ask me for oils to rub themselves with. My stock however is nearly exhausted and I use it trembling not knowing what I shall do when I have none left. I have generally several sick here.  I do not know how the accounts of the mission stand but I fear that we are behind although the most rigid economy has been observed in the management of the mission. We have at least 140 head of cattle and 250 sheep and as we have no overseer but I have everything to attend to my time is very much taken up with secular matters for our servants being prisoners they are always on the alert to pilfer anything they can. I have been very anxious to have a catechist such a person as Mr Chapman of New Zealand who would take the whole management of secular affairs and leave me at liberty to itinerate but I think it did not meet with the approbation of the Corr. Comm. in Sydney. They were probably afraid of increasing the expenditure of the mission. I have been desirous of collecting a herd of cattle and of having a flock of sheep which have not been effected. For (but O the dead weight of debt on the mission at [NN] prevents me from soaring) I have always looked on this station as [NN] kind of depot I have ever contemplated the establishment of [NN] missionary stations amongst these natives. And the cattle and the sheep which we now have will in process of time under the Divine blessing stock several stations and in favourable seasons sufficient wheat may be raised here to supply them. Last year I laboured hard (sometimes ploughing sometimes driving bullocks or harrowing) to cultivate 16 acres for wheat from which we reaped I suppose 700 bushels. This year we are likely to have no season we have had but very little rain for 8 months but we have a 2 years supply. So that in time we may expect to go on more smoothly. I am afraid you cannot afford to forgive us our debt. O that would be joyful news to us as we should then labour prospectively calculating on an enlargement of the mission. But though it is just and right to pay our debts we cannot but say if you can do anything have compassion upon us and help us. Natives are dying souls are perishing Satan is leading thousands of these untaught heathen to eternal ruin. I must leave it with you and our Divine Master who is the God of missions and the Father of all the families of the earth. I trust he will guide you in all your consultations and enable you to send forth men whom He has chosen and may you see [NN] waving in every part of the field to His honour and glory. I am sorry to say Mr Handt is poorly otherwise the members of the mission are well. I am sure you will excuse this [NN] with all its mistakes when you know that it is now one O'Clock AM.  Believe me to be   My Dear Sir   Yours faithfully  W Watson.  (received 31 Oct 1835)  In conclusion I may be allowed to express an opinion that in no point of view does this colony present the unhappy spectacle which Mr. Burton holds up. However prevalent crime may be it is not more so in proportion to its numbers than formerly nor so much so as might naturally have been expected among a population chiefly consisting of the criminal outcasts of another country. In the meantime agriculture and commerce are advancing and every year is placing out of the reach of ordinary temptations and in the ranks of those interested in maintaining the rights of property many who commenced life in their systematic violation. I regret much that Mr. Burton should have thought it necessary to put forth an address which dwells upon and even exaggerates evils from which none could expect a penal colony to escape while it suppresses all mention of the numerous causes for congratulation which are everywhere apparent.  It has served in a way which I am sure Mr. Burton never intended to encourage the clamour of those inconsistent persons who have attained to wealth by the services of convicts; who up to the present moment are emulating each other in frequent and urgent application for more convict servants; who are continually travelling to their farms and remote stations over roads of great length and difficult construction wholly formed by the labour of convicts; yet spend their lives in cavilling at the evils by which these advantages are inevitably accompanied and charge them on the Government.  PORT JACKSON.  Gentlemen -   I beg you will make known to the public and those connected with the vessel mentioned below the following circumstance.  The ship MANGLES under command arrived under Murray's in Torres Straits on the evening of 18th Sept 1835 on the morning of 19th several Canoes came alongside with shells etc to trade in one was a white person apparently an. European quite naked as the Savages The greater part of the natives came on the Starboard quarter the quarter boats being lowered half down for the purpose of Trade.  I remained some time on the Starboard quarter watching their movements till several had gone ashore I then went to the Larboard side to enquire respecting the person whom I had seen he then had dropped a little astern and from enquiry.  I found he was an Englishman wrecked some twelve months since in the Sir CHARLES EATON in Torres Straits and wished much to come on board but the Natives would not allow him at the report of this I manned and armed the Cutter and sent the second officer Boatswain and six men to take him at any price stationing myself on the poop with armed men to protect them in the event of any objection to his being given up.  They hooked the Canoe with a boat Hook and told him they were come for him his reply was "take that Man he will go with you" pointing to a Savage before him.  "Not" said the second officer "I am come for you and you I will have."  He immediately threw down the paddle he had in his hand and dashed under the Midship of the Canoe out of sight; I then ordered my Boat to return and said "if he prefers a life with Savages to being with me he may remain" and the boat was hoisted up again. Subsequently the fourth officer told me he had said there were eight men on shore detained by the Natives and what his motive could be for not coming into my Boat I am at a loss to conceive as he might have stepped into her. [169]  However not feeling altogether satisfied I manned and armed the Boat again and went myself in her close to the Beach with my Spy Glass remaining there two hours. The Natives were very anxious for me to land; but seeing so many on the beach and many more behind the Bamboo work and a large Canoe ready for launching I did not think it proper to do so. They brought a little European boy (apparently 2 or 3 years old) down close to the Boat but would not allow me to touch him. I also saw a Boat building under cover of a shed by European hands I am certain but could not see a white man.  After I returned on board I watched with my glass the remainder of the day but still saw none and remained all night at anchor thinking it might be possible for some of them to make their escape; but seeing nothing of them the next morning at nine I weighed anchor and came away through the Straits and anchored under Booby Island in the morning of 21st and there got letters under a Memo of H.M.S. HYACINTH having been there on 8th with a convoy from Sydney all well the MARQUIS OF HUNTLEY MORRISON and Brig CHILDREN.  I left Hobart Town 31st August. That there are Europeans on Murray's Island I have not the slightest doubt and that they are detained there by force; or why not come to me. The one that was alongside I could not see again. I arrived at Timor Co pang Bay October 1st and found the Captn. and Crew of the JANE AND HENRY there arrived the day before in the launch wrecked on the Barrier Reef. I conveyed them to Sourabaya.  There was such a ship as the SIR CHARLES EATON I know but who are her Owners I know not; that this should be made known to the proper Authorities for a Man-of-War to relieve them there is no question about. I have written to the Commander-in-Chief on the East India station.  I am Gentlemen  Your most obedient servant  W. CARR.  Commander Ship MANGLES  October 4 1836  "After escaping from Port Macquarie New South Wales early in 1836 and undergoing many hardships in the bush I finally engaged with a Gentleman on the Patersons River (Mr. Andrew Lang) as a Freeman to split slabs for a Rough Building.  "I so employed myself for about three weeks when I was recognised as an escaped prisoner and fearing the circumstances would be carried to the knowledge of Mr. Lang by the Overseer I determined upon quitting the station and I was induced for the first time to commit a Forgery as a means of defraying my passage to Sydney intending there to swim to a Vessel bound for England and so to secrete myself on board until she was far away from the land of my sorrow and affliction.  "But Alas! These calculations proved visionary. I was shortly taken not for that offence but on suspecion of being one John Jones who somewhat resembled me in his personal description and for whom there was at that time a reward of Fifty Pounds. The Constable John McDougall apprehended me marched me to his house where he secured the chain of a Timber carriage to a Beam and manacled me with his servant for the night. On the following morning he loaded his pistols mounted his Horse and marched me before him on the Road for Maitland.  "At this juncture my mind was tortured with the contemplation not so much of the fate which awaited me as the awful degree that every prospect of my being restored to my friends to whom I had erected a Domicile of affliction by my juvenile follies was placed beyond the reach of human possibility. So impressed I was intent upon making my escape from the Constable in charge of me at the peril of being shot in the attempt and as we approached a pond convenient to a very thick scrub by the road side I expressed a wish to have a drink of water.  "The Constable dismounted and after I had satisfied my thirst he turned his Horse to the pond and I thrust myself forward into the scrub and so effected my escape. It afterwards appeared that his Horse galloped away from him and he proceeded to Maitland to make his report.  "During the night I found myself surrounded by the Mounted Police who were galloping in every direction and it was with the greatest difficulty that I escaped them. The Basils of the Handcuffs had bedded themselves in my wrists by my endeavouring to break them across the different boulders of Stone but I could not get rid of them until the following morning when I called upon an old man (a Settler whose Son had a great regard for me) who broke them with a Hammer and wished me to take shelter in his Granary for a month.  "This offer I declined accepting owing to his liability to 14 years' transportation in the event of my being found on his premises and after taking some refreshment I resolved upon advancing towards Port Stephens as the most unlikely direction to be taken by the police in pursuit. In prosecuting this journey I passed two very cold nights in the Mountains without a fire or place of shelter when I came to a Sheep Station at Wollorobba where I requested the Shepherd to put down the pot and boil me a little Tea for which I promised payment.  "I was at this time 50 miles distant from where I effected my escape and little expected the approach of the Constabulary; but to my disappointment I was there retaken by two of them armed who escorted me to Maitland where I was arraigned at the Quarter Sessions in May 1836 and 'on the plea of Guilty of Forgery' was sentenced to transportation to Norfolk Island for Life.  "I was accordingly removed to that floating Den of Infamy the Hulk PHOENIX until opportunity offered for the Shipment of a draft of re-convicted prisoners to that place.  "During my stay on board scenes of depravity which human nature shudders to contemplate were exhibited with apparent delight. Nor were the means as resorted to by the Keeper for the punishment of slight Offences at all calculated to lessen the successful spread of so demoralizing a contagion. [190] The men of the adjoining Cell to that in which I and 9 others were chained had been smoking a Tobacco pipe one Evening contrary to the Rules of the Establishment; when the Keeper came to our Cell and charged us as the Offenders.  "He sent for 10 pairs of Handcuffs took our shirts Blankets and clothes away and manacling each of our hands behind our backs he reefed the legs which were very heavily honed to the upper part of the Iron Staunchions of the Cell by means of a Bar outside with the whole weight of our chains and bodies pressing on our Shoulder blades for the night in a state of perfect Nudity. By the following morning and for two days afterwards I could scarcely regain the use of my Arms.  "I have also seen men in a similar position with the additional torture of a gagging instrument to silence their Cries and the throwing of Buckets of Water over them when in that state. Numerous complaints had been made to the Authorities but the capabilities of the Keeper and his aidants were such that no prisoner could withstand the case they would make out to render futile the complaintants assertions; and thus these Outrages upon humanity commissioned with impunity.  "The Keeper's predecessor Captain Murray who had practised similar cruelties died in a state of Mental derangement and the one in question (Mr. McKeig) laboured under a similiar malady brought on by the excessive use of Ardent Spirits.  "From the PHOENIX I was transferred to the Barque CARNARVON with 99 others for that place of horror - Norfolk Island. The dreadful picture afforded me the intensity of sufferings and torture to which every Victim to this Island was subjected was most appalling. So much terror had this produced on my mind that during a faint squall on our passage I most fervently prayed to the Almighty to suffer the Vessel to sink and mercifully receive the Souls of all from a state of endurance worse than death in its most terrific shape.  "My feelings on landing there no pen or language can correctly describe. In a state of Nudity we were ranked upon the Beach and after undergoing a minute and most indelicate inspection our miserable rags were handled on and we were marched to the Police Office and from thence to the Barrack Yard. "From this instant all my hope of happiness was to cease. My beloved Parents my Brothers and Sisters for ever lost to me. Shut out from the World for ever to herd with beings in human for but whose every action excluded their claim to the appellation of 'Man'.  "This was the place in which I was doomed to pass the remainder of my days and blank despair for a time took possession of my Soul. Soon after my arrival on the Island I found circumspection indispensible to escape if possible the Machinations of the unprincipled characters employed by the Underlings in Office to trepan their fellow prisoners into some indiscreet Act. Numerous were these despicable Treacherous characters who with the hope of preferment or for a much less inducement - A STINKING PIECE OF TOBACCO would retail to the Underlings every trifling occurrence of the day - such was the rage for information that to keep place with their employers' wishes THEMSELVES were compelled to hatch plots and form conspiracies into which the unwary were ensnared. The daily working of these plans for no other than purposes of information and of furthering their diabolical views was made known to the Underlings who in their turn duly reported the same to the Authorities whose pusillanimous wisdom suffered them to believe that they were indebted to such scoundrels for their lives and properties.  "When the plot was properly matured the poor incautious and goaded fellows who had lent them-selves to its measures would be suddenly pounced upon and in a short time weighed to the Earth with heavy chains. By these means were the most inoffensive entrapped cruelly tortured then placed in the custody of the most brutal Overseer and under him employed at the most harassing descriptions of labor in whose presence a murmur - nay an unpleasant look would again subject the already emaciated wretch to further lacerations and torture.   "Human nature could not long patiently endure such dreadful state of suffering and so treated men as a natural result became desperate and in all their passions and actions were Very Devils. Under such a System the best conducted men on the Island were in imminent danger their language was misinterpreted as were their actions misrepresented; if the quiet and unassuming FOR A TIME escaped the wiles of these reptiles he would then be represented as an artful dangerous character and well to be looked after: HE WAS A MARK'D MAN AND ALMOST SURE TO FALL. [191]  "Such was the state of things when I arrived but glaring instance of treachery occurred which in a great measure arrested the progress of false informations.  "Two men named Morgan and Beattie gave information that a Mutiny was about to break out among the Prisoners in confirmation of which they handed over a paper containing 120 names which Morgan stated he had forcibly taken from a man named Farrell and in doing which he had received some severe wounds with a knife.  "Chains were got in readiness and two of the parties accused named Farrell and Brechan were consigned to the Gaol. The truth of this Information I have reason to believe was doubted from the beginning - and the facts as elicited from one of the parties combined with other forcible Evidence PROVED THAT MORGAN HAD STABBED HIMSELF AND FORGED THE LIST OF NAMES for which the calumniating Wretches were sentenced each to receive 300 lashes.  "To the success of Machinations so diabolical may be ascribed the protracted periods of Slavery to which a number of prisoners STILL REMAINING ON THE ISLAND have been subjected.  "There existed little if any hope of those whose sentences were undefined being restored to Freedom under 18 or 20 years; and the contemplation of their having to exist under the onus of unrestricted rigour for so long a term (unless indeed they chose to resort to measures of Villainy) reduced them to the lowest stage of despair; and those who had before been quiet and unassuming finding themselves unjustly assailed calumniated and hunted down by the underlings in Office and their Creatures they had recourse to acts of the most desperate.  "Several daring attempts have been made to take Boats from this Settlement; but there never were more than four instances of the parties being successful.  "During the Commandantry of Colonel Morrisset 20 men left their Huts in the night and went to the Boatshed. Upon being challenged by the Sentry they told him they were ordered to fetch Mr. Cunningham the Botanist from Phillip Island.  "Upon their getting the Boat out the Sentry desired them not to launch her until he informed the Sergeant of the Guard. One of the party continued to amuse the Sentry who was an Irishman in his native tongue - while the others succeeded in getting her afloat on perceiving which the Sentry fired his piece and alarmed the Garrison. These men however cleared the Bar without an accident pulled over to Phillip Island took the tent provisions etc belonging to Mr. Cunningham but without using the least violence and then put to sea.  "Another equally daring occurrence took place on the 29th May 1833 in a conspiracy by 16 men to take one of the Launches. It so happened that two Government Vessels a Brig and Schooner were in the Harbour at the time. The Launch going from the Shore pulled alongside the one coming from the Schooner which was laden with Maize etc and transferring her cargo into the empty Launch which was the better Boat of the two they double-banked their Oars and in the face of both Vessels got clear off.  "Other attempts were not so fortunate and they were fired upon by the Military before they go clear.  On one occasion several men were killed and on another the Offenders when taken were Sentenced to receive 300 Lashes.  "The following anecdotes will afford illustrations of the depravity and utter hopelessness of the prisoners on the Island when I arrived.  "A Tyrannical Overseer named Sullivan had charge of a Road party and so much was he in the habit of harassing and torturing the men under him that the Devil prompted them to a conspiracy to murder him and seizing the first opportunity a man named Reynolds repeatedly struck him with a Hoe until he had completed his fatal purpose.  "During the perpetration of this Deed a misguided wretch named Connor (not one of the conspirators) immediately stepped up and attempting to seize the head of the deceased in order to implicate himself with the sole purpose of being hanged.  "Another poor wretch named Doolan was murdered in his Hammock in the night. A man named Riley was executed for this Murder in the year 1833 in company with Reynolds and Connor. Doolan had hatched up a story while at Moreton Bay to give evidence against Innocent Men but had been detected in falsehood and FORWARDED HITHER TO TERMINATE HIS SENTENCE AND THROUGH HIS TREACHERY IT SO HAPPENED HIS LIFE.  "A wretch named Thompson was executed 26th December 1835 for having attempted to assassinate a man named Fell. A baser character than Thompson could not possibly be conceived. He was universally held in hatred as one of the creatures of the Underlings and was well known as a disgusting wretch; like others on the Island he was given over to propensities abhorrent to Nature.  SYDNEY N.S.W.  28th December 1837  My Dear Edmund  I think it advisable in consequence of the suspicion entertained and communicated to me by my brother Robert that my letter of the 2nd September 1835 was never brought to Lord Glenelg's notice - to furnish you with a letter to the Secretary of State to be read by you if you require it and I think proper and also I enclose an original note from the late Governor here and another from his late private secretary the former received by me in July or August 1836 and the latter yesterday in proof that my letter was forwarded from hence.   I hope however that the necessity for this proof will have ceased and that such arrangements made may have been made for me although I am yet ignorant of them as will be satisfactory. I can only express my thankfulness to your and my other friends for their kind and friendly zeal in my behalf coupled with my chagrin that so much exertion should become necessary. A reflection which is not very consoling to one who really feels he has a right to say that his exertions in the public cause have been even beyond this duty. It affords not much stimulus to the future zeal to learn that not only can those services be [u]nknown but stifled by underlings in the office of the colonial department.  Mr. Gardner of whom Robert writes that he is an enemy of mine is altogether unknown to me. I have never given him any harm of which I am conscious but he is a friend of Forbes which may account for his enmity to me -although this letter has no right to feel so towards me. I have twice supported him in this colony when without me he must have very greatly fallen. I have acted towards him as I wish he had acted towards me - supporting him whenever it was in my favour and never availing of any opportunity to injure him. My words and deeds may have strongly contrasted with his own and may have been in that way prejudicial to him; but only incidently and in the discharge of my duty; which could not have been conscientiously performed had I not said and done as I have.  I know not my Dear Edmund what may be within the short future of a few days - but we ought by this time to know if Dowling be confirmed Chief Justice or who else and what is the result to me. The ships however at this season have been long delayed - one which sailed from England in July had only arrived a few days ago. The Governor (Sir Geo. Gipps) cannot be expected before March and I fear I shall be kept in suspense until then - unless as I hope you will be aware of what is transacted and I shall hear of it from you earlier.  The last two years have thoroughly disgusted me with the Public Service and I shall be glad to escape from it upon any terms which you think proper. The last communication from Robert was on [...]  Give my love to my dear mother my brothers [...] the children and all who love me [...] and informed you of having received Roberts letters of 20th June and 18th July which informed me of your intention to apply for my retiring pension if Dowling should be confirmed I cannot however act upon that intermation until I hear what has been done in consequence.  My expectation is that you will obtain my retiring pension and if no that you will have by [...] letter or its [...] what I shall do; whether ask leave and go home or remain [...] I sincerely thank you and Robert and all my excellent friends for your and their zeal in my behalf only regretting that their labours as at present seems to be the case have been so fruitless. Give my love to all accept the same yourself and believe me to be my dear Edmund ever your affectionate brother.  W. BURTON.  Original of the enclosed duplicate was transmitted by the "Luisa" which finally sailed having once put back three days ago.  The fretfulness of temper which so peculiarly characterizes the intercourse of society in our penal colonies may be attributed I think almost exclusively to their convict system. Degraded servants make suspicious masters; and the habit of suspicion being once given masters soon begin to suspect their equals and superiors as well as their inferiors; whence among other symptoms impatience and irritability under Government regulations and judicial decisions however just or well founded. The total disuse moreover of moral motives in the domestic relations of life and the habit of enforcing obedience by mere compulsion give a harsh and peremptory bearing in all transactions which being met by a corresponding tone in others (the upper classes acting and re-acting on each other exactly as the lower) every difference of opinion constitutes a ground of quarrel and disunion becomes extensively prevalent. Much too exists in the mere arrangements for convict discipline as now maintained which fosters these lamentable results. A constant interference of the police with private feelings and interest is absolutely unavoidable in existing circumstances; and the summary and peremptory character of decisions in cases of discipline scarcely admitting of appeal and practically almost always confirmed against both convict and master (because even if appealed from the reply is contingent on a report from the magistrate who has passed the first sentence) is alone calculated I think to exasperate even mild Spirits.  Now according to my views this [i.e. licentious state of the press immorality etc.] may be for the most attributed to the transportation system. The habit which most of the free contract of thinking and speaking of and treating the convicts contemptuously is by a very natural process extended to the whole species; and hence the want of respect and deference to others which is so universally manifested. Nor ought this to excite surprise. In the rank of life from which most of them have come they have been accustomed to an open exhibition of their passions many of them in the roughest form; comparatively few of them have been trained to the first lesson of refinement the necessity and habit of civility. [166]  I acknowledge that a contempt for convicts is frequently produced by personal experience of their ingratitude duplicity and general depravity; but it is also produced in part by the important position into which the great disparity between the classes raises the free which has a tendency to break down the distinctions conceded in the mother country and thus to place the whole free population on a nearly equal footing. The contempt thus felt and expressed which is the active mischief; is returned by the bond by hatred; and hence as I have already stated a prejudice of caste is produced which sets the two classes of the community in hostility to each other. On the other hand the free imbued with a notion of their individual importance forget their relative duties and are more or less claiming superior distinction and consideration.  Had the encouragement of the convict population been indeed regulated upon the principle of conferring rewards on good conduct only such a course could scarcely have failed to be productive of consequences alike beneficial to the individuals and to the community at large. But when men who had been convicts and who were besides disqualified by want of education or previous mode of life were appointed magistrates and public functionaries; - when land was distributed with undiscriminating profusion amongst the whole class of emancipated convicts without regard to good or ill conduct ; - when the circumstance of having come free to the colony conferred no claim to favour; and that of having been convicted became proverbially the best security for preferment; - is it surprising that the free settlers should have expressed their dissatisfaction at the continuance and their apprehension of the probable results of so extraordinary a system? [329]  The natural consequence of this system was reaction - a determination on the part of the emigrant colonists to maintain the more strictly those distinctions which it was the object of the Governor to break down.  On the part of the emancipated convicts on the other hand it gave rise to claims for full participation in civil rights and political privileges upon the basis of property alone without reference to character and conduct. It was the origin also of a feeling at one time very generally prevalent amongst this class and which still exists in the minds of many that the colony was theirs by right and that the emigrant settlers were interlopers upon the soil.  To the Rev W Jowitt   Mission House Wellington Valley 17 Jan 1837.  My Dear Sir  Not more refreshing to the parched earth is the rain from heaven than your letters to our almost fainting spirits in this inhospitable wilderness. But like angel's visits they are "few and far Between". No doubt in the midst of your multifarious engagements we receive our portion but we feel sometimes that portion to be small. I am sure your heart would sicken had you any idea of the wretchedness with which we are surrounded. Amongst the hundreds of Europeans who live in this neighbourhood whether masters overseers or servants scarcely an individual is to be found who has any fear of God before his eyes and a very large majority of them live in the violation of every moral principle. On some establishments where there are from 30 to 40 servants scarcely a hut can be found where there is not a native female living in adulterous connexion with the European inmates. The fruit of such connexion we have too much reason to believe meets a premature death from the hands either of its unnatural father or mother. Aboriginal men compel their females frequently against their will to prostitute themselves in this lamentable way because they themselves receive the wages of iniquity being supported by the Europeans in such connexions. It is to be credited that such proceedings are going on where the masters are living on the establishment or if not living amongst their servants are occasionally visiting them and must be well acquainted with the evil conduct of those in their employ. Honourable exceptions indeed are found as it regards master and overseer but all we know of amounts to no higher a number than four. True we have the ordinances of Divine worship attended every Lord's day and as far as we know those who attend are under some moral restraint so far and no farther has the preaching of the Gospel appeared to influence the minds of those Europeans who have been favoured with hearing it. No doubt it has reached you that our mission is unpopular in the Colony. Look at the state of Society here and let me ask can the cause of the Redeemer be popular with the devoted servants of the prince of darkness? Where the generality of the people labour to encourage the aborigines in all kinds of vice no wonder if the aborigines prefer such associations to living with us under spiritual instruction. We need your X'n sympathies - we need your prayers. Our trials mental trials are beyond your conception. They are known they can only be known to the searcher of hearts and to ourselves. Many are ready to infer that because after four years of labour among the aborigines few only are at all attached to mission or benefited by the instructions they have received no good will ever be effected among them. You will not thus calculate. The Parent Committee will not thus infer. No person acquainted with the history of missions will thus speak. And I assure you that we have no such apprehensions. While we daily mourn over our unworthiness before God and our unfitness for so great and holy a vocation: whilst we have daily discouragements and disappointments we do hope - we do believe - that God will call from among these poor perishing heathen a people to glorify His holy name. One of our native youths Gungin (Jemmy Marshall) is very deeply affected with a sense of his guilt and danger as a sinner. He weeps and groans and sighs when we converse with him and he acknowledges his sinfulness and expresses a desire to be better. There are others who feel their sins a burden and occasionally seem to long for spiritual deliverance. If the conflict between a desire to be saved and a sinful heart be so long and frequently so severe under more favourable circumstances what must be the struggle in the mind of a native when his knowledge of Divine things is comparatively very defective and everything around him is calculated rather to destroy than encourage his serious impressions. What our feelings are in the prospect of the conversion of Gungin may be better conceived than described. What are all our privations disappointments troubles anxieties tears if the Lord smile upon our work and bless the labour of our hands to His own glory. Our children continue to improve in scriptural knowledge. We look to the Lord to sanctify that knowledge. "The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord". As they are continually under our eye and constantly under instruction they can scarcely fail of improving. My Diary from April 1st to Oct 1st will be forwarded herewith. They contain nothing of an interesting nature: our duties being continually the same and our daily conversations with the natives affording but little variety we feel no pleasure in forwarding as you will feel no interest in perusing papers little superior to blanks. I remember one of the members of your honourable Committee saying previously to our leaving our beloved country "Mr Watson you are going on the forlorn hope". I thank my Heavenly Father that I have never viewed the scene of our labours in that way. We have always believed that God would prosper His own work and greatest fear is that the Corr. Comm. in Sydney should be induced to abandon this part of the field.   Mrs Watson unites with me in sincere X'n regards to you and to all the Committee praying that the great Head of the Church may guide you in all your councils and crown your attempts to spread the saving knowledge of His name throughout the whole world with abundant success and finally by his mercy bring us all to unite in ascribing salvation to the lamb that was slain.   I remain   My Dear Sir   Yours faithfully  W Watson.  received ? 1837  To the Rev W Jowitt  Mission House Wellington Valley 6 Nov 1837.  My Dear Sir  I received your letter of the 16th March 1837 but do not consider myself at present fully prepared to reply to those very serious charges implied therein. As by the time we shall receive an answer to this we shall have been seven years from England and as two applications have been made to the Corr. Comm. for leave of absence for the benefit of our health without obtaining their permission I have now to request that the Parent Comm. will allow us to visit England for the benefit of our worn out constitution.   I am   My Dear Sir   Yours faithfully  William Watson.  received 23 May 1838  THE OPENING OF THE THEATRE ROYAL HOBART 1837  On Monday night we went to see the opening of the New Theatre but we were prevented from getting there until the performance had commenced. We understand that Mr Cameron spoke an address of which we have not at the period of this writing been able to obtain a copy. He also apologised for the absence of four of the performers who had been announced in the bills. The upper boxes were quite full as also was the gallery and there was very little spare room in the pit or in the lower boxes which last were all occupied by respectable people. The whole appearance of the house will be very elegant when properly lighted. The scenery is equal to any in any theatre in Britain Out of London. The drop scene is particularly beautiful; it is copied from a print (in one of the Annuals) of Byron's Dream and looks really like a highly-finished oil painting. The scenery was not well worked which in some parts spoiled the effect. The audience part of the house was very badly lighted by a temporary affair composed of several concentric rings of iron in the shape of something like an inverted cone with the apex cut off; these rings being stuck over with tin lamps and glass chimneys but no globes. This house can never be properly lighted without bracket lamps all around the box circle. We would here suggest to the proprietors whether it would not be to their advantage even in a pecuniary point of view to light the house with gas - the convenience of such an arrangement especially for the stage lights cannot we apprehend be questioned. The apparatus could be furnished by an ingenious artisan of Hobart Town at a reasonable cost. [371] The pillars of the proscenium are tastefully gilt and the whole surmounted with an escutcheon of the Royal Arms. Opposite the proscenium is a motto in Latin "mores mollir" which our "Little Particular" translates "mollify your morals" for which purpose the managers and moral protecting magistrates have very considerately licensed the "Shades below" where all sorts of stimulants the use of which is so well adapted for "mollifying" any rigidity of "morals" the play-going youth may possess are to be had in abundance. The saloons being also part and parcel of the licensed house all the means necessary in the shape of liquors for inflaming the passions and destroying the reason are to be found there. We believe that this is the only theatre in the British dominions that has attached to the same building a licence to sell spirits. Now it was generally understood that the object of the proprietors of the new theatre was to soften the manners and to render more rigid not to "mollify" the morals. We question much whether this grog selling in the Theatre will not have an effect directly opposed to that which the shareholders professed to have in view. We would recommend the managers to place lights in the passage at the back of the lower tier of boxes; we have heard some very equivocal remarks about the purpose for which this passage was (said to be avowedly) kept in darkness. Smoking in the saloon ought not to be permitted - let this indulgence be entirely confined to the "shades below"; we like our cigar as well as any of the swaggering smokers but we could never think of indulging in it where the fumes must annoy one person much less when they annoy some hundreds.  The acting was on the whole decidedly below mediocrity; but the novelty and beauty of the house kept the audience in good humour throughout the evening. Mrs THOMPSON the star of the night is we understand a newcomer but very respectably connected in the Colony. We understand that in her early youth she was a favourite performer on the London boards and at the period she would no doubt have made a very pretty interesting "Little Pickle" but when she tried that character here on Monday night she must have forgot that she is not now so young as she was twelve years ago.. . . We make every allowance for the first performance in a new house and as we have said before the beauty of the house scenery and decorations will for a time take attention off the failings of the players but the Committee must get Meredith or they cannot get on while he keeps his little theatre open for any person who likes to laugh at a play must enjoy one hour of Meredith's acting more than all the vapid entertainment of seeing and hearing his substitutes at the new theatre with all the advantages of a really elegant house and excellent scenery.  We would recommend gentlemen to walk in the box doors in place of jumping over the back partition and wiping their dirty boots on ladies' silk dresses. The public expect some regard to decency and good manners in persons who occupy the dress circle they must learn to behave themselves or seek associates of a more congenial habit in the "dark corners" of the house. [352] The press will soon drive them out of the dress circle if they cannot behave themselves.  Melbourne. - The town of Melbourne is now half a mile in length the houses at intervals extending over the whole of that space the habitations at a rough guess are three hundred and fifty; the population one thousand  including children not under twelve years of age and for the protection of its inhabitants and their property there are I believe only four constables. [98] How they divide the watches I do not know; but Sure I am that if they were up altogether during the whole of time night they would not be sufficient to guard against the depredations so constantly committed; it is easy for the house breaker to watch them off' their beat and effect his deeds of darkness as for me to peal and eat a roasted potato.  Australia Felix. - We have received the account of an expedition into the interior by a party of our enterprising gentlemen settlers in search of the Australia Felix of Major Mitchell. [274] The party in question set out au cheval well armed and provisioned taking led horses were out twenty-four days and guided by the Major's map reached Australia Felix. They describe the herbage as plentiful and most luxuriant; the water however in less abundance than was expected but that can be accounted for by the long succession of drought since Major Mitchell's discovery. They found the blacks numerous and troublesome and returned after having travelled over five hundred miles.  Our hero was transported to New South Wales when very young and as far as we know for neither an atrocious nor consequential crime some say for stealing geese. We do not know either when he got married and only remark that his wife was the widow of a man who had undergone the utmost penalty of the law on the gallows.  Under such circumstances it was easy to perceive to what kind of exertions Samuel Terry would probably resort as soon as he should have obtained some indulgence so profusely granted in those times - he established a small slye grog and pawnbroker's shop. Spirits were then a guinea a bottle and tobacco retailed for the weight of silver.  To him resorted convict servants with some worn or questionable clothes or other such property which were again circulated amongst associates and friends - higgling with convicts for their dirty clothes.  It is easy to be conceived how in a sprouting-up colony enlivened by the liberal grants of the British Treasury such a business was capable of being increased and how it was really increased. But even with all this we must look deeper into S.T.'s character to be able to explain how even under the very favourable circumstances of those colonial times he could have laid the foundation of his subsequent large fortune.  Our hero possessed qualities (a few of them useful ones) which under adequate circumstances will always produce a similar effect. He was of the most perfectly sober and frugal habits he was active and industrious; and his whole philosophy consisted in having made up his mind to never give value without obtaining value for it and moreover as much as only to keep his neck out of the halter or his legs out of chains.  However Samuel Terry was cunning enough and not at all nice to refuse any bargain where no legal danger was to be apprehended. He left several valuable grounds which he had purchased for a bottle of spirits; or he had advanced spirits and tobacco sued or caused to sue for the debt and bought the ground at the sale of the sheriff.  Whether our friend ever forsaw to what value land would rise in the colony or whether it was accidental that he endeavoured to amass the only sort of property which was to be had in his way i.e government grants belonging to soldiers and emancipists who patronised his slye grog shop Suffice to say that as soon as this rise took place Samuel Terry was even on that score a rich man and he must have found to his great surprise and at the same time satisfaction that those acres of his in and near Sydney hitherto covered with filth and rubbish were now worth as much as if they were pasted all over with bank notes.  Our hero entered subsequently into some shipping speculations but his cunning and caution were so great his economical habits so unalterable that we did not hear that he ever sustained any considerable loss. It was at this time about 1818 that being asked in some law suit on his oath how much he believed he was worth he answered - ninety thousand pounds sterling.  Whether or at what time S.T. received his emancipation or free pardon is a matter of indifference; because with such a mass of wealth he could in the present age always either obtain it or disdain its possession.  In the extensive business he was now engaged in he was obliged to have a large amount of cash about him and one Sunday morning his "iron chest" (proverbial in Sydney) was robbed of some thousand sovereigns. The deed was traced to a young convict in Terry's service and who on account of his engaging figure and good behaviour had hitherto been a favourite of the family - some gold coin having been found concealed in his shoes. He was capitally convicted.  It is asserted that Samuel Terry obtained leave to visit him in his cell when he under the explicit promise of obtaining his pardon induced the boy to disclose the spot in the garden where the money had been planted. We should believe that in these times a man of S. Terry's affluence might have been able to obtain any thing in New South Wales. At any rate it is said that he had given his word; still the boy was hung.  The story runs that after that Terry was ever haunted by the sight of the executed and in moments of acrimony within his family circle his relations often reproached him with the murder of the lad. [197]  A similar tragical event is related in which Mr. Attorney-General Saxe Bannister was concerned. This gentleman somehow or other got on intimate terms with Samuel Terry and the latter lent him on one occasion eight hundred pounds. Mr. B. became afterwards embarrassed when T. sold his valuable farm and got himself possessed of it which it is said contributed at least to the subsequent mental aberration of that gentleman.  And now we may ask any of our readers even of that class we are more immediately addressing whether there is any of them who would covet Samuel Terry's riches - riches as is already seen tainted by the death of a favourite servant and the madness of a friend? We are sure none! none!  We will take up the period of about six years back when T. was in possession of about fifty thousand pounds sterling per annum and in the very prime of life. He lived then in the same place he died in viz a not small but unroomy tasteless house in Pitt Street Sydney. He rode at times a clumsy old charger and passed many hours of the day in salting beef in his shirt sleeves. When he had a friend with him and was obliged to send for a bottle of spirits to the pantry he always smelled the breath of the servant for fear he might have drunk some. Mrs Terry never kept a female servant; she dressed in the most simple nay coarse manner and was seen every Saturday on her knees scrubbing out the whole premises.  Although S.T. in the latter years of his life discounted yearly £300000 bills at 10 per cent.; and as it is known that the rental of his houses in Sydney (of which he possessed entire streets) the produce of his farms etc amounted to at least £60000 or £70000 per annum he yet lived upon £500 or £600 a year taken at the outset; and thus it will be seen that his immense wealth was but a dead incumbrance upon him.  But we will now mention facts which will not only exempt him from being an object of envy but reduce him to a state truly to be pitied; and if the proverb saying "end good all good" is correct it certainly can in its most pointed contrast be applied to him.  About four years ago this hitherto strong and healthy man was seized with a paralytic stroke which at once deprived him of the use of his right limbs. What a misfortune for a man without mental resources without inward consolation without loving and sympathetic friends!  As this man could not now exercise any active influence upon the members of his family he became with some of them an object of contempt and disgust whilst in the meantime all their vicious propensities became apparent. His son had married a handsome and well-bred young emigrant but being a drunken and brutal man he lived then with her on the worst terms possible and in one of his mad moments opened her head with an iron poker.  The relations appeared against him and the magistrates committed him to take his trial. However strange to say he was (in a case which nearly threatened his life) allowed to bail and the whole affair was subsequently made up by money. Even S.T. himself was not exempted from the brutal frenzy of this imbecile son and he was abused and threatened on many occasions.  Our hero for the remainder of his life was unable to move without the aid of two men and thus extended in his open carriage pale and bloated he drove about the domain of Sydney a silent but impressive example for any one showing how illusive and worthless at times wealth is especially with a man like him and if obtained in a low and even questionable way.  His illness became more dangerous and more irksome from day to day and he died on 22nd of February 1838 only sixty-two years of age and therefore just at a period of life when riches well and honourably obtained may be most quietly and beneficially enjoyed and employed.  His will was that of all vulgar misers to wit property in New South Wales amounting to more than half a million pounds sterling consisting of about £250000 personal estate £150000 landed property as well as other interests which he left to such as consanguinity and chance had placed round him. He bequeathed an annuity of ten thousand pounds to his wife and after her demise the annuity to continue with the son and his heirs. There is not one word about charity or a house of refuge or anything of a public bearing; the only provision approaching to such generosity is that all his benevolent subscriptions (perhaps a £100 a year) should be continued for ten years to come.  Such was Samuel Terry ! - the richest outlaw whom the Australian colonies yet possessed and ever will possess because times and (very properly) circumstances also have now wonderfully changed. In a very few years Terry the man will be entirely forgotten save in his substantial monetary capacity and cognomen  "THE BOTANY BAY ROTHSCHILD !"  Monday Morning November 19 1838  The trial of eleven men for the slaughter of a company of Aborigines of both sexes and all ages from sucking infants to hoary hairs took place on the 15th inst when they were acquitted.  From the violent articles published by the Colonial press during the last months against the black natives we had been impressed with the belief that not only had these slaughtered aborigines committed some wanton murders on our stockholders residing in their neighbourhood but that their slaughter had been perpetrated in retaliation for such murders.  But in all the evidence given on the trial our readers will perceive that the eight- and-twenty persons put to the sword by the eleven stock-keepers are not accused of committing any personal violence whatever at any time either on these eleven men or on their neighbours The only thing laid to their charge by the murderers is that they had committed a "depredation" on some sheep once; and had once "rushed" the cattle in charge of one of the prisoners. The nature and extent of the "depredation" on the sheep is not explained. With respect to rushing of cattle our readers lately arrived in the Colony will please to understand that cattle when much left to themselves rush that is make off at full gallop to a great distance and into the glens and passes difficult of access to their keepers on falling in with either blacks or whites. There is however an exception to this rule as regards such cattle as are inspected once a fortnight or so by their stock-keepers On seeing their own keeper they will not "rush' unless his visits have been very few and far between. But if cattle see the Blacks they are apt to rush on all occasions even cattle that are reckoned to be pretty tame. If therefore the "rushing" of the cattle be in future to be considered as an apology for putting the Blacks to the sword the whole race must soon be exterminated inasmuch as they get their living not by staying at home but by hunting in their native wilds.  But the company or tribe of blacks put to the sword by these eleven men had not only been innocent of all personal violence but they had become domesticated among these very men One of them (Kilmaister) had been the chief cause of their taking up their residence near his hut and he himself seems to have formed a friendship for them for in the evening on his return from his journeys after his cattle he was in the habit of playing and dancing with their children. One of the witnesses indeed states that this man always denied being of the party But the man made no attempt on his trial to prove an alibi and other witnesses swore to him being of the party.   The Blacks it appears were residing at the hut of Kilmaister in peace and confidence as usual when a party of men mounted and armed with swords and pistols galloped up to the place. From the manner of the party the Blacks who are by no means so deficient in intellect as they are represented in books perceived danger and ran for safety into the hut. They were taken out and tied one by one to a long rope used to catch cattle by the horns. Perceiving their fate they began to weep and moan.  The women though tied contrived to carry their infants in a net slung from their shoulders. Being all secured men and boys women girls and sucklings one of the horsemen led the way with the end of the rope attached to himself or horse. [199] The other ten horsemen divided into two parties of five each five placing themselves on one side of the rope one behind the other and five on the other side. The funeral procession then commenced its march and the tears and lamentations of the victims. It must have been a heart-rending sight to see the aged Black named "Daddy" led to the slaughter a man of giant-like stature and probably brave as he was magnificent in his form; the tears rolling down his aged cheeks at the sight of his wife children and relatives. The children perhaps scarcely knew their sufferings until the sharp steel had passed through their bodies and put a speedy end to their troubles.  Arrived at the place chosen for the catastrophe the slaughter began. All however we can glean from the evidence is that two shots were fired. The sword it should seem did the rest without noise except the cries of the victims. Decapitation appears to have been considered the readiest way of despatching them from the great number of skulls afterwards found.  After the slaughter a fire composed of dead trunks of trees and many yards in extent was kindled and the headless bodies and skulls were placed on the pile. But the party did not stay to see the bodies completely consumed. Perhaps they got alarmed or were compelled to return home in a given time. It would however been prudent in one or two of the party to remain at the fire another day. In the course of twenty-four hours every skull and every bone even the little bones of sucking children might by diligent searching among the ashes have been found and consumed and then what yesterday formed eight- and-twenty living human beings would have been mere heap of ashes.  A report which is gaining ground that these men were set upon this deed of darkness by others; a deed for which we cannot find a parallel for cold-blooded ferocity even in the history of Cortez and the Mexicans or of Pizarro and the Peruvians. The only monsters whose conduct will furnish us with a parallel is that of the Buccaneers of the West Indies.  It is not improper that these eleven men should have had counsel hired for them. Three counsel however was rather a luxurious number. But while three gentlemen (the masters of these men for instance) might have hired one counsel each privately it is not to the credit of New South Wales that a general subscription should have been raised among the magistrates and graziers of Hunter's River to an amount much larger than even three counsels could demand.  What was there in this murder of eight- and-twenty poor helpless betrayed men women and children that should induce the magistrates and gentlemen of Hunter's River to hire Counsels for the murderers? Do they hire Counsel for other men when tried for murder? How will this fact tell in England in France in Austria in Prussia and in America? For we doubt not but there are men in the two Houses of Parliament who will now make the Colony known all over the world - in kingdoms and cities where it was scarcely heard of before.  The verdict of acquittal was highly popular! It was with exertion that the Chief Justice could prevent the audience from cheering - such was their delight! The aristocracy of the Colony for once joined heart and hand with the prison population in expressions of joy at the acquittal of these men.  We tremble to remain in a country where such feelings and principles prevail. We have always dreaded an oligarchy. Should the new Act of Parliament take the government of this Colony out of the hands of the Queen and place it in the hands of the illiterate Dutch money-making aristocracy of this Colony we certainly shall begin to think of returning to Old England or taking up our abode among the uncorrupted English Colonists of Australia. For the verdict of Thursday shews that only let a man or a family be sufficiently unpopular with the aristocracy and the prison population of the Colony conjoined (in this case) and their murder will pass unheeded. Money lucre profit - these are thy Gods O Australia!  Associations in support either of prosecutors or the prosecuted are most abominable. Private subscriptions if publicly collected have the same tendency of the same un-English spirit and are equally unconstitutional. Illustrations of their bad tendency could be given without number; but we will give a practical one. In consequence of these eleven men being visited in prison and otherwise "comforted and abetted" by the Magistrate and Gentlemen of Hunter's River not one of them turned King's evidence!  Now without King's evidence half nay three - fourths of the murders rapes burglaries etc etc committed in this Colony would never be brought to light.  What will the Colony come to if Gentlemen feel justified in soliciting subscriptions to pay Counsel to defend their pet murderers and other pet ruffians.  SYDNEY Wednesday Dec. 19 1838  Yesterday at nine o'clock Kilmaister Hawkins Johnson Parry Foley Oates and Russell the seven convicted murderers of the blacks at Liverpool Plains paid with their lives the last earthly penalty of their crimes and have now gone to meet the award of an Almighty God.  From the time they had received sentence even up to the morning of their execution there were many persons who thought it probable that the sentence would not be carried into execution and attempts were made by petitioning His Excellency to extend mercy to them; but the reply was that the law must be carried into effect.  Very early yesterday morning the belief that a reprieve would arrive for the unfortunate men became very strong when at five A.M a message was despatched by His Excellency to Mr. Keck the Governor of the Gaol to wait upon him. which he did forthwith and ascertained that his presence was required in order that arrangements might be made to repress any violence should any be attempted on behalf of the condemned men by the mob. This was deemed not improbable on account of the degree of excitement which the case had occasioned in the public mind.  About eight o'clock a number of persons began to assemble on the Rocks at the rear of the Gaol and shortly after a few persons who had made application on the previous day were admitted within the walls. By orders of the Sheriff all other persons were refused admission into the yard at the time of the execution and this arrangement no doubt gave offence to many persons who applied for admission but the good effect was apparent by preventing the rush of the rabble usual on such occasions.  The mob outside was not so great as might have been anticipated from the degree of interest taken in the case although larger than on any former occasion.  Shortly before nine a guard of eighteen men of the 50th. regiment under the command of Lieutenant Sheaffe arrived and immediately afterwards the Sheriff.  The men had been engaged in their religious exercises previously and when the clock struck nine the procession began to move. Kilmaister Hawkins Johnson and Parry Protestants were attended by the Rev. Mr. Cowper and Mr. Hyndes of Sussex-street; and Foley Oates and Russell Catholics by the Rev. F. Murphy Roman Catholic Priest. They seemed greatly dejected and Russell was much agitated that he was obliged to cling to the Priest's coat for support. As soon as they had entered the yard the High Sheriff read over to them the warrant for their execution which he said by a letter from His Excellency the Governor had been appointed to take place that morning.  When the warrant had been read over Foley the youngest of the culprits addressed Mr. Macquoid and requested permission to embrace his unfortunate companions and the request being complied with they kissed and shook each others hands and with eyes streaming with tears bade each other a last adieu.  They shook hands with Mr. Keck and embraced Mr. Hibbs the principal turnkey and then knelt down and proceeded with their devotions at the close of which they mounted the scaffold attended by the clergymen who continued to exhort them while the final preparations were being completed.  These done the Rev. Gentlemen and the executioners descended the scaffold and in the short interval that followed previously to the falling of the drop the cries of the men to God for mercy were distinctly audible and they were soon launched into eternity. [201]  POSTSCRIPT  Reason and experience alike conspire to impress us with the belief that the unhappy beings who have just suffered if they did not actually act under the orders of some higher and concealed party were at least persuaded that in doing as they did they were acting in accordance with the wishes of their superiors whom it was both their interest and desire to please.  We dwell on this case the more particularly because it has given rise already to feelings which unless we are mistaken must have a powerful effect on the future peace and welfare of the community. Unhappily on this occasion men holding the very first rank in our colonial society have united with the very dregs of that society in the attempt to justify and uphold the murderers and to protect them from the just consequences of the law.  During the examination of the troops in the garrison before Sir Maurice O'Connell yesterday morning a conversation was overhead between two gentlemen the one resident in Sydney and the other a settler from the interior and which considered in conjunction with the ill-suppressed murmurings of the rabble at the execution over as they said the alleged hardships of hanging so many white men for the murder of a few black cannibals gives food for thought.  After the usual salutations the countryman asked: - "Have they hanged the men?"  "Yes" replied the citizen. "I understand they have."  "It is a damned shame" said the countryman. "But we have fallen on a safer game in our part of the country."  "Indeed pray what is it?"  "Oh! we poison them and have done so to a good many already" explained the countryman. "Serves them right too."  It is well-known that arsenic is used in great quantities by the shepherds of our interior in curing scab in sheep. It is kept in every hut at every sheep station in the country.  The hut-keepers make wheaten cakes and they have only to mingle a portion of arsenic in a particular cake and mark it and give it to the Blacks as a present. It will despatch them rapidly or lingeringly according to the quantity infused.  The natives die or they languish a few weeks and then die. There is no Surgeon no Protector to report their death or to examine into the disease which caused it. We can see at no distant date the entire extirmination of our black natives of the interior.  If there be any actual ground for this supposition and that the unfortunate men who have just suffered were urged to the commission of the atrocious deed by parties yet behind the curtain we trust that no pains will be spared until the whole murderous crew are brought to the bar of justice.  Sydney   July 14 1838   Dear Sir   We arrived here through much mercy on the 1st of the month in health and safety and after an unusually long passage being 20 weeks from England. Mr Hadfield wrote to you from the Cape where we put in for fresh water &c. I also wrote to Mr Broughton desiring him to send me a new Black Dress of clothes (thinking that by the time they arrived I should want them). Also Davenant's Commentary on the Calossians; and Milner's Church History to which I would now add Owen's Commentary on the Hebrews. These Books I could wish to have as I know somewhat the value of them. But I wish them to be paid out of my yearly salary as I have a little money with me to discharge any incidental expenses which I might incur here.   Since our landing I have been busily employed in making preparations to proceed to my destination to which place (if God will) I shall proceed on Monday next. I go by the Mail to Bathurst where I expect to have a horse sent me by Mr Watson from Wellington as Rev. Mr Cowper has written to Mr Watson to that effect.   If Mr Broughton has not sent the above-mentioned articles perhaps you would be kind enough to allow them to be sent the first opportunity as the only way of my obtaining anything from England is through the medium of the Society.   Mr Hadfield and myself are both well in health for which we would thank our Heavenly Father who is ever with us to guide guard and help us with the riches of His Grace and to keep us by His Glorious power through Faith unto Salvation. We are living together very agreeably speaking to and edifying each other continually in those things which belong to our everlasting peace.   I remain dear sir   Your humble servant in the Lord   William Porter.   Scarcely had an hour elapsed after our arrival than the worthy Bishop of Sydney Monsignor Polding accompanied by a missionary priest Father Brady arrived amongst us. The benevolent prelate told us that although quite unable to distinguish us one from another he knew everyone of us that we were his children torn from the Church in Canada but entrusted henceforth to the care of the church in New South Wales. The Bishops of Canada had written to Bishop Polding and their letters of religion and charity had preceded us into these far distant regions of our harsh exile.  Monsignor Folding and his companion Father Brady who spoke French with the greatest of ease remained with us for about an hour and a half during which they lavished on us all the sympathy that the offerings of charity and priestly zeal could suggest. The Bishop informed us that he would come with some priests the following day to receive our confessions; then before leaving he prayed for us and gave us his blessing. There is no necessity for me to attempt to express the comfort that this holy visit brought us since these lines are especially intended to be read by my fellow-countrymen Canadians children of the church inheritors of the piety of glorious ancestors.  The following day Bishop Folding returned as arranged with two missionary priests. His Grace informed us that he had obtained from the authorities permission ho celebrate mass in our wretched quarters and that later Holy Communion would be administered no those who were in a fit condition to receive it. We all made our confessions preparing ourselves as best we could to receive our Saviour the following day.  As I have explained earlier at one end of our narrow prison there was a space corresponding to a hatchway within which the height between one deck and the other allowed several persons to stand erect. It was there that we set up as well as lay within our power the altar for the Holy Sacrifice.  On 27 February 1840 in the port of the capital of New South Wales a Bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ assisted by his missionary priests celebrated the Holy Mass in the hold of a convict ship and fifty-eight Canadian political exiles heard this mass said for their benefit and received there the Holy Eucharist.  O miracles of Religion! who can describe you! But if few possess the gift of revealing you alt have received that of feeling you ninth it is especially no the unfortunate that this gift is accorded in all its plenitude.  It was an unspeakable happiness for us to meet on our arrival upon the soil of the land to which we had been transported a protector a father in the person of a prince of the church and In/ends so sincere in its worthy missionary priests. [114]  At that time we had great need of the help from on high that they brought to us and of the power that is drawn from the Sacraments so as to pardon wholeheartedly all those who during this endless voyage had shown themselves as cruel as they were unjust towards us.  The Holy Mass having been said we all passed about half an hour in thanksgiving after which the Bishop placing himself in the midst of us that is as far as the place would allow and seating himself on our convict's bench began to chat with us with solicitude and goodheartedness.  As I have already said our guard was made up of one squad of policemen and one squad of soldiers. Several of these men were married and our Superintendent was a bachelor having so little respect for himself that he was pretty indecent. One evening when the Superintendent and his cronies had gathered together in one of the rooms where his policemen resided with their families to drink and enjoy themselves it happened that the worthy chief and his worthy subordinates became so blind drunk that the differences of ranks and grades could no longer be distinguished. The Superintendent having so far forgotten himself as to publicly insult the wife of one of the policemen the husband of this latter attacked his captain hammer and tongs and showered on him a succession of punches which then restored to the latter his sense of authority. Then he ordered his subordinate officers to arrest the assailant and to take him off to the clink a dark cell made for prisoners undergoing solitary confinement.  It must be understood that some took the side of their chief and that others sided with the insulted husband for a terrible row then took place. From our dormitories we heard the yells and the noise of the smashing of furniture and crockery in the midst of the brawl.  In the embarrassing position in which he found himself our Superintendent forgetting his prejudices and his unjust restriction rushed towards our little cells opened the doors and summoned us outside. This we were able to do without any delay owing to the fact that by reason of the cold and the lack of bed-clothes we were lying down as usual fully dressed Once assembled which was the work of only a minute the Superintendent ordered us to arrest all the policemen and all the soldiers and so lock up in one of the sheds the whole force appointed to guard us. [125] We obeyed without knowing then a single word about the origin and causes of the quarrel and without foreseeing what would be the consequences of this extraordinary adventure. Only one man a sergeant had been exempted from arrest. It was he alone who was charged with the duty of guarding us during the rest of the night.  The consideration that there have been two systems in operation for the introduction of Immigrants the one by means of Agency conducted under the direction of Government the other kept in activity by private enterprise under the inducements held out by the offer of the Bounties has led your Committee to institute an accurate comparison between those two systems upon the points of general efficiency arrangement and expense.  With reference to the first feature that of positive efficiency the Committee has arrived at the conclusion that each of the systems has had the effect of introducing great numbers of useful and industrious individuals of both sexes into the Country whereby its moral physical and political condition has been already much improved and the ground-work has been laid for a future much more extended melioration.  It is however not so much upon the actual as upon the comparative recommendations of these two systems that your Committee has been led to dwell from a conviction that preference should be given to that one which shall be found to confer an equal amount of advantage on the colony at the lowest rate of expense.  (On expense) Your Committee therefore can form no other conclusion than that the Immigrants introduced under the Government system at an expense of £168775 might have been conveyed hither under the system of Bounties at a cost of no more than £112955 or with an actual saving of £55820 to the Colony.  It appeared therefore necessary to inquire whether the description of Immigrants furnished by the Government system was so superior to the corresponding class under the Bounty System as to constitute an advantage deserving to be placed in the scale against the marked excess in the cost of their introduction. But without designing to detract from the character of usefulness and eligibility in many of the Immigrants introduced in Government vessels the Committee cannot conceal the fact that there is Evidence of a great proportion of this class being of a contrary description and upon the point of qualification there can be no doubt that the balance is decidedly in favour of those under the Bounty System. [189] The most obvious cause of such Superiority in the latter class is to be found in that Regulation which prohibits the payment of any portion of the Bounty on account of any Immigrant until he or she shall have undergone an inspection before a Colonial Board to the satisfaction of which it must be made to appear that the party in point of age and general qualifications accords with the conditions appointed by the Government here. In the case of all parties not answering to that standard the Bounty is withheld and the expense of their passage falls therefore as a loss upon the affreighter of the vessel. It is too clear to need any proof that no possible regulation could surpass this in tending to make persons entering into engagements to bring out Immigrants on the Bounty System extremely cautious in admitting none except such as duly correspond with the description laid down in the Government Regulations. It is shewn that not above one in a hundred is rejected on inspection; from which it must be evident that the persons by whom the selection is made must be acting with the utmost carefulness under a sense of the pecuniary responsibility they would incur by any relaxation of vigilance as to the description of persons sent by them to the Colony. It does not appear to your Committee that the Agency of a Board in the service of Government can ever be expected to exercise so scrupulous a care; however earnest and faithful the Members of such Board may in reality be there must still be wanting among them that stimulus to keenness of observation which must necessarily be excited when the party making the selection is under the constant recollection that his own pecuniary interests will be injured if he admit ineligible objects.  In this point of view the Bounty System is incontestably preferable to Government Agency under which there will not only be somewhat more of laxity in the selection of parties but should they die on the passage or however inefficient or unsuitable they may on their arrival prove to be the expense of their transmission has been incurred previously to their leaving the Shores of England and cannot in any event be recovered. Under the other System it is obvious that upon the supposition of deaths occurring or of incompetency being proved the whole account of Bounty is saved to the Colony.  The corresponding details relating to Ships on the Bounty System shew that in Vessels arriving between the 1st January 1838 and 30th September 1839 there were embarked 3001 Adults of whom 36 died or 1 in 83 - Children embarked were 1449 among whom occurred 148 Deaths or one in 9.  The average of Deaths on board Government Vessels has been I in 56 Adults and 1 in 10 Children. The general average of Mortality therefore has been 124 Adults in 7939; and 526 Children in 5365 i.e: 1 in 64 adults 1 in 11 Children or 1 in every 20 souls very nearly. [190]  Previously to quitting the consideration of the comparative merits of the two systems upon which the conveyance of Immigrants is now conducted it is necessary to refer to one class peculiar to the ships on the Bounty System that is consisting of persons arriving on board those ships at their own cost and charge. During the year 1838 there were 1478 persons of that description; and during the first nine months of the present year their numbers have increased to 2171.  It is evident that persons so circumstanced could either not be received on board the Government vessels or they must be provided with free passages and consequently the value of their services to the Colony and the amount of passage money thus saved must be placed to the credit of the Bounty System. There are no data enabling this Committee to trace very accurately what proportion among those who arrive at their own expense may have been induced to undertake the voyage from the motive of accompanying their friends who are allowed a free passage; but assuming this motive to prevail in one-half only of such cases the Bounty System will have had the collateral effect of bringing to the Colony in 21 months not fewer that 1824 individuals without expense to the public who if that system had not been in operation would either not have come or would have had their passage paid for out of the Colonial funds.  FULL Particulars of THE Dreadful Shipwreck of the SHIP TARTAR FREE TRADER  With the horrible sufferings of PART OF THE CREW. Who were compelled to Eat each other to SUPPORT EXISTENCE.  The Ship Tartar of 837 tons commanded by captin J. H. Peck left Cork on the 8th January 1839 bound to Sydney on a trading voyage having a crew on board of 37 men a Surgeon and 28 Passengers 10 of whom were females and 13 children; 2 of the passengers died on the passage so that at the time the vessel struck she had on board no less than 75 souls.  For some weeks the voyage was pursued under the most favourable circumstances; the wind was tolerable fair and though there was some sickness among the passengers everything seemed to prognosticate a speedy and propitious voyage. Alas! how soon was that assurance of safety changed to horrors of the most awful description. Danger lurked in their path and death with all his terrors stood unseen before them. Little dreaming that their existence was drawing so near a close they thought not of the future till warned by the terrors to which they were subjected.  At about noon on the 13th of April according to the ship's reckoning she was about 90 miles from King's Island at the entrance of Bass Straits and things wore a favourable aspect. In about 2 hours afterwards breakers were discovered right a-head and immediate orders were given to tack by Captain Peck who was then engaged in his various duties on the deck. Scarcely had the crew and passengers recovered from the alarm into which they had been thrown when the vessel again struck on the larboard bow swung her broadside on the reef and bilged.  Horror succeeded to the consternation and alarm into which all the parties had been thrown by this unexpected event. The captain was called upon to render what assistance he could to rescue them from the perils and dangers which threatened them; he endeavoured to soothe and comfort them under their misfortunes and besought them to restrain their terror and alarm as much as possible under these awful circumstances but the imminent danger of their situation rendered them desperate and their cries for deliverance rose louder and louder as the danger of the ship and their situation became every moment more apparent.  By whose orders we know not but the pinnance was now lowered and the captain and the surgeon and two of the crew got into her and endeavoured to make off from the sinking vessel. At this period of dismay and confusion many threw themselves over the side of the vessel and clinging to the boat quickly swamped her when horrible to relate all excepting the Captain and two sailors perished amidst one wild cry of horror - and despair.  With the greatest difficulty the Captain contrived to regain the Ship when without losing a moment of time he ordered the long boat to be launched and that care should be taken to prevent a similar accident to that which had just befallen them by two [sic] many endeavouring to force their way into her. After having taken the utmost caution the long boat was at length pushed off; but scarcely had they got away from the Ship when she was upset by the violence of the surf and the whole party precipitated into the sea.  The master and the chief mate being good swimmers once more succeeded in saving themselves from the death which appeared to be inevitable. With extreme difficulty they managed to reach the ship but scarcely had they got on board when a new horror awaited them. The vessel went to pieces and every hope of preservation vanished like an unsubstantial dream.  The scene at this moment was most awful. The vessel had been divided into four parts each of which was covered with the terror-stricken females in the light dress in which they had just before simultaneously rushed from their beds; clingly wildly to parts of the wreck and screaming for help in the most piteous manner. This was indeed a moment of terror which would have appalled even the boldest. Situated as they were upon a frail and shaking wreck not one gleam of hope broke in to cheer or inspire them. Beneath and all around were the lashing waves roaring aloud as if eager to engulf them. Every plank and joint creaked as the contending elements warred furiously with each other and insecure as this place of refuge seemed the hearts of the poor creatures quailed lest it should sink and bury them in the yawning abyss of water. [203] The vessel soon afterwards went to pieces the final work of destruction was complete and the whole of those on board were precipitated shrieking with horror into the raging ocean.  In this perilous situation nearly the whole of the unfortunate sufferers were consigned to an untimely death. About 22 persons however consisting of some of the crew and 5 passengers were carried by clinging to various disjointed portions of the wreck to a small uninhabited Island which was situated at the distance of about 9 miles from the spot where this distressing accident took place. Of these 22 suffering creatures seven shortly afterwards died from exhaustion and the fatigue to which they had for so long a period been subjected.  After having buried the bodies of their unfortunate companions and in some degree recovered from the cold and fatigue they had endured the remaining 15 succeeded in erecting a temporary tent of the few things that were occasionally washed ashore from the wreck. In this dreadful situation they were not suffered to perish a few provisions were washed ashore from the vessel and upon the scanty supply thus afforded they contrived with economy to subsist for about 15 days.  During this time they had employed themselves in constructing from the numerous portions of the wreck which were found washed ashore a raft on which they hoped to make their escape to King's Island which they supposed to be about 150 miles distant. Actuated by curiosity and a desire to ascertain whether any more of the crew had escaped 5 of the survivors commenced a journey round the Island in order to satisfy themselves; they encountered perils and fatigue of no ordinary kind and after a search of 4 days returned to their fellow victims of adversity.  The crew of the Tartar had been accompanied by a sealer a passenger in that vessel who had luckily saved several of his hunting dogs. With the assistance of these sagacious animals they soon succeeded in taking a wallaby upon which the persons on the Island lived. Whilst some of the party were employed to see if any vessel passed others were engaged in erecting tents for their shelter from the inclement season which had just set in in those latitudes.  The sufferings to which these poor creatures were subjected it would be impossible to describe. Thoughts of home and distant friends were ever flitting through their minds. They remembered the happiness that had once been theirs and contrasting it with the misery to which they were at present doomed despair at last yielded to the hopes they had once formed of escaping from the wretched situation in which their lot was cast and they wished that the raging elements which had destroyed so many of their companions had involved them in the same dreadful fate.  At last on the 15th of June exactly 1 month from the time of the wreck taken place they left this inhospitable Island and committed themselves to the dangers of the deep on the fragile raft they had constructed when awful to relate fresh and more horrible disasters awaited them. In 3 days their whole stock of provisions were exhausted - 2 days passed without tasting a morsel. What followed next? Nothing but what devouring famine could have suggested. It was agreed that one should die to support the rest and they accordingly cast lots; the first lot fell upon Patrick Lidane who requested that for their immediate subsistance they would only take the calves of his legs; representing that Providence might do more for them than they expected. His request was granted and after cutting away the flesh which they eat raw and of which he begged a morsel for himself but was refused he was permitted to live 30 hours. The second person who suffered was Brian Flaherty. Of these two bodies which were eaten raw without any drink but what rain-water they could catch in the skulls of the killed the rest subsisted. In this interval three of them who had escaped the lot after languishing for a considerable time expired on the raft.  On the following morning 8 others in despair jumped into the sea. Next morning the raft was descried by some persons on King's Island who had them conveyed on shore and although the greatest care was extended to the two unfortunate survivors the Captain died in 30 hours after.  John M'Daniel the only person saved of the ill-fated crew as soon as he was able to travel made the best of his way home to Galway to fulfil the dying injunctions of the men who fell by lot and relate to their friends their miserable sufferings and sad catastrophe.  Jarmous Darlinghurst April [?] 1839  My Dear Capt. Piper  I am sufficiently acquainted of old with your disposition to do good whenever an opportunity offered of doing so to make any Apology for addressing you on the present occasion without further ado I will say that a poor Lady from Bathurst a Mrs. Bohun whose husband is in Gaol there and who belongs to a most respectable family in England has written to Lady O'Connell a most soul harrowing letter describing the station of misery and starvation to which she and a family of helpless children are reduced having no means of support but a trifle she earns by establishing a school which is as yet very thinly attended - The poor woman declares that for 10 Days previous to her writing she and her children had not tasted a morsel of Bread altho her letter was written on the 16th of the present month it only reached as this morning - Lady O'Connell sends by this days Post a trifle to keep her from starvation for a short time but as in consequence of the heavy expenses I have been at for my outfit and establishment here it will be impossible for me to aid this poor woman as I would wish.  I wish to recommend her case to the humane and charitable aid as you are in her immediate neighbourhood you can in any way and in alleviating the dire distress of this poor woman you will be doing a most meritorious act. - I know nothing of Mrs. Bohun or of her husband but she is connected with persons in England whom we have a very great regard for - Such as Lady Catharine Bishett the Sister of Lord Suffolk [?] and the late Lady Brownrigg [?] [?] [?] of the late Sir Robert Brownrigg who were both our particular friends - perhaps your interest may [?] join of the families in your neighbourhood to send their children to her school. in any way that you could put the poor woman in the way of obtaining the means of procuring bread for her helpless familiy. I repeat you will be performing a most meritorious act and you will oblige Lady O'Connell who joins me in kindest remembrance to you as well as yours [?] [?] [?]   Mission House Wellington Valley   Jan. 21 1839   Dear Sir  The Colonial Government having decided to establish a Town on the Mission Land (as the Surveyor has measured off about 1000 Acres for that purpose.) I beg leave to address the Society on the supposition of them forming another Mission. I would first just mention that I wrote to the Society in August last. In that letter I made known to them my suspicions that the Colonial Government would eventually take the Land from us. Since the date of my letter the Rev J. Gunther has made some important communications to you respecting the Colonial Government and the Mission which makes it unnecessary for me to write on that subject. I wish to give merely my own thoughts and feelings relating to the removal of the Mission. And I do so with the greater confidence from the liberty given or rather the wish expressed by the Rev. W. Jowett in a letter to me dated 17 August last the receipt of which I have gratefully to acknowledge. That the Mission must be removed is quite certain. It can never be carried on in so close a connection with a Town.   There are several things to be considered in forming another Mission. First the Situation. It should be were there is plenty of water and the Land fertile. Also were the Natives are most numerous. Secondly the Land should be a large tract not less than 5 miles each way from the Mission Station. The Land should also be secured to the Society for the use of the Mission as long as they should wish to keep it for that purpose. Thirdly as a Mission amongst the Natives of this Country is attended with so much secular labour it appears necessary that the Society should have a large number of Lay Missionaries to commence another Mission and avoid the necessity of employing those wretched characters the convicts of the Colony. But I must again advert to the situation of the supposed Mission. We have thought it advisable that the Mission should be removed down the River if re-established at all. But my opinion is altered on that subject for these reasons. First unless we removed 60 or 100 Miles; lower down the Natives are not numerous and even at that distance they will soon cease to be if they diminish as they have done in other places. (For it is a remarkable fact that 12 months ago at a place 30 Miles down the River the Natives it is said were numerous. Now there is scarcely one at that distance. It may be asked what is the cause? I think it to be this. The great increase of population enables the Settlers to extend their Cattle and Sheep Stations farther every year: wherever they locate themselves they drive away the Kangaroos and Opossums on which the Natives chiefly subsist. The Natives must therefore either pine away and die or else move into the interior. My other reason is this: The great additional expense of obtaining our Supplies from Sydney.   If I may be allowed to give my opinion respecting the situation of another Mission. I should propose it being a few Miles from the sea shore in an unlocated country either in the South between Port Phillip and South Australia or on the East side of this Country a little to the Northward of Moreton Bay. At the latter Place there is a Mission established under the auspices of Dr Lang of the Scots Church in this Colony. The Land to the South is most suitable for Agriculture. And again unlikely to be soon located. The Natives are every where [NN] Mission on the seacoast.   I wish now dear sir to write a little concerning myself. It was the wishes of the Society before I left England that I should take a Partner with me in my Missionary labours. They may recollect that the only obstacle to my doing so then was the opposition of the Parent to her daughter leaving her Native land. I can with confidence now inform the Society that that obstacle is removed. I have therefore humbly to request the Society to allow me to return to England for the purpose of obtaining a Partner previous to their forming a new Mission should they do so at all in this Colony. For if I must continue to be Agriculturist to the Mission it is highly desirable that I should be a married man.   Should the Society dear sir not establish another Mission in this Colony I expect they will send me to some other Mission. In the event of this I have two things to request of the Society if they are agreeable to their own views. The one is that my labours may be of a more spiritual kind than those I am at present engaged in. The other that I may have a more complete education to enable me to perform such labours with greater efficiency.   There is another subject dear sir which I cannot pass over though I mention it with the greatest reluctance. Ever since I have been here   I have had to witness very unhappy discussions between Messrs Watson and Gunther. Though it is my wish as well as my duty to think and speak charitably of all yet in the present occasion I cannot forbear to express my falling somewhat strongly against the Rev W. Watson yet I grieve over it as I write it. I can never join in any other Mission of which he is one of the members. His unhappy temper makes every other fellow labourer miserable. All is division and disunion. No brotherly Love that blessed grace so highly valued by our Lord and Master. Unless there is a great alteration I cannot stay should the Mission continue some considerable time longer.   In conclusion dear sir I beg leave to add that my wish is to live and die a Missionary. I have undergone no change from my six months' trial and disappointment at Wellington Valley; on the contrary they have increased. I long I desire I pray that I may be engaged in a field of more spiritual and less temporal employment. I thank my heavenly Father that I can look upon the World and the things of the World   [Next section virtually illegible]   . . . pray of my Brother Missionaries . . . for the World allowing their affections to be fixed on the things of . . . I can lift up my heart to the . . .   . . .that he had hitherto preserved me from such circumstances.   Waiting an answer at your convenience.   I remain dear sir   Your humble Servant in the Lord   William Porter   Mission House Wellington Valley   April 6 1839   Dear Sir   Having so much sameness in my daily labours in consequence of the severe drought and the almost total absence of the Natives I have considered it best to give the Society the substance of my proceedings and prospects in a letter. That I have done either as a Missionary or as an Agriculturist has been comparatively little. What I have suffered has been much more.   The severe drought with which the Colony has been visited for many months past still continues with all its distressing consequences. We have been prevented entering into any Agricultural employments in which we ought now to be fully engaged. We have not and can not sow the grain of wheat until the Lord is pleased to send us a fall of rain. Nor can we even plough one single furrow as a preparatory step. We have spent much time in dragging cows out of the River the water of which had fallen so low and left so much mud that the cows in going to drink stick fast in it being too weak and poor (thru the scarcity of food) to get out again without help. We have sometimes had as many as 2 or 3 in a day to drag out. A great many of our cows with calves have died some in the bush others have been drowned in the River before they could be got out. The calves generally died afterwards being too young to support themselves upon so scanty a subsistence. The Bullocks that we slaughter being so young and so poor are exceedingly light rarely exceeding 300 pounds in weight and often times much less than that. This causes us to kill so many more to supply us with the necessary quantity of Beef. On the one hand our cows and calves are dying through want and on the other we are killing more Bullocks than usual to make up the required weight so that in a very short time our Herd will consist (with very few exceptions) only of a few young cattle from 0 months to one and a half years' old. Our Sheep have certainly done much better than the cattle; comparatively few have died and those generally very old ones. Still the Mothers that we have killed (like the Bullocks) have been very light and requiring three to make the same weight as two would weigh six months ago. Our horses also are very poor; we have scarcely one that is fit to do a day's work. We endeavour to keep alive those that we do work by giving them a few reeds which the Natives get for us out of the River.   Our wheat crops having entirely failed we are obliged to buy every Bushel we want at the high price of one pound per Bushel and give nearly one pound per cart to have it brought us the distance of seventy miles so that a Bushel of wheat costs us ultimately about one pound ten per Bushel and we ate a little more than three Bushels weekly. The reason we are obliged to have our wheat fetched is this. Our own Bullock team is quite broken up. Six Bullocks have died; four more our men left on their way from Sydney with Supplies (being unable to travel) and I never expect that we shall find them again. The remaining four that we have are nearly all unfit for work.   We have only four Months' Rations of Tea and Sugar in the Stores and no prospect of getting any more up from Sydney for almost every team that attempts to come up to Wellington lose the greater number of their Bullocks on their way with there being no feed for them. The distress is becoming truly alarming as it will be impossible in a short time if the drought continues to obtain the necessities of life Flour and Salt. We have been obliged to use the greatest possible economy in giving food to the Natives which has caused a great many of them to go away. And those that do remain are very unsteady in their habits. Sometimes being with the Police Constables and sometimes with us just as it suits them - fanciful minds. What I have done as a Missionary has been almost nothing for it has occupied almost the whole of my time six Days of the week in providing the necessities of life for our Establishment: and on the Sabbath we have two Services at our Chapel which (taking into consideration the extreme indolence of the Natives) leaves me but little time to devote to their Institution. Still whenever I have time and opportunity to instruct them either in reading or conversation. I trust I never allow it to escape.   All these things dear sir added to those many difficulties trials and lamentable recurrences of which the Home Society I have no doubt are by this time made acquainted with. I mean more particularly the conduct of the Colonial Government in proceeding to take away the Land from the Mission to build a Town upon it and also the unhappy way in which we as Missionaries have almost universally been living with respect to each other.   All these things dear sir cannot fail to make a deep impression on the mind of a sincere Christian and would be more than he could bear were he not supported and comforted by the Lord his God.   The Society may conjecture but they cannot enter fully into all the trials and sorrows I have met within my short Missionary career at Wellington Valley. Had my trials and sorrows arisen simply from the persecuting spirit of a sinful world or as discouragements from the Natives I could rejoice that the Lord had counted me worthy to suffer for His sake. For then I might hope (and that confidently) for better prospects. But when my trials are of that kind and arising from those caused too well known to the Society hope at once vanishes and my heart is filled with the heaviest grief. Nothing but a sense of duty dear sir induces me to continue here where I have not the least prospect of encouragement or success. This I do anxiously waiting the decision of the Society respecting the removal of the Mission.   I trust that whenever or wherever the Society may re-establish the Mission amongst the Heathens of the country it may be established on a better place than the present one is. I do think it to be improper and prejudicial to the interests of a Mission to employ any person in it who are not sincere Christians.   It is far from my wish to dictate to the Society but when I see evils existing which I consider may be remedied I cannot but point them out for the consideration of the Society.   I trust the Lord will direct the Society in all their decisions respecting the Mission to these Poor Heathens. Such is the prayer of   Dear sir   Your humble Servant in the Lord   William Porter.   Sydney   August 30 1839   Dear Sir   The Rev. W Cowper has just made known to me that he has been privately informed by the Colonial Secretary that it is the intention of the Colonial Government to remove the whole of the Civil Establishment from Wellington Valley. In consequence of which dear sir I beg leave strongly to recommend to the Home Society that they should lose no time in forming a proper Missionary Establishment. If they expect anything of importance from the present one they must be disappointed. If you dear sir duly received my letter of December last year you will find that I requested permission to visit England (if the Society intended me to continue as Agriculturist to the Mission) for the purpose of obtaining a female Partner. This I wrote under the anticipation that the Mission would be removed from Wellington Valley. But as the Mission is now not to be removed from that place I have no wish to return to England. That is - if the Society wish me to continue as Agriculturist to the Mission. If I continue to hold my present situation it is necessary - indispensably necessary - that I should be a married man. This is the opinion of the Home Society I know. Then if the Society should send out other Missionaries to this country the female in question might come out with them very well without my returning to England. That is if the Society will pay her Passage and give her the customary outfit. She has expressed her willingness to come under these circumstances. I shall write to the female in question dear sir and give her the necessary information requesting her to write to the Society on the receipt of my Letter. stating her wishes and determination. If the Society approve of my proposition I trust dear sir you will write to the female in question informing her of the fact and kindly giving her any information which may be desirable relative to her embarkation.   If the Society should remove me from Wellington Valley the above mentioned requests will be unnecessary.   I remain dear sir   Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus.   William Porter.  P.S. Perhaps it may be desirable for me to give you the "address" of the person above mentioned which is as follows;   Miss Beeston   Mr Abell's   Halland Ward   Derbyshire.   These statements are quite sufficient to draw the attention of the public to the scandalous abuses of the Government system of importing immigrants. It has been converted into a contemptible tool for Whig faction purposes and Popish ascendancy. The interests of the colony are thrown overboard to promote the Irish poor laws. The sale of Land funds are handed over to agents who sweep the gaols and parishes of the cumberers of the property of popish landlords. The unhappy emigrants are shipped off to make way for pardoned cut throats released from prison by the popularity hunting Lord Lieutenant. Will the Government permit this system so ably exposed by Mr. Pinnock to exist for one day will no sense of oppression awaken the torpid energies of the buyers of land and hirers of servants? The nefarious system is open to the glare of the sun. If the monster is not crushed let the sufferers take the consequences in the embarrassing poor-law begging system it produces and in the pondrous taxes to be levied for poor-houses hospitals gaols and police to suppress such scenes as have never been witnessed in this land comparatively happy with all its disadvantages of convict servants and irresponsible Councils. [195] A merchant when ordered to send you his best rum sugar or tea with a promise that you will pay him the best price will not send you the sweepings of his store if he is an honest man. But here the Colonists send ample funds for the best immigrants to advance the Colony and benefit Britain while the Whig Ministry send out the very refuse of the counties that their new poor-laws may be lightly felt. The system is 'too bad'. It merits the severest censure.  Is it quite certain that the local magistracy will deal equal justice between the parties? Is it upon the common principles which actuate human nature even altogether probable? We know not. We own it to be our opinion that the servant whether he be complainant or accused will NOT in cases such as the present meet with scrupulous or impartial Justice. [422] Far be it from us to impute to the magistracy in country districts any intentional desire to pervert the law. But we maintain that their minds will be inevitably though imperceptibly biased in favour of one class of applicants rather than of the other. The general turn of their minds the pressure of their private interests the cardinal necessity as it seems to them of preserving discipline is not in instances such as will occur under this Act salutary to the undisturbed and impartial discharge of justice. And this reflection is rendered more weighty and is the more calculated to disquiet the mind when we take it in conjunction with the indefinite discretionary powers entrusted by the Act both to themselves and to the settler complaining. We assert that upon this head a well-grounded fear may be entertained and we should be wanting to an upright discharge of our duty were we not timely to proclaim this opinion.  Where is the BRITOMART?  Are the People in the STRAITS PIRATES?  The first intimation of the Britomart's loss about Banks' Straits was derived from Captain Gill of the schooner Sir John Franklin who was the bearer of a letter to Captain Moriarty the Port Officer at Hobart Town from a person called Munro living on Preservation Island. He also brought the register of that vessel together with some letters and books among which was the log-book of the Ellen and a private journal belonging to the missing master of the ill fated Britomart. The letter from Munro states that the above few things were probably washed ashore between the 22nd. and 26th. December 1839.  Jimmy Munro has been living on Preservation for almost 35 years and raises a considerable quantity of vegetables which he barters to sealers. He has several black women who labour for him and procure mutton-birds. He was appointed agent for the Government several years ago although what his duties are in that capacity remains a mystery but notwithstanding he is known to all and sundry as King of the Eastern Straits.  From Captain Gill we learn that when he visited Munro he saw part of a ship's cabin affording cover to a pig-stye.  "There appears" Captain Gill observed to Munro "to be indications of a wreck hereabouts!"  "Yes" Munro replied. "I think some vessel has been wrecked going from Sydney to Port Phillip."  "Ah!" said Gill. "Why the Britomart is missing."  At that Munro was silent.  Captain Gill then returned to his vessel and reflecting on what had passed he resolved again the next day to have some further conversation with Munro when he elicited the fact of Munro having in his custody on shore the register of the Britomart some books and letters which he gave up to Captain Gill. Captain Gill also had shown to him by some of the black women or Munro there being only four persons on Preservation - part of two wrecked boats and some sheep's carcases.  Further enlightenment comes with the report from Captain M'Cole of the Vansittart which however is partly based only on his own opinion "that the vessel struck on a rock near Preservation and washed over into deep water." But Munro did inform him that a man named Drew had left the island with some cheques amounting to £460 besides gold and notes.  At the time of the above reports reaching Captain Moriarty more letters were received by the post via Launceston that had evidently been despatched in the Britomart from Port Phillip. Strange circumstances! perhaps Captain M'Cole put them into the Post Office at Launceston or the man Drew - a mysterious character - did so.  Shortly after this episode some persons apparently sealers make their appearance at Launceston very flush of money. One of them boasted of his knowing where to find the Britomart should some one make it worth his while.  About a fortnight since Captain Tregurtha the owner of the brig Henry expressed his surprise that the owner of the Britomart did not send to save something from the wreck as the scalers of the Straits were flashing away plenty of sovereigns and that they all knew where the Britomart was.  Captain Gill has since returned from his second trip to Preservation Badger and Barren Islands and has brought up the mizzen topmast the rudder of a ship's long-boat the part of a compass and a snuff-box identified as belonging to Mr Charles Gatehouse one of the passengers of the Britomart. Captain Gill also saw thirty carcases of sheep and a ham and leg of mutton cooked. But he can't account for Munro's mysterious behaviour; and will cooked meat float ashore?  If the people in the Straits are pirates Munro's disinclination to reveal anything is natural enough. But there is a dereliction of duty on the part of the Government if immediate steps are not taken to unravel the mystery which enshrouds the fate of above thirty individuals including at least seven passengers among whom were Messrs. Gatehouse Ratcliffe Glass and Watt known to have been on board the brig Britomart a staunch vessel of 200 tons burthen.  Is it a matter of no importance to know whether they were drowned or murdered? Whether they landed alive or were plundered after being washed ashore? And where are the bodies of those that were drowned?  A COMPLETE EXPOSURE OF THE CONVICT SYSTEM.  HORRORS HARDSHIPS and SEVERITIES INCLUDING AN ACCOUNT OF The Dreadful Sufferings OF THE unhappy captives  Containing An Extract from a Letter from the Hulks at Woolwich written BY EDWARD LILBURN Pipe-Maker late of Lincoln.  The alarming progress of crime in every part of the Empire is a sufficient reason for calling the attention of Parents and Guardians and the young and inexperienced to the certainty and excessive severity of legal punishment.  The case of Lilburn is well known to the world the writer knew him many years and suffered great pain of mind from those unhappy circumstances which have placed him in his present unenviable situation. His opinion is and it is the belief of thousands that more than one half of what has been said of Lilburn is entirely false; and yet he hopes that petitions from Lincoln and his good behaviour will abridge the term of his captivity.  When he was removed from Lincoln he was taken to the Hulks at Woolwich from which he writes -   "I was led to think there was something dreadful in the punishment I had to undergo but my heart sank within me on my arrival here for almost the first thing I saw was a gang of my fellow unfortunates chained together working like horses. I was completely horror-struck but every hour serves now to increase my misery; I was taken to the Blacksmith and had my irons the badge of infamy and degradation rivetted upon me my name being registered and my person described in the books of the ship; I was taken to my berth and here new sufferings presented themselves as the great arrival of convicts had crowded the ship so much that three of us have but one bed and this the oldest prisoner claims as his own; our berth is so small we have no room to lie at length thus I passed a wretched a half sleepless night at the dawn of day we have a wretched breakfast of skilley in which I cannot partake and though suffering dreadfully from hunger I subsist wholly on my dinner at present live on one meal a day!!"  "I have complained but am told I was brought here for punishment and that I must submit to my fate. Whether I speak of my present situation in reference to daily labour daily food or the rigorous severity of the system under which I suffer I can say if there is a Hell on earth it is a convict-ship. Let every inhabitant of the City and County of Lincoln know the Horrors of Transportation that they may keep in the path of virtue and happily avoid a life like mine of indescribable misery."  In compliance with this desire the statement of a returned Missionary is here subjoined which shews the state of convicts in the colonies. They are drafted from the Hulks and conveyed in numbers of from 2 to 300 to their destination; on the voyage they are closed down under hatches each rolled in his blanket 3 4 or more placed in one wooden crib the 7 years' prisoner couched with the convict for life - the thief with the murderer - the simple countryman with the jail polluted felon and the monster from the hulk.  Having landed he endures new tortures at the Barracks; and wherever he goes he carries tied to his person his small canvas bag containing his little necessaries or they would be stolen in a moment. The feelings of the convict are petrified by the hardness of everything about him; he never feels the warmth of kindness. They are generally hurried up the country carrying suspended from their shoulders their only consolation a rug and a blanket to be worked like oxen from daylight until dusk under the burning sun and an heartless overseer with no better encouragement than the threat of the lash. [213]  At every step of this dreadful system there springs up a new source of corruption. They are assigned to masters for reformation but the master's object is profit. His contention is to produce as much labour out of his slaves as possible; when this one is worked out there is another ready; the incentive to good conduct and industry is the lash. When the master in England finds fault the master in Australia threatens the lash; where the master here grows angry the master there swears and invokes the lash; where he talks of turning away there he procures the infliction of the lash. Ever on the master's tongue and ever in the prisoner's ear sounds the lash the lash.  The Overseer himself perhaps a convict exhibits but little feeling towards those under him; his study is to keep them in subjection; at his mere will the prisoner is taken before a magistrate on a charge of insubordination; authority must be maintained and the case is summarily decided - the hideous triangle is displayed with its gory associations and the scourger comes forth he displays his brawny strength grasps his scourge draws his clotted fingers through the tangles of its many knots the nine detested thongs descend and after a fiftieth repetition each more swift and cutting he is taken down.  After frequent complaints against a prisoner he is removed to the chain-gang or sent to Norfolk Island.  To this place convicts are re-transported from New South Wales. It is 1000 miles from Sydney and is small only about 21 miles in circumference. The cemetry is closed in on three sides by thick melancholy groves of tear-dropping manchineel while the fourth is open to the restless sea. The graves are numerous and recent most of the tenants having reached by an untimely end the abode to which they now contribute their hapless remains and hapless story. I have witnessed 16 descents into these houses of mortality and in every one lies a hand stained in blood.  Such is the horror the convicts in New South Wales entertain for this colony that the condemned on the gallows thank God they are going to die rather than live on Norfolk Island. The number of convicts in 1840 was 1200 since then it has been increased 200 a year. [214] Here they are worked in heavy irons under a military guard. When they are employed in the interior they are at night and on Sundays locked up in square boxes 16 being crowded together in a space less than 2 square feet for each person. Their countenances are shocking to behold. Until lately religion was completely excluded from these miserable men - their deep depravity was proverbial even in New South Wales. Here the human heart seemed inverted and the conscience reversed. So indifferent had even life become that murders were committed in cold blood; the murderer afterwards declaring he had no ill-feeling towards his victim but that his object was to obtain his own release. Lots were even cast the man on whom it fell committed the deed his comrades being witnesses with the sole view of being taken for a time from the scenes of their daily miseries to appear in the Court at Sydney although after the execution of their comrade they knew they should be remanded to their former haunts of wretchedness.  So notorious was this fact that it was made the ground of a legislative enactment by which criminals are now tried by special commission on the island. The life of these men was one of despair; their passions severed from their usual object centred in one intense thirst for liberty. Their faces are like demons.  The reader will form some opinion of the state of society among these wretched persons when informed that the number of capital convictions in one year and in one colony amounted to 110 ; and that during the same period in this one colony TWENTY-TWO THOUSAND persons were convicted of petty felony. May our rising generation read this ponder well what they read and shun bad company.  A LOVE STORY  CHAPTER 1. THE FAMILY.   "It was a vast and venerable pile."  "Oh may'st thou ever be as now thou art  Nor unbeseem the promise of thy spring."  The mansion in which dwelt the Delmés was one of wide and extensive range. Its centre slightly receded leaving a wing on either side. Fluted ledges extending the whole length of the building protruded above each story. These were supported by quaint heads of satyr martyr or laughing triton. The upper ledge which concealed the roof from casual observers was of considerably greater projection. Placed above it at intervals were balls of marble which once of pure white had now caught the time-worn hue of the edifice itself. At each corner of the front and wings the balls were surmounted by the family device - the eagle with extended wing. One claw dosed over the stone and the bird rode it proudly an' it had been the globe. The portico of a pointed Gothic would have seemed heavy had it not been lightened by glass doors the vivid colours of which were not of modern date. These admitted to a capacious hall where reposing on the wide-spreading antlers of some pristine tenant of the park gleamed many a piece of armour that in days of yore had not been worn ingloriously. [2]  The Delmé family was an old Norman one on whose antiquity a peerage could have conferred no new lustre. At the period when the aristocracy of Great Britain lent themselves to their own diminution of importance by the prevalent system of rejecting the poorer class of tenantry in many instances the most attached - the consequence was foreseen by the then proprietor of Delmé Park who spurning the advice of some interested few around him continued to foster those whose ancestors had served his. The Delmés were thus enabled to retain - and they deserved it - that fair homage which rank and property should ever command. As a family they were popular and as individuals universally beloved. [3]  At the period we speak of the Delmé family consisted but of three members: the baronet Sir Henry Delmé; his brother George some ten years his junior a lieutenant in a light infantry regiment at Malta; and one sister Emily. Emily Delmé was the youngest child; her mother dying shortly after her birth. The father Sir Reginald Delmé a man of strong feelings and social habits never recovered this blow. Henry Delmé was barely fifteen when he was called to the baronetcy and to the possession of the Delmé estates. It was found that Sir Reginald had been more generous than the world had given him credit for and that his estates were much encumbered. The trustees were disposed to rest contented with paying off the strictly legal claims during Sir Henry's minority. This the young heir would not accede to. He waited on his most influential guardian - told him he was aware his father from hospitality and good nature had incurred obligations which the law did not compel his son to pay; but which he could not but think that equity and good feeling did. He begged that these might be added to the other claims and that the trustees would endeavour to procure him a commission in the army. He was gazetted to a cornetcy; and entered life at an age when if the manlier traits are ready to be developed the worthless ones are equally sure to unfold themselves. Few of us that have not found the first draught of life intoxicate! Few of us that have not then run wild as colts that have slipped their bridle! Experience - that mystic word - is wanting; the retrospect of past years wakes no sigh; expectant youth looks forward to future ones without a shade of distrust. The mind is elastic - the body vigorous and free from pain; and it is then youth inwardly feels although not daring to avow it the almost total impossibility that the mind should wax less vigorous or the body grow helpless and decay. [4] [5]   But Sir Henry was cast in a fine mould nor did his conduct at this dangerous period detract from this his trait of boyhood. He joined his regiment when before the enemy and until he came of age never drew on his guardians for a shilling. Delmé's firmness of purpose and his after prudence met with their due reward. The family estates became wholly unencumbered and Sir Henry was enabled to add to the too scanty provision of his sister as well as to make up to George on his entering the army a sum more than adequate to all his wants. These circumstances were enough to endear him to his family; and in truth amidst all its members there prevailed a confidence and an unanimity which were never for an instant impaired. There was one consequence however of Sir Henry Delmé's conduct that he at the least foresaw not but which was gradually and unconsciously developed. In pursuing the line of duty he had marked out - in acting up to what he knew was right - his mind became too deeply impressed with the circumstances which had given rise to his determination. It overstepped its object. [6]   The train of thought to which necessity gave birth continued to pervade when that necessity no longer existed. His wish to re-establish his house grew into an ardent desire to aggrandize it. His ambition appeared a legitimate one. It grew with his years and increased with his strength.   Many a time on the lone bivouac when home presents itself in its fairest colours to the soldier's mind would Delmé's prayer be embodied that his house might again be elevated and that his descendants might know him as the one to whom they were indebted for its rise. Delmé's ambitious thoughts were created amidst dangers and toil in a foreign land and far from those who shared his name. But his heart swelled high with them as he again trod his native soil in peace - as he gazed on the home of his fathers and communed with those nearest and dearest to him on earth. Sir Henry considered it incumbent on him to exert every means that lay in his power to promote his grand object. A connection that promised rank and honours seemed to him an absolute essential that was worth any sacrifice. Sir Henry never allowed himself to look for or give way to those sacred sympathies which the God of nature hath implanted in the breasts of all of us. Delmé had arrived at middle age ere a feeling incompatible with his views arose. But his had been a dangerous experiment. Our hearts or minds or whatever it may be that takes the impression resemble some crystalline lake that mirrors the smallest object and heightens its beauty; but if it once gets muddied or ruffled the most lovely object ceases to be reflected in its waters. By the time that lake is dear again the fairy form that ere while lingered on its bosom is fled for ever. [7]  Thus much in introducing the head of the family. Let us now attempt to sketch the gentle Emily.   Emily Delmé was not an ordinary being. To uncommon talents and a mind of most refined order she united great feminine propriety and a total absence of those arts which sometimes characterise those to whom the accident of birth has given importance. With unerring discrimination she drew the exact line between vivacity and satire true religion and its semblance. She saw through and pitied those who pluming themselves on the faults of others and imparting to the outward man the ascetic inflexibility of the inner one would fain propagate on all sides their rigid creed forbidding the more favoured commoners of nature even to sip joy's chalice. If not a saint however but a fair confiding and romantic girl she was good without misanthropy pure without pretension and joyous as youth and hopes not crushed might make her. She was one of those of whom society might justly be proud. She obeyed its dictates without question but her feelings underwent no debasement from the contact. If not a child of nature she was by no means the slave of art. [8]  Emily Delmé was more beautiful than striking. She impressed more than she exacted. Her violet eye gleamed with feeling; her smile few could gaze on without sympathy - happy he who might revel in its brightness! If aught gave a peculiar tinge to her character it was the pride she felt in the name she bore - this she might have caught from Sir Henry - the interest she took in the legends connected with that name and the gratification which the thought gave her that by her ancestors its character had been but rarely sullied and never disgraced. [9]  These things it may be she had accustomed herself to look on in a light too glowing: for these things and all mundane ones are vain; but her character did not consequently suffer. Her lip curled not with hauteur nor was her brow raised one shadow the more. The remembrance of the old Baronetcy were on the ensanguined plain - of the matchless loyalty of a father and five valiant sons in the cause of the Royal Charles - the pondering over tomes which in language obsolete but true spoke of the grandeur - the deserved grandeur of her house; these might be recollections and pursuits followed with an ardour too enthusiastic but they stayed not the hand of charity nor could they check pity's tear. If her eye flashed as she gazed on the ancient device of her family reposing on its time worn pedestal it could melt to the tale of the houseless wanderer and sympathise with the sorrows of the fatherless. [10]    [11] CHAPTER II. THE ALBUM.   "Oh that the desert were my dwelling place  With one fair spirit for my minister;  That I might all forget the human race  And hating no one love but only her."  A CHEERFUL party were met in the drawing room of Delmé. Clarendon Gage a neighbouring land proprietor to whom Emily had for a twelvemonth been betrothed had the night previous returned from a continental tour. In consequence Emily looked especially radiant Delmé much pleased and Clarendon superlatively happy. Nor must we pass over Mrs. Glenallan Miss Delmé's worthy aunt who had supplied the place of a mother to Emily and who now sat in her accustomed chair with an almost sunny brow quietly pursuing her monotonous tambouring. At times she turned to admire her niece who occasionally walked to the glass window to caress and feed an impudent white peacock; which one moment strutted on the wide terrace and at another lustily tapped for his bread at one of the lower panes. "I am glad to see you looking so well Clarendon!" "And I can return the compliment Delmé! Few looking at you now would take you for an old campaigner." [12]  The style of feature in Delmé and Clarendon was very dissimilar. Sir Henry was many years Gage's senior; but his manly bearing and dark decided features would bear a contrast with even the tall and elegant although slight form of Clarendon. The latter was very fair and what we are accustomed to call English-looking. His hair almost but not quite flaxen hung in thick curls over his forehead and would have given an effeminate expression to the face were it not for the peculiar flash of the clear blue eye. [13]   "Come! Clarendon"said Emily "I will impose a task. You have written twice in my album; once years ago and the second time on the eve of our parting. Come! you shall read us both effusions and then write a sonnet to our happy meeting. Would that dear George were here now!"   Gage took up the book. It was a moderately-sized volume bound in crimson velvet. It was the fashion to keep albums then. It glittered not in a binding of azure and gold nor were its momentous secrets enclosed by one of Bramah's locks. The Spanish proverb says   "Tell me who you are with and I will tell you what you are."   Ours in that album age used to be "Show me your scrap book I will tell you your character."Emily's was not one commencing with -   "I never loved a dear gazelle!"  and ending with stanzas on the "Forget-me-not." It had not those hackneyed but beautiful lines addressed by Mr. Spencer to Lady Crewe -   "I stay'd too late: forgive the crime!  Unheeded flew the hours;  For noiseless falls the foot of Time.  That only treads on flowers."  [14]   Nor contained it those sublime but yet more common ones on Sir John Moore's death; which lines by the bye have suffered more from that mischief- making laughter-loving creature Parody than any lines we know. It was not one of these books. Nor was it the splendid scrap book replete with superb engravings and proof-impression prints; nor at all allied to the sentimental one of a garrison flirt containing locks of hair of at least five gentlemen three of whom are officers in the army. Nor lastly was it of that genus which has vulgarity in its very title-page and is here and there interspersed with devilish imps or caricatured likenesses of the little proprietress all done in most infinite humour and marking the familiar friendship of some half-dozen whiskered cubs having what is technically called the run of the house. No! it was a repository for feeling and for memory and in its fair pages presented an image of Emily's heart. Many of these were marked it is true; and what human being's character is unchequered ? But it was blotless; and the virgin page looks not so white as when the contrast of the sable ink is there. [15]   Clarendon read aloud his first contribution - who knows it not? The very words form a music and that music is Metastasio's.   "Placido zeffiretto  Se trovi il caro oggetto  Digli che sei sospiro  Ma non gli dir di chi  Limpido ruscelletto  Se mai t'incontri in lei  Digli che pianto sei  Ma non le dir qual' ciglio  Crescer ti fe cosi."  "And now Emily! for my parting tribute - if I remember right it was sorrowful enough."   Gage read with tremulous voice the following which we will christen     THE FAREWELL.  I will not be the lightsome lark  That carols to the rising morn -  I'd rather be some plaintive bird  Lulling night's ear forlorn.  I will not be the green green leaf  Mingling 'midst thousand leaves and flowers  That shed their fairy charms around  To deck Spring's joyous bowers.  I'd rather be the one red leaf  Waving 'midst Autumn's sombre groves; - [16]   On the heart to breathe that sadness  Which contemplation loves.  I will not be the morning ray  Dancing upon the river's crest  All light all motion when the stream  Turns to the sun her breast.  I'd rather be the gentle shade  Lengthening as eve comes stealing on  And rest in pensive sadness there  When those bright rays are gone.  I will not be a smile to play  Upon thy coral lip and shed  Around it sweetness like the sun  Risen from his crimson bed.  Oh no! I'll be the tear that steals  In pity from that eye of blue  Making the cheek more lovely red  Like rose-leaf dipp'd in dew.  I will not be remember'd when  Mirth shall her pageant joys impart -  A dream to sparkle in thine eye  Yet vanish from thy heart.  But when pensive sadness clouds thee  When thoughts half pain half pleasure steal  Upon the heart and memory doth  The shadowy past reveal.  When seems the bliss of former years -  Too sweet too pure to feel again -  And long lost hours scenes friends return  Remember me love - then! [17]   "Ah Clarendon! how often have I read those lines and thought - but I will not think now! Here come the letters! Henry will soon be busy - I shall finish my drawing - and aunt will finish - no! she never can finish her tambour work. Take my portfolio and give me another contribution!" Gage now wrote "The Return" which we insert for the reader's approval: -     THE RETURN  When the blue-eyed morn doth peep  Over the soft hill's verdant steep  Lighting up its shadows deep  I'll think of thee love then!  When the lightsome lark doth sing  Her grateful song to Nature's King  Making all the woodlands ring  I'll think of thee love then!  Or when plaintive Philomel  Shall mourn her mate in some lone dell  And to the night her sorrows tell  I'll think of thee love then!  When the first green leaf of spring  Shall promise of the summer bring  And all around its fragrance fling  I'll think of thee love then!  Or when the last red leaf shall fall  And winter spread its icy pall  To mind me of the death of all  I'll think of thee love then! [18]   When the lively morning ray  Is dancing on the river's spray  And sunshine gilds the joyous day  I'll think of thee love then!  And when the shades of eve steal on  Lengthening as life's sun goes down  Like sweetest constancy alone  I'll think of thee love then!  When I see a sweet smile play  On coral lips like Phoebus' ray  Making all look warm and gay  I'll think of thee love then!  When steals the tear of pity too  O'er a cheek whose crimson hue  Looks like rose-leaf dipp'd in dew  I'll think of thee love then!  When mirth's pageant joys unbind  The gloomy spells that chain my mind  And make me dream of all that's kind  I'll think of thee love then!  And when pensive sadness clouds me  When the host of memory crowds me  When the shadowy past enshrouds me  I'll think of thee love then!  When seems the bliss of former years -  Too sweet too pure to feel again -  And long lost hours scenes friends return  I'll think of thee love then!    [19] CHAPTER III. THE DINNER.   "Hues which have words and speak to ye of heaven."  "Away! there need no words or terms precise  The paltry jargon of the marble mart  Where pedantry gulls folly: we have eyes."  We are told by the members of the silver-fork school that no tale of fiction can be complete unless it embody the description of a dinner. Let us therefore shutting from our view that white- limbed gum-tree and dismissing from our table tea and damper call on memory's fading powers and feast once more with the rich the munificent the intellectual Belliston Graeme. [20] Dinner! immortal faculty of eating! to what glorious sense or pre-eminent passion dost thou not contribute? Is not love half fed by thy attractions? Beams ever the eye of lover more bright than when after gazing with enraptured glance at the coveted haunch whose fat - a pure white; whose lean - a rich brown - invitingly await the assault. When doth lover's eye sparkle more than when at such a moment it lights on the features of the loved fair one? Is not the supper quadrille the most dangerous and the dearest of all ?   Cherished venison! delicate white soup! spare young susceptible bosoms! Again we ask is not dinner the very aliment of friendship? the hinge on which it turns? Does a man's heart expand to you ere you have returned his dinner? It would be folly to assert it. Cabinet dinners - corporation dinners - election dinners - and vestry dinners - and rail-road dinners - we pass by these things and triumphantly ask - does not the Ship par excellence - the Ship of Greenwich - annually assemble under its revered roof the luminaries of the nation ?   Oh whitebait! called so early to your last account! [21] a tear is all we give but it flows spontaneously at the memory of your sorrows!   As Mr. Belliston Graeme was much talked of in his day it may not be amiss to say a few words regarding him. He was an only child and at an early age lost his parents. The expense of his education was defrayed by a wealthy uncle the second partner in a celebrated banking house. His tutor with whom he may be said to have lived from boyhood - for his uncle had little communication with him except to write to him one letter half-yearly when he paid his school bill - was a shy retiring clergyman - a man of very extensive acquirements and a first rate classical scholar. After a short time the curate and young Graeme became attached to each other. The tutor was a bachelor and Graeme was his only pupil. The latter was soon inoculated with the classical mania of his preceptor; and as he grew up it was quite a treat to hear the pair discourse of Greeks and Romans. A stranger who had then heard them would have imagined that Themistocles and Scipio Africanus were stars of the present generation. [22]   When Graeme was nineteen his uncle invited him to town for a month - a most unusual proceeding. During this period he studied closely his nephew's character. At the end of this term Mr. Hargrave and his yotmg charge were on their way to the classical regions where their fancy had been so long straying. They explored France and the northern parts of Italy came on the shores of the Adriatic - resided and secretly made excavations near the amphitheatre of Polo - and finally reached the Morea. Not a crag valley or brook that they were not conversant with before they left it. They at length tore themselves away; and found themselves at the ancient Parthenope. It was at Pompeii Mr. Graeme first saw the beautiful Miss Vignoles the Mrs. Glenallan of our story; and in a strange adventure with some Neapolitan guides was of some service to her party. They saw his designs of some tombs and took the trouble of drawing him out. The young man now for the first time basked in the sweets of society; in a fortnight to Mr. Hargrave's horror was rolling in its vortex; in a couple of months found himself indulging in and avowing a hopeless passion; and in three was once again in his native land falsely deeming that his peace of mind had fled for ever. He was shortly however called upon to exert his energies. The death of his uncle suddenly made him to his very great surprise one of the wealthiest commoners of England. At this period he was quite unknown. In a short time Mr. Hargrave and himself were lodged luxuriously - were deep in the pursuit of science literature and the belle arte - and on terms of friendship with the cleverest and most original men of the day. Mr. Graeme's occupations being sedentary and his habits very regular he shortly found that his great wealth enabled him not only to indulge in every personal luxury at Bendlesham Park but to patronise largely every literary work of merit. In him the needy man of genius found a friend the man of wit a companion and the publisher a generous customer. He became famous for his house his library his exclusive society. But he did not become spoilt by his prosperity and never neglected his old tutor. [23] [24]   Our party from Delmé were ushered into a large drawing-room the sole light of which was from an immense bow window looking out on the extensive lawn. The panes were of enormous size and beautiful specimens of classique plated glass. The only articles of furniture were some crimson ottomans which served to set off the splendid paintings; and one table of the Florentine manufacture of pietra dura on which stood a carved bijou of Benvenuto Cellini's. Our party were early. They were welcomed by Mr. Graeme with great cordiality and by Mr. Hargrave with some embarrassment for the tutor was still the bashful man of former days. Mr. Graeme's dress shamed these degenerate days of black stock and loose trowser. Diamond buckles adorned his knees and fastened his shoes. His clear blue eye - the high polished forehead - the deep lines of the countenance revealed the man of thought and intellect. The playful lip shewed he could yet appreciate a flash of wit or spark of humour.   "Miss Delmé you are looking at my paintings; let me show you my late purchases. Observe this sweet Madonna by Murillo! I prefer it to the one in the Munich Gallery. It may not boast Titian's glow of colour or Raphael's grandeur of design - in delicate angelic beauty it may yield to the delightful efforts of Guido's or Correggio's pencil - but surely no human conception can ever have more touchingly portrayed the beauteous resigned mother. The infant too! how inimitably blended is the God-like serenity of the Saviour with the fond and graceful witcheries of the loving child! How little we know of the beauties of the Spanish school! Would I could ransack their ancient monasteries and bring a few of them to light! [25]  You are a chess player! Pass not by this check-mate of Caravaggio's. What undisguised triumph in one countenance! What a struggle to repress nature's feelings in the other! Here is a Guido! sweet as his ever are! He may justly be styled the female laureat. What artist can compete with him in delineating the blooming expression or the tender but lighter shades of female loveliness? who can pause between even the Fornarina and that divine effort the Beatrice Cenci of the Barberini?" [26]  The party were by this time assembled. Besides our immediate friends there was his Grace the Duke of Gatten a good-natured fox-hunting nobleman whose estate adjoined Mr. Graeme's; there was the Viscount Chambery who had penned a pamphlet on finance - indited a folio on architecture - and astonished Europe with an elaborate dissertation on modern cookery; there was Charles Selby the poet and essayist; Daintrey the sculptor - a wonderful Ornithologist - a deep read Historian - a learned Orientalist - and a novelist from France; whose works exhibited such unheard of horrors and made man and woman so irremediably vicious as to make this young gentleman celebrated even in Paris - that Babylonian sink of iniquity.   Dinner was announced and our host giving his arm very stoically to Mrs. Glenallan his love of former days led the way to the dining-room. Round the table were placed beautifully carved oaken fauteuils of a very old pattern. The service of plate was extremely plain but of massive gold. [27]   But the lamp! It was of magnificent dimensions! The light chains hanging from the frescoed ceiling the links of which were hardly preceptible were of silver manufactured in Venice; the lower part was of opal-tinted glass exactly portraying some voluptuous couch on which the beautiful Amphitrite might have reclined as she hastened through beds of coral to crystaI grot starred with transparent stalactites. In the centre of this shell were sockets whence verged small hollow golden tubes resembling in shape and size the stalks of a flower. At the drooping ends of these were lamps shaped and coloured to imitate the most beauteous flowers of the parterre. This bouquet of light had been designed by Mr. Graeme. Few novelties had acquired greater celebrity than the Graeme astrale. The room was warmed by heating the pedestals of the statues.   " Potage a la fantome and à l'ourika."   " I will trouble you Graeme"said my Lord Chambery " for the fantome. I have dined on la pritanniere for the last three months and a novel soup is a novel pleasure." [28]   Of the fish the soles were à la Rowena the salmon à l'amour. Emily flirted with the wing of a chicken sauté au suprême coquetted with perdrix perdu masqué à la Montmorenci and tasted a boudin à la Diebitsch. The wines were excellent - the Geisenheim delicious - the Champagne sparkling like a pun of Jekyll's. But nothing aroused the attention of the Viscount Chambéry so much as a liqueur which Mr. Graeme assured him was new and had just been sent him by the Conte de Désir. The dessert had been some time on the table when the Viscount addressed his host.   " Graeme! I am delighted to find that you at length agree with me as to the monstrous superiority of a French repast. Your omelette imaginaire was faultless and as for your liqueur I shall certainly order a supply on my return to Paris."   "That liqueur my dear lord"replied Mr. Graeme " is good old cowslip mead with a flask of Maraschino di Zara infused in it. For the rest the dinner has been almost as imaginaire as the omelet. The greater part of the recipes are in an old English volume in my library or perhaps some owe their origin to the fertile invention of my housekeeper. Let us style them a la Dorothee." [29]  "Capital! I thank you Graeme!"said his Grace of Gatten as he shook his host by the hand till the tears stood in his eyes.   The prescient Chambery had made a good dinner and bore the joke philosophically. Coffee awaited the gentlemen in a small octagonal chamber adjoining the music room. There stood Mr. Graeme's three favourite modern statues: - a Venus by Canova - a Discobole by Thorwaldson - and a late acquisition - the Ariadne of Dannecker.   "This is the work of an artist"said Mr. Graeme "little known in this country but in Germany ranking quite as high as Thorwaldson. This is almost a duplicate of his Ariadne at Frankfort but the marble is much more pure. How wonderfully fine the execution! Pray notice the bold profile of the face; how energetic her action as she sits on the panther!"   Mr. Graeme touched the spring of a window frame. A curtain of crimson gauze fell over a globe lamp and threw a rich shade on the marble. The features remained as finely chiselled but their expression was totally changed. [30]  They adjourned to the music-room which deserved its title. Save some seats which were artfully formed to resemble lyres nothing broke the continuity of music's tones which ascended majestically to the lofty dome there to blend and wreath and fall again. At one extremity of music's hall was an organ; at the other a grand piano built by a German composer. Ranged on carved slabs at intermediate distances was placed almost every instrument that may claim a votary. Of viols from the violin to the double bass - of instruments of brass from trombones and bass kettle-drums even unto trumpet and cymbal - of instruments of wood from winding serpents to octave flute - and of fiddles of parchment from the grosse caisse to the tambourine. Nor were ancient instruments wanting. These were of quaint forms and diverse constructions. Mr. Graeme would descant for hours on an antique species of spinnet which he procured from the East and which he vehemently averred was the veritable dulcimer. He would display with great gusto his specimens of harps of Israel; whose deep-toned chorus had perchance thrilled through the breast of more than one of Judea's dark- haired daughters. Greece too had her representatives to remind the spectators that there had been an Orpheus. There were flutes of the Doric and of the Phrygian mode and - let us forget not - the Tyrrhenian trumpet with its brazen-cleft pavilion. But by far the greater part of his musical relics he had acquired during his stay in Italy. He could show the litui with their carved clarions - the twisted cornua - the tuba a trumpet so long and taper - the concha wound by Tritons - and eke the buccina a short and brattling horn. [31]  Belliston Graeme was an enthusiastic musician; and was in this peculiar that he loved the science for its simplicity. Musicians are but too apt to give to music's detail and music's difficulties the homage that should be paid to music's self: in this resembling the habitual man of law who occasionally forgetteth the great principles of jurisprudence and invests with mysterious agency such words as latitat and certiorari. The soul of music may not have fled; - for we cultivate her assiduously - worship Handel and appreciate Mozart. But music now springs from the head not the heart; is not for the mass but for individuals. With our increased researches and cares and troubles we have lost the faculty of being pleased. Past are those careless days when the shrill musette or plain cittern and virginals could with their first strain give motion to the blythe foot of joy or call from its cell the prompt tear of pity. Those days are gone! Music may affect some of us as deeply but none as readily! [32]  Mr. Graeme had received from Paris an unpublished opera of Auber's. Emily seated herself at the piano - her host took the violin - Clarendon was an excellent flute player - and the tinkle of the Viscount's guitar came in very harmoniously. By the time refreshments were introduced Charles Selby too was in his glory. He had already nearly convulsed the Orientalist by a theory which he said he had formed of a gradual metempsychosis or at all events perceptible amalgamation of the yellow Qui Hi to the darker Hindoo; which said theory he supported by the most ingenious arguments. [33]  "How did you like your stay in Scotland Mr. Selby?" said Sir Henry Delmé.   "I am a terrible Cockney Sir Henry - found it very cold and was very sulky. The only man I cared to see in Scotland was at the Lakes; but I kept a register of events which is now on the table in my dressing-room. If Graeme will read it for I am but a stammerer it is at your service."   The paper was soon produced and Mr. Graeme read the following: - "A stranger arrived from a far and foreign country. His was a mind peculiarly humble tremblingly alive to its own deficiencies. Yet endowed with this mistrust he sighed for information and his soul thirsted in the pursuit of knowledge. Thus constituted he sought the city he had long dreamingly looked up to as the site of truth - Scotia's capital the modern Athens. In endeavouring to explore the mazes of literature he by no means expected to discover novel paths but sought to traverse beauteous ones; feeling he could rest content could he meet with but one flower which some bolder and more experienced adventurer might have allowed to escape him. He arrived rived and cast around an anxious eye. He found himself involved in an apparent chaos - the whirl of distraction - imbedded amidst a ceaseless turmoil of would- be knowing students endeavouring to catch the aroma of the pharmacopaeia or dive to the deep recesses of Scotch law. He sought and cultivated the friendship of the literati; and anticipated a perpetual feast of soul from a banquet to which one of the most distinguished members of a learned body had invited him. He went with his mind braced up for the subtleties of argument - with hopes excited heart elate. He deemed that the authenticity of Champolion's hieroglyphics might now be permanently established or a doubt thrown on them which would for ever extinguish curiosity. He heard a doubt raised as to the probability of Dr. Knox's connection with Burke's murders! Disappointed and annoyed he returned to his hotel determined to seek other means of improvement; and to carefully observe the manners customs and habits of the beings he was among. He enquired first as to their habits and was presented with scones kippered salmon and a gallon of Glenlivet; as to their manners and ancient costume and was pointed out a short fat man the head of his clan who promenaded the streets without trousers. [34] [35]  HIRED SERVANTS - On Friday last Captain Smythe of Heidelberg appeared at the Police Office to prefer a charge against two of his hired servants named James and Agnes Brown the former for shamefully maltreating a valuable horse belonging to the complainant gross neglect of duty in losing off the dray the box referred to in another paragraph and also for absconding. [89] The female was also charged with leaving her hired service without permission. Brown pleaded guilty to the charges and begged that Captain Smythe would take him into his service again where he would work until his master's loss was repaired. This the complainant refused alleging that Brown was considerably in his debt and he was determined to have him punished; he was sentenced three months imprisonment. The woman as it was suspected she had acted under the influence of her husband was discharged.  To Rev. William Jowett Missionary House  Salisbury Square Fleet Street London.  Moreton Bay Nov. 27 1841  To Rev. William Jowett  Very dear Sir  I cordially thank you for the three Volumes of the Christian Visitor they are very welcome here at Moreton Bay and in my situation they are particularly useful.  This is but a small place yet there manifests itself as great an enmity to Christ and his religion as in small places. Infidelity and antichristian Popery lift up their heads as high as they ever can but there are also those who seek and fear the Lord. I endeavour meekly plainly and fully to preach the Gospel and when my subject or particular occurrences lead me to expose infidelity and sin I do not spare. The sceptical and wicked to not much relish my doctrine or rather that of the Gospel they are kept in awe however by a higher hand not to broach their infidel opinions in the day-light but as it were only in the dark when they think they are where none will refute their blasphemous sentiments and they will not be accounted disreputable characters for uttering them.  In reference to the Aborigines I cannot indeed do much for them yet Providence I believe has opened a door for me of some usefulness by directing government to require me to furnish them with a report every year relative to the condition of the Aborigines. I have just finished the first which I hope will prove instrumental in inducing them to support missionary efforts among the Aborigines with more fervour.  Pray remember me kindly to Mr. Coates and the members of the Committee and tell them that I feel myself under great obligations to them for the countenance and support with which they have always favoured me notwithstanding my weak services and that I feel myself as strongly united with them through the bonds of Christian affection as before when in their actual service. Mrs. Handt fully joins me in these sentiments and thus  I remain  Very dear Sir  Yours faithfully  J.C.S. Handt.  Wellington Valley N.S. Wales   Feb. 22 1841   Dear Sir   For many months past it has been my very anxious wish to address the Home Society on the subject of this Mission but hitherto I have deferred doing so as we have long expected some further communication from them. And I wishing to suppress any impatience of spirit and avoid being premature in anything I have to state. But should I delay the subject any longer I feel that I should be wanting in my duty to the Society to which I belong. Yet while I take the liberty of addressing myself to them on the affairs of this Mission I wish to apologise for so doing as I hold but an inferior and subordinate situation in connection with them. The apology I have to offer is - the very discouraging state of the Missions which calls for the serious attention of the Parent Committee both in regards its location and also the manner of its being conducted. What I wish to effect in my present communication is to labour for the Home Society a faithful representation of the present state of the Mission; which if I succeed in doing I think they will concur with me in concluding that some better place must be adopted or the Mission must be abandoned.   The first thing I shall take the liberty of noticing is the locating of the Police Establishment upon the Mission Land. This has been and still is one of the greatest hindrances to the success of our exertions. But I need not use any arguments to prove this as I know the Home Society take precisely the same view on this subject as myself (which you dear sir communicated to me in a Letter dated Dec. 24th 1838.) It is true the Col. Government have repeatedly promised to remove the Police from us and when His Excellency the Governor was here in November last he assured us again that it would be so and ordered a Township to be laid out about seven or eight miles from us - which has indeed been surveyed: but at present there is not the least appearance of anything more being done. And I have some reason to believe that His Excellency is now hesitating whether he shall remove the Police at all from their present location. Perhaps he may consider that the present situation of the Mission is not a desirable one principally because there are so few Natives that continue for any length of time about Wellington Valley; and it is anticipated that there will be much fewer shortly as a neighbouring Settler has laid out the Township on his own Estate about three miles from us and some of the allotments are sold and buildings are being erected upon. On the opposite side of the Mission Land about five miles from us - there is another Township laid out by a private individual on which there is an "Inn" built. So that in a very short time we shall be situated between two Townships and one of them contiguous to the Mission Land. And it is a well-known fact that the Natives will never continue long near any town. His Excellency when at the Mission expressed his readiness to provide another tract of Land for the location of the Mission if it was considered desirable to remove it.   My own opinion dear sir is - that Wellington Valley is now not a desirable situation for a Mission. We ought to be located where the Natives are more numerous which will not be except we go farther into the interior. But while I would recommend the removal of the Mission I must also tell the Society that in many respects the labours of the Mission would be greatly increased at least for some time and the expenses of the Mission increased also. I for my part am quite ready to remove to any other desirable situation if the Home Society will but have a proper Missionary Establishment.   To explain more fully what I mean it will lead me to notice a very serious hindrance to our Missionary exertions - which is the necessity we are under (from the small number that we are) of engaging as Servants unprincipled men who either are or have been "convicted felons" I trust I need no arguments to convince any Christian Society that to employ such men to be connected with a Mission is a manifest evil yea I do not hesitate to call it a great sin - they pull down and destroy whatever we attempt to build. Or in other words - whatever good impressions we may succeed in making on the minds of any of the Natives they soon erase them by their filthy conversation or immoral example.   It may be thought that it is not unavoidably necessary to employ such men. To this I must reply that if it was not unavoidable I would not employ them. But I will endeavour to show that in the present circumstances of the Mission it is unavoidably necessary to employ such men. In the first place the Society has a large tract of Land for the use of the Aborigines. To make the best use of this for the support of the Mission it is necessary to keep a large farming establishment. To manage this in a proper manner it requires many persons. Some for one employment and some for another. And as the services of the Natives cannot be depended upon (for they may be with us today and tomorrow 20 miles off) it necessarily follows that I must either engage Europeans or the business of the Farm must be unavoidably neglected. And in the selection of Servants there is very little or no choice as they are almost universally men of bad character.   Some may think that it is possible for me to do the business of the Farm with the services of the Natives - but whoever thinks so they are quite mistaken and it shows that they know very little of the Native character. It is my opinion formed from nearly three Years' residence among them that until these Natives become the subjects of Divine Grace their services can never be depended upon no not even the most civilised of them. They are so wedded to their naturally wild volatile and wandering habits that though they may work well for a time they will again and again leave us to ramble amongst their old companions in the bush. That generally when their services are most required. Since Mr Watson has taken away the Native Children the Adults have become so much more unsettled and unsteady in their habits that they very rarely stay with us more than three or four days at a time so that very little can be done in the way of teaching them. I must candidly confess that our Mission is fast degenerating into nothing more than a farming establishment.   In concluding my present communication I beg leave earnestly to recommend to the Home Society the desirability of either having such a Missionary establishment which would enable us to dispense with the services of "convicted felons" - or that they would abandon the Mission altogether. To continue it as it is is not only useless but it is bringing contempt and disgrace upon the C.M.S. and causing the Gospel of Christ to be reproached by the world around us.   Waiting a reply at your earliest convenience   I remain dear sir   Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus   William Porter.   Wellington Valley N.S. Wales.   Oct. 11 1841   Dear sir   From the general tenor of my last Letter written in February last: and also from other communications more weighty and important than my own you perceive what a lamentable state our Mission is in. And is gradually becoming more and more so. My present object in writing you is not to repeat what has been so often stated and so largely entered upon by others more capable of doing it than myself: but it is simply concerning myself and the situation I hold in connection with your Society. From my many communications dear sir I suppose the Home Society to be quite aware how disappointed I have been since I have entered upon my duties at this Mission. It is true sometimes I have indulged a hope that I might see a change of things which has stimulated me to a greater exercise of faith and patience: but alas: I feel that I cannot now indulge a hope of that kind. Therefore after much Prayer for Divine Guidance after much deliberation and with very great reluctance do I tender the resignation of my situation as Agriculturist to this Mission.   To be more explicit I would observe that there are three things which principally induce me to leave this Missionary field of labour. The first is the very great discouragement I have met with in my Agricultural pursuits. This is the fourth season I have cultivated and sown our Paddocks with Wheat and have never received any return except about one third of a crop of Wheat last year - about seven Bushels to the acre. This season I have bestowed more than common care and attention in ploughing and sowing. The grain came up beautifully grew until it was about six inches high. The drought set in - soon dried it up and now any hopes are once more blasted and my labour and care entirely lost. The drought still continues and our distress is becoming very great for Cattle and Sheep are suffering very much for want of food and Water. Indeed should it please God that the drought should continue a few months longer the distress will be unparalleled in the history of the Colony.   The second thing that I shall mention which induces me to take the present step - is that I am obliged to employ very improper characters as domestic servants on the Mission Farm as the Corresponding Committee will make no efforts to procure more suitable persons for us. In addition to the above mentioned reasons there is another which under more favourable circumstances of an Agricultural nature would still incline me to take the step I am now doing. It is the great and unceasing wish to exchange my secular employment for a spiritual one. I have no secondary motive in wishing to do this. I have only one motive and that is I wish to spend my life as a Preacher of the Gospel. I am not tired of the Missionary life; on the contrary I have a stronger desire to be a real Missionary than I ever had before: notwithstanding the trials and disappointments I have met with here. I wish the Society to understand that I have no wish to leave their connection if they think me a proper person to undergo such a course of study as would put me for the sacred office of a Minister of the Gospel. Should the Society be unable to do this I must then (Please God) return to my friends in England as I am unwilling to continue here as an Agriculturist.   Waiting a reply at your earliest convenience.   I remain dear sir   Your Obedient Servant   William Porter   Wellington Valley N.S. Wales   Nov. 1 1841   Dear Sir   About three weeks ago I wrote you on a very important subject and fearing that the Letter might not safely reach you I have thought it desirable to address you again on the same subject: which I beg leave to do in the present communication. In my last Letter I expressed my wish and intention to resign my situation as Agriculturist to this Mission and gave some general reasons for so doing. I must again say my mind is unaltered and I still wish to leave this secular employment.   The first reason I shall mention for wishing to take this step is the very great discouragement I have met with in my agricultural pursuits. This is the fourth season I have cultivated our Land to the best of my ability and every year I have failed in obtaining a Crop. (Last year was not an exception as we had only seven Bushels to the acre.) The present season we shall not have a single Bushel as the plants have long been dried up from the want of rain. Our Cattle and Sheep too are suffering very much from the great scarcity of food and should the drought continue a few months longer many of them must inevitably die of starvation. It is a very remarkable fact that while most other parts of the Colony have lately been visited with copious showers of rain we have scarcely had a drop in this District. This once beautiful and fertile Valley is now a complete bed of dust and sand. And our River once a running stream is now for more than five miles nothing but a dry channel without so much as a single pail of Water for either man or beast. We have to fetch all the Water we use for our whole establishment from a distance of nearly three Miles - which is both expensive and laborious.   The next thing I shall mention which induces me to resign my situation is the apparent impossibility of procuring such servants for the Mission Establishment whom I can conscientiously employ. I am thoroughly satisfied that no Mission can ever succeed when the Missionaries are obliged to employ as Servants such men as we with our present Establishment are unavoidably compelled to do so. What I have above stated are my principal reasons for giving up my present avocation. Still there is another which I must add to those already mentioned. - It is the strong and unceasing desire I have to exchange my secular duties for those which are spiritual. For I must candidly tell the Society that I could not continue in a secular appointment even if I had better success in my agricultural pursuits - It does in no way answer the expectations I had previously formed of it.   I do not wish the Society to understand that I am tired of a Missionaries life. No dear sir very far from that. I have a sincere and I may add as ardent a desire to be a Missionary as I had before I left my Native land but it is to be a Missionary in the real sense of the Word. The only motive I have in wishing for this is the love and desire to be a Preacher of the Gospel. Any other sphere of labour the Society might eventually appoint me to - I should cheerfully enter upon provided the duties were of a spiritual kind. But while I sincerely wish for the sphere of labour I have above described I must confess I feel really unfit for such an office until I have by a course of study obtained a knowledge of such things which I am informed by His Lordship the Bishop of Australia is considered necessary to be eligible for the Sacred office. I do not think I should feel much inconvenience in leaving an active life for a certain period of Study as it is what I am very much attached to particularly the Greek Language; a slight knowledge of which I have obtained through the kind assistance occasionally given me by my Christian Brother The Rev. J. Gunther.   If the Society can accede to the wishes I have above expressed I beg to add that I am anxious as soon as practicable to enter upon the new labours of study. If the Society still continue this Secular Establishment and are not able or willing to send another agriculturist so that I can shortly return I consider it may be carried on just as well if a "working overseer" was engaged in this Colony who would be under the control and superintendence of the resident Clergyman. This might be done without interfering with interfering with his ministerial duties and would occupy a very small portion of his time. Mr Gunther quite concurs with me in this opinion and has promised to write to the Home Committee on the subject.   Waiting your reply.   I remain dear sir   Your Obedient Servant in Christ   William Porter.   We think it but right to congratulate the inhabitants of Sydney generally upon the actual commencement of the operations of the Gas Company. The public are now enabled to have better cheaper and more cleanly light than has been possible heretofore. The dim days of oil and tallow are gone by as far as the lighting of shops and warehouses are concerned. These materials must needs give place to gas lamps which are in every respect superior to any other mode of lighting that exists. The Company generally its Directors Secretary and Engineer deserve the sincerest thanks of the community for their perseverance under many obstacles; and we trust that they will reap a reward where they most require it namely in the abundant and indeed universal patronage of the public. It is however not probable we are afraid that the streets will be regularly lit up with gas until a Municipal Corporation is in existence. When however the law creating this institution is passed it will we trust next after taking care of the sufficient draining and paving of the town be the early object of the corporation to light up our streets with gas.  There is nevertheless at present one class of persons whom we would recommend to patronize the Company forthwith. We allude to the publicans. The law compels each of them to have a lamp burning over their doors throughout the night. [275] Now what an advantage does the adoption of gas for these lamps afford them. Not alone is gas light cheaper and more brilliant but the lamps if securely fitted with glass never go out. Whereas oil lamps are constantly expiring and the publican is every now and then fined for not having his lamp burning. We know one case of a publican in which he paid in a single twelve-month not less than £14 for such fines. Upon a principle of self-interest then every innkeeper should have a gas lamp fitted up. The banks moreover might well follow the example of the Union Bank which by the adoption of gas lighting is really an ornament to the town. An additional appearance of respectability would be given to their buildings and the course taken by the Union Bank would be in every way creditable to all. On the whole we would strongly appeal to the public in behalf of the Gas Company. They have expended much time money and labour in an enterprize which is peculiarly calculated to benefit the town of Sydney and it is but just fitting and proper that they should reap a proportionate reward.  To the Rev W Jowitt  Apsley Station Wellington 1 May 1841.   Reverend Sir  I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 20 January 1840. It is not convenient for me at present (having to form a new mission establishment to provide for thirty natives) to enter into the particulars of your letter. This I shall do at a future time. A gentleman of this neighbourhood being on his way to Sydney I avail myself of the opportunity of forwarding the accompanying reply which has been too long delayed.   I am   Reverend Sir   Your obedient servant  William Watson.  received Nov ? 1841  The way in which single women are now sent out is highly objectionable: they are placed under the protection of married families; nothing is known of their character; the first thing to be done is to change the girl's name - what can we expect with a falsehood to commence with! [42] One girl who came into the barracks gave the name of Ellen McGuiggan: on looking at the ship's list I saw no such name. 'Oh ma'am I forget! I was changed to another family'. This girl's real name was McDermott: she was to have left Tipperary with a family by the name of McQuade; but at the last moment they refused to emigrate and Ellen was transferred to McGuiggan's care; but ultimately she came under the protection of Mr and Mrs Matthews. Is this the way to improve the morals of the people? I have seen so much of this kind of protection that I abhor and loathe the thought of it. Some families there are who have indeed acted a parent's part - in every ship there are some; but I have known some of these married men tear up their marriage certificates leave their wives in Sydney and extend their protection far into the interior. [...]  I may here remark that very little dependence can be placed on written characters. The Countess of Cashel seems to take an interest in the poor and her characters when genuine are to be depended upon: but many come here with forged characters and I have remarked they generally run thus if given by the countess - 'The bearer is a diligent reader of the Bible has attended a Sabbath school for years and is strongly recommended to the pious care of any Protestant family she may meet with'. The Catholics generally have one from their bishop the Right Reverend Dr Murray of Dublin who has known them for years; and the tenor of the certificate runs thus - 'For four years the bearer has been a weekly communicant and would be a treasure to any family and is most strongly recommended to the pious care of the clergy of New South Wales'. Now the genuine certificates of the above lady and gentleman are worded in a very different style. The Countess [a name given to a well-known prostitute in Sydney] and E.B per ship - -  had several of these pious testimonials: the latter I recommended to Mrs - - ; the second night she slept out and the fourth she returned intoxicated to the Home. Now as it appears to me impossible that girls if they are sent good can become so suddenly bad I told the girl so; and asked why she came to this colony? 'I started in a spree; William Walter persuaded me.' And now for William Walter: he was late in his application - if four more girls were found he could go - a visit was forthwith made to and four were found: 'Give them a little starch and they will answer for Sydney'. [...]  I am fully aware of the difficulty of controling [sic] a number of persons and getting them to go the way you wish; consequently I can feel for those who by a certain day must fill a ship: some will at the last moment fly from their word; this causes a gap - how is it filled? [43] The papers are taken from one handed to another and the number is complete; the ship sails and when she arrives in Sydney what is the consequence? The board assemble to inspect the immigrants; now view the group: First stand the able ploughmen and the stout Irishwomen - just the girls for a show. 'Capital set' says - - - . 'Healthy' says - - - ; 'oh there is something truly cheering to the spirits in the sight of such a group!' But just pass the line: you can see on - - _'s face in legible letters the quarantine - however a few orders for the general hospital and stop the bounty until they get well. But the scrutiny is going on - one after the other quickly passes; the importers are in spirits - . - The girls now pass - ten girls from Limerick - able stout strong and tall - without a doubt they pass them all. Those are twelve from Cork - just the girls gentlemen love to question. Another lot - these look genteel; they are dressed for the occasion: one has been a favourite; it has been rumoured that at sea she ate Leman's biscuit; the steward to her has been attentive - liberal with the captain's store. The board indulgent make some excuses - a pretty woman 'tis painful to condemn; she may be made the subject of future enquiry but now she passes. Another group - a medley here - one is too old another too young another not under proper protection. But the first set made an impression on the minds of the board; they are all in good humour and these are passed; but still there are two - 'Where did you come from?' 'Liverpool'. There she stands fully prepared to answer any question; but to prevent waste of time or to avoid enquiry the importer withdraws his claim to the bounty and all are satisfied.  One of the most serious evils I know is the practice of young women being allowed to make engagements on board ship. Some families of high respectability do engage servants in this way; but I also know that some people of the very worst character go there and engage servants - servants no; they are not required as servants - they are not wanted to work. Many have I known who have been taken to houses of the worst character the first day of their arrival. Shall this evil continue? God forbid! But I will give you a few facts.  E. A. - -  an orphan fifteen years of age per ship - - -  was sent to me by a person who saw her danger and advised me of it. According to the rate of wages given at the time she was worth three shillings per week: she was engaged at six shillings. I asked what work she had to do? 'None.' 'What do you not sweep the rooms?' 'No.' 'Wash the tea-things?' 'No; all I have to do is to carry notes and buy fruit and cakes.' 'What houses do you take the notes to?' 'No houses; I walk between - - - street and - - - street and my mistress tells me to keep near - - - office about two o'clock and give to gentlemen answering a particular description the notes.' I need not say more than that the child said when I asked if she had received any presents? - 'Yes; all the girls get presents; and a gentleman is to give me two pounds.' A government Registry-office would in a great measure prevent this evil - . - I may also state another fact and one well known to some of the members of the Immigration Board that a gentleman is known to visit nearly every ship and there engage a single woman. He came to my office but his character was known to me; I would not give him one. He left my office for the ship - - -  then in harbour and engaged one.  [Such characters] can go on board ship with impunity: how can the captain or surgeon be expected to know them? they judge from appearances. A silk dress - a little talk about attending church on a Sunday and the poor girl gets high wages - leads an idle life - visits the theatre - dresses well - leads some of her shipmates into the same hands. And then comes the cry against the Bounty system - the importer and the agents. 'See what a set the - - - brought us: I counted ten from that ship at the theatre last night.' I have no hesitation in saying that girls of bad character are shipped to these colonies and must be known at the time to be such. In many cases they are without certificates; and I have known instances in which the importers have not put in their claim for the bounty. One girl long known at Liverpool as 'the Countess' arrived per ship - - -  and now figures in Sydney; the last time I saw her was on a Sunday near St James's Church; she had evidently started in the morning with an intention of making herself look interesting at either St James's or at St Mary's for her book was in her hand; but she had taken a glass by the way and was so far aware of her state that she requested a man to help her to a seat in the Domain. [53] I saw her fall twice and since then I have not seen 'the Countess'. People express their astonishment that English girls are not sent out. We will suppose that some families at Liverpool are meditating this step and in their anxiety to obtain all information they learn that the Countess is missing. The Countess left on - -  in the year - - -  for Australia. They condemn all for one; they shrink with horror from sending their daughter where the Countess is received; they know her character; they are strangers to those on board; all therefore suffered for one; they are condemned as a bad set.  I received a letter from a man who wanted a wife. I found he was well known to several persons as a man of integrity. It would be a serious thing to visit Sydney for a wife: first a loss of time; second money; and after all perhaps not be suited. His letter too interested me and I determined on trying to serve him; I give his letter that the reader may judge: - 'Reverend madam I heard you are the best to send to for a servant and I heard our police magistrate say it was best to leave all to you; and so I'll just do the same as his honour says it's the best. I had a wife once and so she was too good for me by the far and it was God's will ma'am [his wife had died] ; but I has a child ma'am that I wouldn't see a straw touch for the world; the boy's only four yeare old: and I has a snug fifty-acre farm and a town 'lotment and I has no debts in the world and one teem and four bullocks; and I'se ten head oh cattle and a share on eight hundred sheep so I as a rite to a desent servant that can wash and cook and make the place decant.  I wouldn't mam on any account in the world be bound to marry; but I don't wish it altogether to be left out. . - I sends you five pounds; she may get wages first for I know some of the gals and the best on um to are not heavy we boxes; and supposing anything should happen I would not like it to be said she come here in rags. I wants also a man and his wife.... [whole passage sic]  There was something in the character of this honest bushman to admire; he had gained his freedom sent home money to his parents and during a long and tedious illness of twenty months he had tended his sick wife with patient care. Who would not get up an hour earlier to serve such a man? - I did for I knew that early in the morning is the best time to choose a wife. I went first into the governess-room - all asleep; I unlocked the Home-door - some dressed others half-dressed some too very cross: I have often remarked that early in the day is the best time to judge of a woman's temper; but I wish this to be kept a secret. I remained half-an-hour in the Home; I then went through the tents could not suit myself and returned. At the Home-door I found a girl at the wash-tub; she was at work with spirit; she was rather good looking very neat and tidy. I went into my office and ascertained that on board ship her character was good. I desired the matron never to lose sight of her conduct and report the same to me. Day after day passed and I was at last fully determined to place her within reach that is in a respectable family in his near neighbourhood; but I was able to arrange better for I found that amongst the families [in the Immigrants' Home] there was one related to her. I immediately engaged them as his servants; they were a respectable couple; the man was a very prudent person. I told them to take the girl with them and get her service near them and on no account allow her to live with a bachelor. I gave the girl three letters to respectable ladies and she was engaged by one the fourth day after her arrival at - - - . About a fortnight after the bush-man wrote to thank me for sending him the married couple; and concluded by saying 'With regard to that other matter upon my word you have suited me exactly; and as soon as our month is up [for the publication of banns] we is to be married'. [60]  I received forty-one applications of this kind; but the above is the only girl I ever sent into the country with a direct matrimonial intention. That I take pleasure on hearing when a girl is married is a fact; and I also like to see girls placed where they will have a fair chance of being well married.  Bathurst July 18th 1842  Sir  Gratitude for your kind advice and friendly manners to me in Court - yesterday - prompts me to address you in writing - to thank you for your kindness and candidly state my sentiments to you. I am ready & willing at all times to make an amicable adjustment of deficiencies with all men who will do so with me. Reasonably - But since I am exposed in a public court as a character unworthy of a situation as an overseer and that by one to whom I have done everything in my power to serve faithfully honestly and justly - in a diligent manner therefore I am resolved in defending myself against all such injuries.  If a man has got plenty of money he might find some way purchasing a good character with the world even suppose he had got none by merit - on the other hand I have got nothing to depend upon in this Country. Save a good character and rather than have it soiled by injustice I will suffer anything.  With respect to my calling & circumstances - I have no doubt that you will not only overlook but may approve of my obstinacy.  Now - what to think of my prosecutors - I know not if after discharging me without my wages - to command me yesterday (without interruption) in a Court of Justice - not to stop another night on his Establishment is - in my opinion against all Reason - Justice - & Humanity  I have the honour to be Sir with grateful respect your Humble and obedient servant  TUESDAY WAS the Anniversary of the introduction of gas lights into the southern hemisphere; and in congratulating the Australian Gas Light Company on the success of its operations for the past year we cannot but impress upon them the necessity of enforcing stringent regulations for the supply of a good and equal light. From some fault of the system at present we hear many complaints from various quarters of the uncertain and irregular light which they derive from the gas and we ourselves are constantly subjected to the same annoyance. We suspect this must arise from some mismanagement of the works which if properly looked into might be remedied. Should the Corporation Bill pass it is most likely that the streets of Sydney will be lighted with gas so that it is necessary that the Company should be prepared to extend its operations. We should also think it probable that as we become more familiar with the management of gas and the purposes to which it may be applied such as cooking and a variety of mechanical purposes that the demand would considerably increase. We noticed an apparatus at Mr Gill's confectionery establishment in which gas is introduced neatly and effectually for the heating of coffee tea &c.  To the Rev W Jowitt  Apsley Wellington 12 Sept 1842.  Reverend and Dear Sir  I have repeatedly written to you since the Church Missionary Society were pleased to dissolve their connexion with me but as yet have never been favoured with a reply. I cannot bring myself to imagine that your silence is from any disrespect. The Society may have been displeased at my retaining the aboriginal children which during eight years I had collected and instructed in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures but be assured dear sir what I then did was neither out of bad feeling towards Mr Gunther or from any spirit of revenge to the Society. I knew Mr Gunther too well to consider him careful of the morals of the natives. I am well persuaded that had I in 1840 transferred the fourteen aboriginal females which were living under my roof to Mr Gunther's charge they would have been ruined before they had been there a week. The conduct of the two aboriginal girls that he had both from me I think is enough to establish this fact. A native girl who was with us three years and who during that period never manifested any desire to have connexion with Europeans or native men was decoyed away to live with Cochrane a native youth at the mission house in Febry 1841 that girl's frequent elopements from the mission house - her having borne an half caste child before she had been twelve months under Mr Gunther's charge as well as other circumstances prove as Mr Porter has so repeatedly stated that neither Mr nor Mrs Gunther were fit for [NN] missionary work. This is moreover corroborated by the circumstance that they are under the necessity of paying wages to aborigines (although they have about twelve paid European servants) to induce them to remain with them. However the object of my writing at present is to request information as to which of my communications to the Parent Committee you refer to in your letter of 26 January 1840 in which you state that you are led to infer that all have had much to suffer from me. Be assured my dear sir that I have the cause of the heathen too much at heart to allow the Society's treatment of me to sink into oblivion. The Society may prefer German Lutherans to English Episcopalians - and all their labourers may eventually be from Basle. Yet while other missionary societies can find a sufficiency of English candidates it argues something faulty in the Church Missionary Society that more than half its labourers are foreigners who consider it hard that they must submit to episcopal ordination. As soon as I can leave my mission in the hands of persons who are devoted to the cause we shall proceed to England in order to plead the cause of the Aborigines - and I shall have a tale to tell.  I am my Dear Sir   Yours very affectionately  William Watson.  The market in Sydney is well supplied and is held in a large commodious building superior to most provincial market-houses at home. The display of fruit in the grape season is very beautiful. Peaches also are most abundant and very cheap; apples very dear being chiefly imported from Van Diemen's Land and frequently selling at sixpence each. The smaller English fruits such as strawberries etc. only succeed in a few situations in the colony and are far from plentiful. Cucumbers and all descriptions of melon abound. The large green water-melon rose-coloured within is a very favourite fruit but I thought it insipid. One approved method of eating it is after cutting a sufficiently large hole to pour in a bottle of Madeira or sherry and mix it with the cold watery pulp. These melons grow to an enormous size (an ordinary one is from twelve to eighteen inches in diameter) and may be seen piled up like huge cannonballs at all the fruit-shop doors being universally admired in this hot thirsty climate.  There are some excellent fish to be procured here but I know them only by the common Colonial names which are frequently misnomers. The snapper or schnapper is the largest with which I am acquainted and is very nice though not esteemed a proper dish for a dinner-party - why I am at a loss to guess; but I never saw any native fish at a Sydney dinner-table - the preserved or cured cod and Salmon from England being served instead at a considerable expense and to my taste it is not comparable with the cheap fresh fish but being expensive it has become "fashionable" and that circumstance reconciles all things. [222] The guardfish is long and narrow about the size of a herring with a very singular head the mouth opening at the top as it were and the lower jaw or nose projecting two-thirds of an inch beyond it. I imagine it must live chiefly at the bottom and this formation enables it more readily to seize the food above it. They are most delicate little fish. The bream a handsome fish not unlike a perch in shape (but much larger often weighing four or five pounds) and the mullet but especially the latter are excellent. The whiting much larger than its English namesake is perhaps the best of all; but I pretend to no great judgment as a gastronome. I thought the rock-oysters particularly nice and they are plentiful and cheap; so are the crayfish which are very similar to lobsters when small but the large ones rather coarse. I must not end my list of fish that we eat without mentioning one that is always ready to return the compliment when an opportunity offers namely the shark many of whom are habitants of the bright tempting waters of Port Jackson. Provisions vary much in price from many circumstances. Everything was very dear when we landed in New South Wales and at the present time prices are much too low to pay the producers.  The dust is one main source of annoyance in Sydney. Unless after very heavy rain it is always dusty; and sometimes when the wind is in one particular point the whirlwinds of thick fine powder that fill every street and house are positive miseries. These dust-winds are locally named "brickfielders" from the direction in which they come; and no sooner is the approach of one perceived than the streets are instantly deserted windows and doors closely shut and everyone who can remains within till the plague has passed over when you ring for the servant with a duster and collect enough fine earth for a small garden off your chairs and tables.  Flies are another nuisance; they swarm in every room in tens of thousands and blacken the breakfast or dinner table as soon as the viands appear tumbling into the cream tea wine and gravy with the most disgusting familiarity. But worse than these are the mosquitoes nearly as numerous and infinitely more detestable to those for whose luckless bodies they form an attachment as they do to most newcomers; a kind of initiatory compliment which I would gladly dispense with for most intolerable is the torment they cause in the violent irritation of their mountainous bites. All houses are furnished with a due attention to these indefatigable gentry and the beds have consequently a curious aspect to an English eye accustomed to solid four-posters with voluminous hangings of chintz or damask and a pile of feather-beds which would annihilate a sleeper in this climate. Here you have usually a neat thin skeleton-looking frame of brass or iron over which is thrown a gauze garment consisting of curtains head and tester all sewn together; the former full and resting on the floor when let down but during the day tied up in festoons. [223] Some of these materials are very pretty being silk with satin stripes of white or other delicate tints on the green gauze ground. At night after the curtains are lowered a grand hunt takes place to kill or drive out the mosquitoes from within; having effected which somewhat wearisome task you tuck the net in all round leaving one small bit which you carefully raise and nimbly pop through the aperture into bed closing the curtain after you. This certainly postpones the ingress of the enemy but no precaution that my often-tasked ingenuity could invent will prevent it effectually. They are terrible pests and very frequently aided in their nocturnal invasions of one's rest by the still worse and thrice-disgusting creatures familiar to most dwellers in London lodgings or seaport inns to say nothing of fleas which seem to pervade this colony in one universal swarm. The thickest part of a town or the most secluded spot in the wild bush is alike replete with these small but active annoyances.  One day we drove out to the lighthouse on the South Head about eight miles from Sydney. Soon after leaving the town the road passes the new courthouse and gaol and its handsome front in the Doric or Ionic style (I forget which) is the only architectural building the "city" could boast when I was there though I suppose that ere this the new Government House a mansion in the Elizabethan-Gothic style is completed. We began shortly to ascend a hill the road being all sea-sand apparently and nothing but sand was visible all around. Great green mat-like plats of the pretty Mesembrianthemum aequilaterale or fig-marigold adorned the hot sandy banks by the roadside. It bears a bright purple flower and a five-sided fruit called by children "pig-faces". A very prickly species of solanum also grew here with large green spiky leaves more difficult to gather even than holly and pretty bluish potato-like blossoms. The universal ti-tree and numberless shrubs which I knew not adorned the sandy wastes in all directions. As we continued to ascend the road became very rough huge masses of rock protruding like gigantic steps over which the wheels scraped and grated and jumped in a way that made me draw rather strong comparisons between the character of roads at home and abroad. As we approached the summit the hollow formed by the road was suddenly filled by a background (forgive the paradox) of deep blue water; it was the open sea that gradually rose before us seen over the rocks and spreading out bright and blue with small waves sparkling in the fervid sunshine and the white diamond-crested spray dashing high against the iron-bound coast here broken into a low craggy amphitheatre into which the rolling Waves came surging on breaking over the groups of rocks and forming bright little basins among them. On either side the rocks rose again in large masses presenting a precipitous face to the sea being part of the dark formidable cliffs we had seen in approaching the Heads by sea. [224] The road after descending the hill turned to the left through some sandy scrub crowded with such exquisite flowers that to me it appeared one continued garden and I walked for some distance gathering handfuls of them - of the same plants that I had cherished in pots at home or begged small sprays of in conservatories or greenhouses! I had whole boughs of the splendid metrosideros a tall handsome shrub bearing flowers of the richest crimson like a large bottle-brush; several varieties of the delicate epacris; different species of acacia ti-tree and corraea the brilliant "Botany-Bay lily" and very many yet more lovely denizens of this interesting country of which I know not even the name. One most beautiful was something like a small iris of a pure ultra-marine blue with smaller petals in the centre most delicately pencilled; but ere I had gathered it five minutes it had withered away and I never could bring one home to make a drawing from. Surely it must have been some sensitive little fay who charmed into the form of a flower might not bear the touch of a mortal hand!  Numbers of parrots those  Strange bright birds that on starry wings   Bear the rich hues of all glorious things  were flying from tree to tree or crossing the road in chattering screaming parties all as gay and happy as splendid colours and glad freedom could make them. Often they rose close before us from the road like living gems and gold so vividly bright they shone in the sun; and then a party of them would assemble in a tree with such fluttering and flying in and out and under and over; such genteel-looking flirtations going on as they sidled up and down the branches with their droll sly-looking faces peering about and inspecting us first with one eye then with the other that they seemed quite the monkeys of the feathered tribes.  On nearing the lighthouse after ascending one or two slight hills we passed several small houses and others were building; the views from thence are doubtlessly very grand but it must be a most exposed situation with nothing to break the force of the strong sea-breezes and but little vegetation to moderate the glare of the sun.  The view from the cliffs is indeed grand  O'er the glad waters of the dark-blue sea;  and looking down over the dizzy height the eye glances from crag to crag till it catches the snowy puffs of foam flung up from the breakers that roar and dash in the cavernous chasms below booming among them like subterranean thunder. As I fearfully gazed down something leaped between me and the dark water - it was a goat and there were some half-dozen of the agile creatures far down the slippery precipitous crags leaping jumping and frolicking about with scarcely an inch of foot-room and only the boiling surf below. [225]  Opposite to us rose the corresponding cliff called the North Head bluff and bare and wearing on its hoary front the hues with which thousands of storms have dyed it. Myriads of sea-fowl were soaring and screaming around and several vessels in the offing and nearer shore were apparently shaping their course to the port but too distant for us to wait their entrance through these most grand and stupendous gates. The lighthouse itself is not in any way remarkable; close by is the signal-staff by means of which the intelligence of vessels arriving is speedily transmitted to Sydney and Paramatta.  We drove back by a different road nearer to the port and less hilly but equally beautiful with that by which we came. It led us through a moister-looking region with more large trees greener shrubs and more luxuriant herbage and commanding most lovely views that appeared in succession like pictures seen through a natural framework of high white-stemmed gum-trees and tall acacias. Here and there peeped forth a prettily situated residence with its shady garden and cool piazza looking down into one of the small bays I have before mentioned and beyond that to the estuary.  On one large dead gum-tree a whole council of black cockatoos was assembled in animated debate sidling up and down the branches erecting and lowering their handsome gold-tipped top-knots as if bowing to each other with the politest gestures imaginable; and accompanying the dumb show with such varied intonations of voice as made it impossible to doubt that a most interesting discussion was going on all conducted in the most courteous manner: perhaps a reform of the grub laws was in agitation for the business was evidently one of grave importance and we respectfully remained attentive spectators of the ceremony until "the House" adjourned and the honourable members flew away. These birds are by no means common in the neighbourhood of Sydney nor did I see any more during my stay in the colony.  The same deep sandy road continued: it appeared to me that this part of the country must have been gradually elevated from the sea and a long succession of beaches consequently formed and left inland by the retreating waters; for the prodigious accumulation of true sea-sand here seems difficult to account for in any other way. In the Domain too and many other situations are raised beaches consisting wholly of sea-sand and shells (recent ones so far as I examined them) above which in a thin stratum of soil great trees are growing; so that although these beaches have formed part of the dry land long enough for a body of soil to be deposited upon them and for aged trees to have grown in that they are still of modern elevation.  Sydney boasts her "Hyde Park"; but a park utterly destitute of trees seems rather an anomaly. It is merely a large piece of brown ground fenced in where is a well of good water from which most of the houses are supplied by means of water-carts. [226] There is also a racecourse between the town and Botany Bay racing being a favourite amusement among the gentlemen of the colony and sometimes among the ladies for I was told of a race somewhere "up the country" in which two "young ladies" were the riders the prize being a new side-saddle and bridle which was won in good style by one of the fair damsels; the horse of the other receiving a severe castigation from his gentle mistress for having swerved and lost the race.  Most of the country gentlemen near Sydney and for many miles round are members of the "Cumberland Hunt"; they have a tolerable pack of hounds and the destructive native dog or dingo serves them for a fox. So long as they hunt the really wild ones the sport is certainly useful; but when as frequently happens a bagged dog furnishes the day's amusement I cannot but think the field of mounted red-coats as something less than children. Dinners and balls of course form a part of the arrangements for the races and hunts and everything is conducted in as English a manner as can be attained by a young country imitating an old one.  That the present supply of agricultural and pastoral labour is far from being adequate to the wants of the Colony; that the rate of wages is beyond what the master can from the amount of profits afford to give; and that the demand for pastoral labour is progressively on the increase. The periodical additions made to the flocks and herds of the Colony by natural increase from breeding demand a corresponding accession to the number of labourers employed in taking charge of them. The annual addition of shepherds thus required cannot be less than 20 per cent. on time whole number previously engaged in the same occupation.  Could labour be obtained at rates commensurate with the profits arising from the growth of wool the increase of the flocks would still go on; fresh districts for depasturing be opened up; the annual exported produce of the Colony enlarged; and its general wealth and resources in a corresponding degree augmented.  It may be suggested that in order to realize such results wages must be reduced to a rate for which it could not reasonably be expected that persons would be induced to emigrate from the mother country or that could be regarded as a fair equivalent to the labouring immigrant for the risk and privations of his voyage hither.  Your Committee have directed their enquiries with a view of eliciting the opinions of witnesses as to the rate of wages the flock. master can pay with a due regard to his own interest and the profitable investment of capital. Were wages for shepherds reduced to an average of from £10 to £12 per annum exclusive of and in addition to lodging fuel and liberal rations your Committee believe that the profits arising from the growth of wool would be sufficient to supersede the practice now had recourse to either of ceasing to breed stock or of boiling down the surplus increase; and no sooner would profit be annexed to the pursuit of grazing than the staple of the Colony (its flocks) would acquire a marketable value and an impulse and activity be again communicated to colonial enterprise. [175]  They cannot but regret that tracts as rich as any of an equal extent in the world should for the present at all events be placed by an undue price out of the reach of permanent occupation. Without permanent occupation - without in fact actual property in the soil - men never apply themselves to the arts of settled industry or study to develop the latent capabilities which a country may possess. Your Committee therefore consider that such a facility for obtaining land should be afforded to persons emigrating to this Colony as would induce them to settle permanently. Pastoral pursuits must of course for a long time form the principal occupation of the Colonists and the chief source of Colonial wealth - therefore they should not be discouraged. They afford the best and readiest means of dispersing civilised inhabitants over the face of the wilderness; and there can be no question that it would be but wise to afford those inhabitants such facilities in obtaining possession of the soil as would induce them to occupy it permanently and to bring around them all the arts and improvements of civilised life. [243] With reference to squatting as superseding through means of the increased price of land the old system of settling it has been correctly remarked by a recent writer that - "They [the squatters] plant no breadth of land - form no enclosures - raise no buildings - make no outlay of capital". They have no fixed interest in the soil. With reference to the waste lands of the Colony it should not be forgotten that there are in Australia whatever may be its general character many millions of acres calculated to reward the industry and supply the wants of man. At present that land is unproductive - it is so much of the national wealth lying dormant. It is to be rendered profitable not by selling it at a high price but by bringing it under occupancy and cultivation. If it be sold the price should be proportionate to the profit derivable from it. At present pastoral pursuits are those alone in the remote districts at all events to which the settler can direct his attention; and if he buy land he can of course only give that price which those pursuits will enable him to pay. Now it appears according to the lowest calculation that three acres of land are required for the support of a single sheep. Therefore if a settler had to buy runs for five thousand sheep at three acres each at the present minimum price he should lay out £15000 in land. The interest of that sum at 8 per cent would subject him to a rental of £1200 a year making each sheep for feeding alone cost him 4s. 10d. per annum. The annual net return from the animal after the payment of shepherd's wages and other expenses would be about sixpence or a shilling: hence it appears that land for sheep farming at all events will not pay at 20s. an acre. A newly arrived settler therefore wishing to invest his capital in that which is the general occupation of the Colonists must go far into the interior and squat beyond the limits. This is a step which scarcely any man with a family would like to take and therefore though it is sometimes adopted by those who are actually in the Colony it is quite enough to deter persons of that description from coming to this country. [...]  From all these considerations which have been borne out by the evidence which has been given and the experience of the Colony your Committee come to the conclusion that the Act of Parliament under their consideration so far as it applies to New South Wales cannot but be injurious in its operation - that it is calculated to prevent immigration to these shores to withdraw capital from the country and to prevent the permanent occupancy of the soil. Your Committee see in the great territory of Australia an important element of national wealth lying for the most part dormant and unemployed; but they believe if the present restrictions were removed from the soil that capital and population would pour into the Colony - that settlers would spread over the face of the vast interior forming farms settlements and townships - each a nucleus around which population would gradually condense; that the inherent capabilities of the country would be developed and that Australia would become - what she once promised to be - the emporium of the Southern Hemisphere and one of the most important of the Colonial Dependencies of England. [244]  This work [i.e. of tail-docking and car-marking in lambing time] was carried on by us year after year while the sheep were grazed on the open unfenced runs but was superseded to our great relief when fenced paddocks became practicable; but that was not until a liberal use of strychnine poison had exterminated the native dog; and sheep fences on alienated runs or portions of them could only then be erected in forest country where cheap material brushwood logs or dead wood was growing or lying on the line. As no compensation was given under any of the Land Acts for improvements but merely a notice to remove them within a month it was not at all likely that substantial fencing could be erected till the runs or portions of them had become the squatters' freehold which was not until some years after the opening up of the diggings and the same number of years after the time referred to in these reminiscences. [283]  Where paddocks could be made a great saving was effected by the substitution of one or two boundary riders for every six or eight men shepherds and hut-keepers and the carrying capabilities were greatly increased also. But the saving was only real while the runs remain unalienated; when the grazing lands became freehold this great saving disappeared and the balance was altogether and adversely on the other side. Under the shepherding system the whole working expenses shearing included did not amount to more than £60 per thousand a little over a shilling each sheep; but when the lands were put up for sale and purchased at an average of £2 to £3 per acre there was the interest or rent on the purchased freehold and the substantial fencing to be reckoned as well as the working expenses which brought up the cost of each sheep to at least 3/6 at a sheep to the acre and it has to be good land to do that.  We are able to enjoy ourselves very pleasantly in our domestic circle. What with music singing and now and then a little dancing of an evening we have very little reason to complain of the loneliness of the bush or to sigh for the gaiety and amusements of the city. A short time ago we had what very much reminded me of years ago at home that was a tea-party something like what we used to have at the book meetings at Plaistow; there were about twenty of us altogether. As however we had no books to discuss after tea we substituted music singing and dancing interspersed with games. and tricks and what was equally important quite an elegant supper got up under the joint superintendence of Mrs. Eager and Caroline.  Being in town at the time our ewes were going through the melting pot I took advantage of the opportunity to see something of the process which as far as slaughtering and dressing was concerned was not an exhilarating spectacle in the case of our own sheep especially as many of the ewes were individually known to us and had received particular names. The operation like shearing being paid for by the hundred was very rapidly performed the dressed appearance being of no importance whatever. [293] The following day when the meat was set they were quartered and thrown into large wooden vats which when full had their manholes securely fastened down against the escape of steam which was then let in from a boiler at a somewhat high pressure. After a certain time the meat was completely disintegrated and all the fat dissolved out. The manholes were then opened for cooling down and the liquid fat was drawn out through several taps at different heights; lower taps were opened in succession while the clear white fat flowed through them and until the gravy appeared when the flow was stopped; the residue was then emptied out through openings in the bottom and put minus the bones into gunny bags and subjected to screw pressure to get the last of the fat squeezed out the gravy and fat being put into receptacles with taps to settle and have the remaining fat drawn off.  The meat residue void of all its fat was then conveyed to adjoining yards where with the entrails it formed a fine wallowing mess for a herd of pigs which had no Board of Health to look after them and which with the whole of the operations of two or more establishments of the kind diffused such an effluvia that was almost overpowering at a half mile's distance. Such was the process from 1842 to 1848 or '50.  I have a very large establishment now with the 8000 sheep and 300 acres of cultivation. I have twenty-two hired servants besides the wives and families of some of the married ones. The wages of these including reapers and shearers come to about £2000 a year independent of their rations which averages about two and a half tons of sugar eight chests of tea eight tons of flour and five hundred sheep per annum of a value of about £800. My gross receipts for this year are about £6500 and the working expenses about £3000. My last balance showed the value of all the property I now possess to be about £20000. I find from a careful examination of accounts since I first arrived in the colony that I have doubled my capital every two and a half years.  Adelaide is laid out on both sides of the Torrens; it has an open space of parkland reserved in the midst and is divided into 1040 acres exclusive of streets which cross at right-angles so as to give to every acre one side of street-frontage and to about half of them two sides. The acres sold originally at from £3 to about £12 each and they are now bringing from £40 to £65 each! The population already amounts to about 1200 but being scattered over so large an area they make little show. Some of the immigrants are erecting comfortable dwellings of wood stone or terrapisa but many are living in rush huts which are exceedingly obnoxious to fire. The day was excessively hot and every thing was consequently very dry. One of the huts caught fire and was destroyed in a few minutes So many persons settling together in an open fertile country and having generally brought good supplies with them from England and a few who had capital having imported cattle from Tasmania they have suffered but a small share of the privations to which the early emigrants to N.S. Wales and V.D.'s Land were subjected. Provisions are however high; fresh meat 1s. per pound bread 20d. the four-pound loaf; but if made at home it does not cost half that sum. Mechanics are obtaining 10s. a day wages in cash or notes of the Bank of Australia which issues 2s. 5s. and 10s. as well as larger notes and receives small deposits at interest.  Much of the country near Freemantle is of limestone covered with sand; it is unproductive of herbage adapted for flocks and unlikely in a state of nature to yield anything for the support of a new colony. With a little culture. it is said however to yield good vegetables. Potatoes are excellent and in some situations produce three crops in a year. Vines and figs thrive even in the town where the limestone rock is covered with little but fragments and sand. Industry is not great in the Colony and much of the land will yield nothing without it.  The Colony is so poor as to be unable to import sheep in sufficient quantity to stock its lands so that the holders of grants of from 5000 to 100000 acres have little stock of any kind upon them. Such grants are consequently of so little value as to occasion land to be sold as low as from Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. per acre! [428] Had the money expended in spirits since the foundation of the Colony been occupied in the importation of sheep it is not improbable that land might now have been ten times its present value; and had no grants originally exceeded 5000 acres many more persons would have had the means of maintaining flocks of about 1000 sheep each. The wealth of the Colony would probably have been thus increased so as to have rendered grants of this size by this time as valuable as those of 50000 acres each now are. Spirit drinking and avarice in obtaining grants of large extent have paralysed the country which beyond a doubt is naturally very inferior to what was originally represented. The exports of oil and wool are yet very inconsiderable perhaps not amounting to £4000 in any one year and almost the only other sources of income to the Colony are the payments of Government salaries the supply of provision to the few ships that put in here and a little arising from private property. The persons who have improved their circumstances by emigration to this country are labourers store-keepers and a few others into whose hands much of the capital that was originally in the possession of other Colonists has passed; but by this transition the capital of the Colony is not increased. Its population is said to be now only about 2000 or one third of what it was three years after the Colony was first settled. Death frequently the result of drinking and emigration to Australia and Tasmania have been the chief causes of this reduction.  To D. Coates Esq. Secretary of the Church Missionary Society London.  Sydney NSW 2 September 1843  Dear Sir  I beg to state for the information of the Committee of the Church Missionary Society that in the beginning of the present year the colonial government discontinued my salary for performing the duties of chaplain at Moreton Bay the settlement having then ceased to be penal. At the same time intelligence arrived here from the Committee of the Church Missionary Society in London that the Mission at Wellington Valley was to be abandoned which circumstances left me and my family without support and as I have not since been able to procure a livelihood my circumstances have become much embarrassed.  The Committee in London know that my salary was small and the time I was solely under government I received less than I had done from the Society and the Committee of Correspondence here can bear testimony that I have always acted with the strictest integrity in reference to the Society &c. Thus I was unprovided and unprepared to sustain such a shock in my circumstances.  I beg therefore of the Committee to take my case into their kind consideration and to grant me a small gratuity or annuity as may be thought proper.  I am  Dear Sir  Your most obedient servant  J.C.S. Handt.  TWO SATIRES ON THE GLADSTONE COLONY  1  How blessed the land where Barney's gentle sway  Spontaneous felons joyfully obey;  Where twelve bright bayonets only can suffice  To check the wild exuberance of vice!  Where thieves shall work at trades with none to buy  And stores unguarded pass unrifled by;  Strong in their new-found rectitude of soul  Tame without law and good without control!  Bless'd land! what mightly words thy future hides!  What zigzag road shall climb thy mountain sides!  Where travellers shall view with proud disdain  The shorter path across the neighbouring plain!  What harbours bristling with unsounded reefs  Shall shield the Navies of thy future chiefs!  What aqueducts shall bear thy river's bed  Free from the modern heresy of lead  To slake some parched city's thirst profound  Built ere a single water-hole was found!  In that blest region sure 'twill natural seem  To bridge the dry and ford the turbid stream  And each invention there will meet success  Which makes the labour more and produce less.  Windmills in swamps and water-wheels on high  This shall the stream eschew and that the sky;  The sail shall steam the oar the sail disgrace  Oars change to paddles paddles poles replace  Till one by one each art and science fall  And Barney's intellect is all in all.    2  Here Barney landed - memorable spot  Which Mitchell never from the map shall blot -   Leaving his steamer stranded on a bank  Regardless if the sailors swam or sank. [25]  Obeying Nature's most esteemed command -   Self-preservation - here did Barney stand.  What did he there? The venerable man!  He came an embryo city's birth to plan;  Wiser than Solomon when first he traced  Tadmor and Balbec cities of the waste.  For six long hours he did the search pursue -   For six long hours - and then he thirsty grew;  Back to the rescued steamer did he steer  Drew the loud cork and quaffed the foaming beer;  Then ate his dinner with tremendous gust  And with champagne relieved his throat adust;  Fished for his brother flatfish from the stern  And thus victorious did to Sydney turn!  Weep not my Barney! tremble not my Brown!  Nor dread abatement of your high renown;  What though the Commissariat growl to pay  Your steamer's hire at thirty pounds a day;  What though your city on the northern shore  Remain as much a phantom as before;  Though people ask you for their quo a quid  And say: "Twas ever thus that Barney did.  Thus did he build a quay beneath the tide -   Thus scoop a basin where no ship can ride -   Thus carry roads on lowlands and o'er highlands -   Thus spoil our harbour - thus blow up our islands.'  Weep not my friends! Who knows or who can tell  How well yourselves he served and us how well?  Oh! had some fever with its breath of flame  Blighted heroic Barney's stalwart frame;  Or had some savage ignorant and dull  Spiked the electric battery of his skull  Then had our cup of woe indeed been full.  But now let envy howl let faction groan  Yet Barney! yet we have thee all our own.  Critics may cavil governors may chafe  We've lost a thousand pounds - but Barney's safe!  After making a hearty breakfast we set out to inspect the settlement which is called Brisbane Town: it consists of the houses of the Commandant and other officers the barracks for the military and those for the male prisoners a penitentiary for the female prisoners a treadmill stores &c. [284] It is prettily situated on she rising north bank of the Brisbane River which is navigable fifty miles further up for small sloops and has some fine cleared and cultivated land on the south bank opposite the town. Adjacent to the Government-house are the Commandant's garden and twenty.two acres of Government-garden for the growth of Sweet-potatoes Pumpkins Cabbages and other vegetables for the prisoners. Bananas Grapes Guavas Pine-apples Citrons Lemons Shaddocks etc. thrive luxuriantly in the open ground the climate being nearly tropical. Sugar-cane is grown for fencing and there are a few thriving Coffee-plants not old enough to bear fruit. The Bamboo and Spanish Reed have been introduced. The former attains to about seventy feet in height and bears numerous branches with short grassy leaves the upper twenty feet bending down with a graceful curve. It is one of the most elegant objects in the vegetable world. Coffee and sugar will probably at some period be cultivated here as crops. The surrounding country is undulating and covered with trees. To the west there is a range of high woody hills distant in a direct line five miles.  The tread-mill is generally worked by twenty-five prisoners at a time; but when it is used as a special punishment sixteen are kept upon it for fourteen hours with only the interval of release afforded by four being off at a time in succession. They feel this extremely irksome at first; but notwithstanding the warmth of the climate they become so far accustomed to the labour by long practice as to leave the tread-mill with comparatively little disgust after working upon it for a considerable number of days. Many of the prisoners were occupied in landing cargoes of Maize or Indian-corn from a field down the river; and others in divesting it of the husk. To our regret we heard an officer swearing at the men and using other improper and exasperating language. This practice is forbidden by the Commandant; but it is not uncommon and in its effects is perhaps equally hardening to those who are guilty of it and to those who are under them.  Whilst walking a few miles down the river toward a brook called Breakfast Creek the waters of which are generally brackish at high tide we saw a number of remarkable plants &c. On the margins of the brook Acrosticum fraxinifolium a large ash-leaved fern was growing along with Crinum pedunculaturn a great bulbous-rooted plant with white tubular lily-like flowers. Hellenia caemlea. a reedy-looking plant with broad leaves and blue berries and a species of Phytolacca with pretty pink blossoms were among the brushwood. By the sides of fresh-water ditches there were a Jussieua resembling an Evening Primrose with small yellow blossoms and a blue-flowered plant in figure like a Pentstemon. On the grassy slope of the hills near the river Hibiscus Fraseri with yellow blossoms like those of the Hollyhock but having a deep purple eye was in flower. Among the mangroves the Moschettos were so numerous that we could not proceed many yards for them notwithstanding we wiped them continually off our hands and faces. Several striking butterflies were fluttering from flower to flower; some of them having considerable portions of the wings transparent. [285] In returning we fell in with half-a-dozen native youths who like the rest of their countrymen in places uninfluenced by civilized society were quite naked. As we could not converse with them we shook hands with them and they seemed pleased with this token of good-will. Having dressed their ebony skins afresh with charcoal and grease they communicated to us a little of their colour. Circumstances of this kind we never regarded as important compared with securing their friendship. We also met some older Natives who afterwards came to the Settlement having their hair filled with small white and yellow feathers and their bodies tastefully decorated with broad lines of the same stuck on with gum.  We visited the Prisoners' Barracks a large stone building calculated to accommodate 1000 men; but now occupied by 311. We also visited the Penitentiary for Female prisoners 71 of whom are here. Most of these as well as of the men have been re-transported for crimes that have been nurtured by strong drink. The women were employed in washing needle-work picking oakum and nursing. A few of them were very young. Many of them seemed far from being properly sensible of their miserable condition. We had however to convey to them the message of mercy through a crucified Redeemer.  Our luggage was sent on shore by a large boat at the charge of £3! We obtained lodgings at a tolerable inn at Freemantle [sic] to which we were recommended by Thomas Bannister with whom we became acquainted when he was Sheriff of V.D. Land and from whom we received much kind attention both at that period and during our sojourn at the Swats River. Western Australia.  The town of Freemantle is situated behind a little promontory of limestone at the mouth of an estuary called Melville Water into the head of which near Perth the Swan and Canning Rivers flow. These rivers form an inland navigation to a considerable distance but the opening of Melville Water into the sea is so choked with rocks that it is only passable for boats in fine weather. [290] Vessels discharge their cargoes at a jetty in a small bay on the south of the town. A tunnel is formed through the promontory to a place where boats can land with more security in stormy weather. The houses of Freemantle are of limestone. Many of them have been left unfinished in consequence of the seat of Government having been removed to Perth: these as well as others that are occupied are going to decay. Freemantle resembles some of the little coast-villages on the limestone of the county of Durham but it is even whiter than they and it is greatly inconvenienced by the drifting of sand. Fresh water is obtained in shallow wells in the limestone. The population is about 200.  Having learned that the Governor Sir James Stirling was likely to make an exploratory voyage to Port Leschenault we concluded to pay him a visit before he set out and for that purpose proceeded to Perth in a passage-boat which reached that place in about two hours. A fine sea-breeze made the sail up Melville Water very pleasant the weather being hot. This estuary widens in many places into large bays. The limestone hills on its margin are covered with trees and scrub and are broken here and there into picturesque cliffs. On landing we were welcomed to the Colony by Major lrwin a pious military officer who invited us to his house. After tea we called upon the Governor who with Lady Stirling received us kindly. We were also introduced to the Colonial Chaplain and to several other persons; and the Governor gave us leave to hold a meeting for public worship in the Court House which is a neat building conveniently fitted up and used as a place of worship by the Episcopalian congregation. The windows have white calico in place of glass and are fitted with Venetian shutters outside.  At Perth we became lodgers in the homely dwelling of the widow of a Colonial Surgeon; in whose house several other persons were also inmates. The bedrooms were without plaster on the walls or glass in the windows and fleas were very numerous. Circumstances like these are not uncommon in newly-settled countries. in warm climates. But we had learned to put up with inconveniences of this kind. and gratefully acknowledged the endeavours of our landlady to do her best to accommodate her guests.  The town of Perth consists of several streets in most of which there are but few houses. Some of these as well as the fences about the gardens appear to be going to decay. The streets are of sand mixed with charcoal from the repeated burning of the scrub which formerly covered the ground on which the town stands. The principal street has a raised causeway slightly paved by which the toil of wading through the grimy sand may be avoided. Many beautiful native shrubs grow in the borders of the gardens most of which are in a neglected state. A few on the slope to the head of Melville Water have the advantage of being moistened by filtration from some lagoons at the back of the town; these are well cultivated and produce fine crops of Grapes and Melons. The lagoons are much filled with the Cats-tail Reed Typha latifolia the root of which is eaten by the Natives. [291] They are margined with blue Lobelias and various species of Drosera and Villarsia; and other pretty plants. Moschettos are numerous and very troublesome in the evening.  We met a congregation of upwards of two hundred persons a large number for the place the population being only about six hundred. Several of the influential inhabitants were present. I had an open season of religious labour and endeavoured to turn the attention of the audience to 'the gift of God' and to Him who is able to give the 'living water' 'which they who drink of shall never thirst'.  In conversation respecting the Aborigines with a medical man from the country he stated his opinion to be that they were a people who deserved no consideration but whom it would be best to destroy whenever they were troublesome! To this sentiment we replied that neither Christianity justice nor even common sense admitted such an idea; and that though according to the notions of these people blood was required for blood yet that persons who voluntarily settled in a country which the British Government had usurped ought with that Government to labour for the civilization of the Native Inhabitants and to bear patiently the inconveniences resulting from their customs until these could be changed. There is reason to fear that many other persons entertain similar sentiments but the Colonial Chaplain with whom we dined at the table of the Governor said he believed that in almost every case where any of the white people had been destroyed by the Blacks the Whites were the faulty party.  ELECTIONEERING Riots. . On the close of the poll on Saturday at 4 o'clock the mobs from the four polling places congregated opposite the Golden Fleece. Bourke-street with the very laudable intention it was whispered of carrying into effect the commission entrusted to them by Mr Edward Curr at the nomination on Thursday and for the due performance of which he had called upon them to swear namely to tar and feather the newspaper alderman. Finding however that the worthy alderman was not exactly in a humour to meet their wishes and observing a very significant demonstration on the part of the mounted police both black and white the mob adjourned to the front of the Mechanics' Institute when the Returning Officer Alderman Russell announced his intention of making the successful candidate known at 11 o'clock this day. The mob refusing to disperse and becoming excessively unruly the Police Magistrate was compelled to read the Riot Act and ordered them to disperse but without effect; and it ultimately became necessary for the troopers to charge in and clear the area in front of the building. As night drew on the mob who had been clearly organised for the purpose formed themselves into bodies of from one to two hundred and paraded the streets breaking the windows of the parties obnoxious to their interest. Amongst the sufferers are Mr Baker Imperial Inn; Mr Roberts Union; Mr Cantlin Elephant and Castle; Mr Young grocer etc etc etc.; and strange to say the windows of Mr Williamson the draper were also broken although he (still more strange to say) was a staunch supporter of Mr Edward Curr which when the mob understood they politely apologised saying it was a mistake.  Later in the evening a mob amounting to a thousand proceeded to the house of Mr Green the auctioneer in Elizabeth-street who had conscientiously given his vote to the Mayor and announced their intention of burning or pulling down his house and thereupon commenced to break open the shutters and smash the windows actually wrenching the iron bars which guarded the windows till they broke like pipe staples. Mr Green and the owner of the premises Mr Greenaway with Mr Green's family were the only inmates of the house at the time and considering their lives in danger Mr Green threatened to fire on the mob if further violence was attempted. Disregarding or perhaps disbelieving the threat the ruffians persisted until Mr Green finding the shutters giving way fired through the door and shot one of the mob the bullet passing through his neck and wounding him seriously but not mortally. Another shot fired passed over the heads of the crowd and wounded a gentleman named Curie a clerk in the employ of Alderman Russell who had been attracted to the spot by the disturbance in the fleshy part of the foot the ball passing clear through and carrying portions of the boot with it. [294] Shortly after this Captain Lewis and his company of the 80th arrived and with fixed bayonets cleared an area in front of the house when Mr Green and his shopman surrendered themselves and they were conveyed to the watch-house for protection. After several charges made by the troopers and by the foot soldiers the mob gradually dispersed loudly and bitterly regretting that Green was out of their reach as they would have 'eaten his heart'. A patrol of the mounted police paraded the town during the night and by that means much outrage was no doubt prevented. There is not the slightest doubt that these and many other disgraceful outrages were contemplated several days previous in the event of Mr Curr being unsuccessful at the election.  Recommendations transmitted by His Excellency the Governor with his Despatches on the above subject dated 3rd April 1844 per ship "General Hewitt" as published in the "Sydney Morning Herald" of 13th May 1844:   1. - Every squatter after an occupation of five years shall have an opportunity afforded to him of purchasing a portion of his run not less than three hundred and twenty acres for a homestead.  2. - The value of any permanent and useful improvements which he may have made on the land shall be allowed to him; but the land itself (exclusive of improvements) cannot be sold for less than the established minimum price of one pound per acre.   3. - Any person who may have purchased a homestead shall not be disturbed in the possession of his run during the following eight years. He must however continue to take out for the unpurchased parts of it the usual license and pay on it the usual fee of ten pounds per annum.  4. - A second purchase of not less than three hundred and twenty acres shall be attended with the similar advantage of being undisturbed for the next eight years; so that each successive purchase of three hundred and twenty acres will act virtually as a renewal of an eight years' lease. [246]   5. - The right of the crown must however remain absolute as it at present is over all lands which have not been sold or granted it being well understood that the crown will not act capriciously or unequally and will not depart from established practice except for the attainment of some public benefit.  6. - Persons who may not avail themselves within a certain period to be hereafter fixed of the advantage offered to them of purchasing a homestead will be exposed to the danger of having any part of their run offered for sale either at the pleasure of the crown or on the demand of an individual. The value of any useful and permanent improvements which they may have made on their lands will be secured to them should a stranger become the purchaser.  7. - The person whoever he may be who purchases the homestead is to have the remainder of the run.  8. - All sales to be as at present by auction - the appraised value of permanent and useful improvements (which will be considered as the property of the former occupant) being added to the upset price of the land.  9. - As stated in the notice of 2nd April a license is not to cover more than twelve thousand eight hundred acres of land unless it be certified by the Commissioner that the twelve thousand eight hundred acres are not sufficient to keep in ordinary seasons four thousand sheep; no existing run is however to be reduced below twelve thousand eight hundred on account of its capability of feeding more than four thousand sheep. But if any licensed person have on his run more than four thousand sheep he is to pay one pound for every one thousand above four thousand. A person therefore having on a run of twenty square miles five thousand sheep will not as has been supposed be required to take out two licenses but will be charged an extra one pound for his license or eleven pounds instead of ten pounds. If he have eight thousand sheep he will be charged four pounds extra or fourteen pounds in all. This is not stated in the notice of the 2nd April but it forms a part of the proposals which were sent home as before referred to.  RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT  The next constitutional grievance to which the attention of your committee has been directed is the total absence of all responsible government.  Nothing can more clearly evince the evil tendencies of that entire separation of the Legislative and Executive powers - which exists here at present than the perfect indifference if not contempt with which the most important decisions and resolutions of your Honorable House have been treated by the head of the government during the course of this Session. Notwithstanding the insignificant minorities - in which the confidential servants and advisers (if any such there be) of the government have been left on every important subject - which has engaged the attention of the House during the present Session the condemned policy and measures of the executive are still persevered in as if they met the fullest concurrence and support of overwhelming majorities. Night after night the decisions of the representatives of the people - decisions in many of the most important of which some of the most experienced and influential of the unofficial nominees of the Crown have concurred have been utterly disregarded and every possible expedient resorted to - in order to deprive the Council of that control over the public purse which the Imperial Legislature on the one hand and successive Secretaries of State with the sanction of the Lords of the Treasury - on the other have over and over again placed at its disposal.  It appears to your Committee that there is but one way of preventing the collisions which have thus unhappily commenced from becoming permanent - to give the Legislative Council the necessary privileges of a representative body which imply that control over the ministers and administration of the Colony which belongs to responsible Government properly so called and which can only exist where the decision of the majority can occasion the choice - as well as the removal of the functionaries - who are entrusted with the chief executive departments.  But to responsible Government there must belong responsible ministers and since it is clear from the evidence of the Colonial Secretary and Colonial Treasurer that in their opinion no legal responsibility whatever attaches to them for any advice they may give the Executive on any measures however mischievous and destructive which may be consequent on that advice; it follows that to ensure such due responsibility the creation of some colonial tribunal for impeachments is an indispensable adjunct. [366]  And when - to the utter irresponsibility necessarily resulting from this unconstitutional unaccountability is superadded the still further irresponsibility which results from an enormous Civil List assumed without the consent of the representatives of the people and without the surrender of those hereditary Revenues which are its usual and constitutional accompaniment and the retention of which in conjunction with such Civil List is sufficient with moderate economy to render the government altogether independent of any grants from the people it cannot be denied that a purer system of despotism under the semblance of popular representation could hardly have been devised.  The utter state of pupilage in which the Governors of our Colonies generally are now held by that necessity for constant reference to Downing-street which is imposed on them by their instructions and the public inconveniences and mischiefs that accrue to the Colonies in general from the distrust thus evinced on the part of the Home authorities of the ability or inclination of Governors to use that local knowledge which they possess or acquire with due judgment and discretion if attended with practical and serious evils in Colonies at the other side of the Atlantic cannot but operate with aggravated injury in a community situated as we are at the distance of half the circumference of the globe from this seat of Imperial reference and power.  Nor is it the least evil of this system that it renders the term "Governor" a practical misnomer and constitutes him who ought in fact as well as in name to be the Queen's representative fully armed with all the powers delegated to him by the Royal Commission a mere subordinate officer; and what is worse as far as the moral influence of his station goes a mere Imperial officer possessing on the one hand in reality little or no discretion in the wide range of administrative powers apparently confided to bins but still held by the community over which he presides from their inability to separate those measures which are of his origination from those which are not accountable on the other hand for the whole of the mischievous policy of which he is the apparent author.  Possessed thus of a sufficient ostensibility of power to draw down upon him the just obloquy of bad measures with but small means and generally still smaller inclination to risk by any disobedience to the mandates of superior authority that chance of ultimate and higher appointments to which the governments of Colonies are now generally considered by the occupants as mere stepping stones - the practical operation of this system has been to draw down upon the head of this mere automaton ruler the denunciations and attacks of all parties - whose interests or privileges he assails whether in obedience to instructions or otherwise. [367]  The constant irritations and vexations incident to such attacks evidently tend to destroy all those sympathies between Governors and the Colonies which used to exist under the old system of colonial administration when the hands of those functionaries were comparatively unfettered and when the Home Government with juster views as it appears to your committee than prevail at present acted on the belief that there are in reality but few questions of a purely Imperial character connected with the internal economy of Colonies to need their control; and still fewer where the amplest discretions may not safely be confided to the Queen's delegate on the spot.  The want of all sympathy between the head of the Executive and the Colony which this state of things superinduces is in itself a great evil - the want of the necessary information in Downing-street to decide correctly on questions most generally of a purely local nature thus habitually referred to the Home Government and the wrong decisions and imperfect legislation which are the necessary consequences is a yet greater evil; but a greater evil still of this system is that it essentially impairs the real vigour of the Executive by suspending its decisions until distance and delay have weakened their force and thus rendered them comparatively valueless even when right and utterly unsatisfactory or odious when wrong.  There is but one remedy for these evils responsible government in the sense in which it is understood in England and an absence of all interference on the part of the home authorities except on questions purely Imperial or on matters referred to them by way of appeal where the Executive and Legislative bodies happen to differ.  Mr. WENTWORTH in pursuance of notice brought forward the resolutions founded on the Report of the Select Committee on General Grievances. When said the honourable member he moved the appointment of the Select Committee whose Report he now brought under consideration he had occasion to enter into an elaborate statement of the grievances which he thought the most oppressive - those which immediately pressed upon the attention of all who consider the position of the colony; and it was a remarkable fact that the list of grievances which he had then brought forward had in no way been increased or added to by the Committee in their Report. [254] [...] it was not however to be inferred that no other grievances did exist. It had occurred to himself and there was evidence to prove that there were many omissions; there was one - a paramount grievance which was not alluded to - which was that from the foundation of the colony to the present time the Home Government had kept to itself the appointments of all offices of honour or emolument or responsibility in this colony; had restricted those offices to persons from the United Kingdom who were sent out here without regard to the opinions or wishes of the colonists. This assumption on the part of the Home Government might be and was one of necessity in the earlier days of the colony; but now it had become a grievance - it was a disparagement to the character of the colony. He did not say that there were not some offices even now which might form exceptions; but he must contend that the Government ought as a general rule to adopt the principle of filling offices as they become vacant with inhabitants of the colony and not with foreigners - foreigners if not by extraction at least by birth or adoption. [...] He trusted that the day and the hour were not far distant when this colony would enjoy a responsible government; and one of the first reforms he hoped for was that the principle which had been adopted in Canada of filling up vacant offices with appointees on the spot would be largely and liberally acted upon. [...]   There were certain grievances set forth in the Report of the Committee upon which he thought there could be no difference of opinion; and although some feeble opposition might be offered to the resolutions by hon. members on the Treasury benches he had no doubt that the Council would affirm the recommendations of the Committee. Amongst these grievances was the imposition of the enormous civil list the schedules attached to the Act of Parliament an imposition as unjust as unconstitutional as could be imagined and on which no difference of opinion could exist. [255] There was the question of District Councils on which the Council and the people of the colony had over and over again expressed their opinion; and there was also the charge for police and gaols. [...] With respect to the civil list and the question of responsible government he would call the attention of the House to the concluding paragraphs of the Report. The Committee said Connected with the grievances there exists also in the present constitution of the Legislative Council a sort of sub-grievance which is quite as objectionable in principle as the Schedules themselves though not at present the cause of much general or wide-spread disaffection in the co-ordinate authority as to the right of voting the supplies which the imperial Act 5 and 6 Victoria C. 76 has vested in the nominees of the Crown equally with the representatives of the people. However little attention this infraction of a great fundamental principle that the public supplies can only originate from the people has yet attracted there can be no question that the period is not very remote when this great and glaring innovation on the ancient rights and privileges of the popular branch of the Legislature and the practical inconveniences that must inevitably result from it (some of which have already become apparent) will excite that public alarm which its unconstitutional tendencies evidently justify. Now with respect to this it might be and no doubt it would be said that this was unkind in the Committee towards those who had granted the colony its present constitution unkind especially in him (Mr. Wentworth) as he might in some measure be looked upon as the author of that constitution. He admitted the charge; he admitted that some eight or ten years ago he had framed and forwarded through a society of which he was a member a plan of a constitution such as had it appeared met favour in the eyes of the powers elsewhere; and the objection which might be taken on the other side to his complaining now would have some validity if he had ever assumed to himself infallibility; but at the time he proposed that constitution he had in view the inconveniences which had resulted in other colonies from two Houses; the evil of having a Legislative Assembly overawed thwarted nullified by a Legislative Council composed of nominees; he saw that some new mode must be adopted for the colonies; and that he was right had been shown fully even in the working of the present constitution of this colony. [256] It was now clear that to endue nominees of the Crown with a power equal to that of representatives of the people was an evil and the sooner that evil was remedied the better. [...] He thought that in all questions of supply the nominees of the Crown should refrain from voting; they should leave this matter to the constitutional authority - the representatives of the people; he meant in committees of supply.. On the appropriation bills he would leave the nominees their votes. On every principle of constitution and precedent the nominees ought to be silent in the Committees on supplies. As he had before said he should consider it a waste of time to say one syllable with respect to the questions of District Councils and Police and Gaols; but he must urge this question of responsible government and it was this question which he had no doubt would draw forth the opposition of honourable members on the treasury benches.   His honourable friend opposite (the Colonial Secretary) admitted that there was not a shadow of responsibility in the present government; that neither he nor any other government officer were responsible to this House; that this House did not possess the slightest control over them; but he said that he preferred this state of things to a responsible government; that to introduce a responsible government would be to sever the link which bound the colony to the empire. He was not at liberty to catechise his honorable friend here as he might have done in Committee but he should like to know how often questions were likely to arise here in which the empire had .any interest? What was the burthen .of .the legislation of this Council but legislation for domestic purposes? and what had the mother country to do with these? What for instance had the Imperial Government to do with such a Bill as that Lottery Bill which the House passed last night? He had indeed: heard that the authority of the imperial representative was to be interposed to prevent that measure from being carried into effect; and he would ask was such a step likely to conduce to good government? [257] Was it likely to preserve the harmony so much talked of? Was the exercise of the veto of the imperial officer on a measure so much needed by the colony likely to increase the fund of loyalty and the affection of the colonists to the mother country? He would ask whether all that. was so much denied would not rather be effected by diminishing this power - by making the Government responsible instead of irresponsible as at present? He denied that there would be any such result as prophesied. No one could be more desirous than he of seeing the link continued between the colony and the mother country - he would say to it esto perpetua; but with every desire to perpetuate that link he would ask again what right had any imperial officer what right had the home government to interfere with an Act like that which the Council had passed last night? It was scarcely conceivable that such interference would be made in a matter of so purely domestic legislation; but he had heard it surmised that the imperial .officer would put his veto on that [...] Such a state of things was unendurable in a free country; no men possessed of minds or souls would submit to it; it must be got rid of. It was well for this colony however that the principle for which he contended however it might be and was now opposed here had been admitted by the Home Government in respect to other colonies and he only wondered how British statesmen had for years endured the drudgery and vexation which must have resulted from constant appeals to the Home Government without having discovered their remedy. It did appear to him that without any wish to dissever colonies from the mother country statesmen might have discovered as it now appeared in other colonies they had that the colonists were themselves the best judges of what was required in domestic legislation and that the powers which their delegates had possessed and here did still possess could only be mischievous in the highest degree. The experience of the last six or seven years of this colony had fully justified what Lord Durham had said upon the subject. [...] The colonists had a right at least to expect in the Governor an impartial referee. But they had been deceived. In the published despatches they found nothing but an unceasing endeavour to damnify the colony and from them they might judge of the spirit of those which were not published not subjected to the public view. [258] The Report which he now submitted for the adoption of the Council not only proved that responsible government had been given to the colonies but that this colony would not be justly dealt by until the same was conceded to it. Hon. members on the other side might oppose the Report for the permanency of their officers would be affected by the change; they must go out and come in as officers of Government did elsewhere. [...] therefore he was not surprised that they should have apprehended that such a system as he proposed would sever the link between the colony and the mother country or rather between them and their Home appointments. The answer to this however was that so far as imperial matters were concerned they did not wish to interfere; the rights of the Imperial Government were not endangered. All they sought was that their domestic legislation might be free and unimpeded as it ought to be; they asserted that there ought not to be any power to arrest the progress of domestic legislation such as that which now existed. [...] What important resolution of the Council adopted in accordance with wishes of the community had the Executive not set aside? What important law what measure devised for the benefit of the community unless indeed it originated with the Executive or had its previous concurrence had not been opposed?   When had the Executive given way to the decisions of the representatives of the people? If one instance could be adduced in which the contrary was the case when the majority was not overwhelming then he would say that the Report was unimpeachable; as it was he could only say that the Committee had not gone far enough: that the Report gave only a milk and water account of the opposition offered by the Government to the measures of the Council. With every inclination to admit the transcendant qualifications of the individual who now ruled the colony that no single mind could compete with his single mind: yet as it was said that in the multitude of counsellors there was wisdom; while he admitted again as taking off his shoes he approached the exalted individual that individuals transcendant abilities he must express his doubts whether the single intellect of that individual transcendant as it was was superior to the collected intellects of the members of this House; he might do this without disputing the transcendental abilities of the highly elevated personage referred to - and he might come to the conclusion that on some points the Council were right while that exalted personage was wrong; that the thirty-six masses or clods of earth of which the Council was composed though not to be compared singly to the concentrated essence double distilled of the thirty-seventh clod should not at all times be overruled by that thirty-seventh clod as they had hitherto been and that it was high time to look for a remedy for the evils under which they and the country had suffered - and the only remedy was a responsible government. [259] This was the deliberate recommendation of the Committee and then followed an ancillary recommendation which would enable the country if in consequence of the imperial protection thrown around the head of the government they could not get at him at least to reach his advisers and those who carried his views into effect. If a colonial Treasurer should be found again who without authority would issue £25000 to pay off debentures or £15000 to pay for a road they would be able to get at him to ask him at all events quo warranto did you pay this money? There was no other means of doing this than by establishing a tribunal for impeachments in the colony. Impeachments appear to have been considered for years past in this colony as a mere joke; and he admitted that it might be so considered while the only tribunal was on the other side of the Pacific and Atlantic; but if such a tribunal as proposed were established here officers of Government would cease to consider it a joke. Such a tribunal had been recommended by Mr. Poulett Thomson and although as he had before said the sublime head could not be impeached yet his acts might in the persons of those who took upon themselves the responsibility of carrying them into effect. He had extended his observations further than he intended at the outset and he hoped that he had said enough to convince the House that the recommendations of the Committee were well founded - that the establishment of a responsible Government was essential to their future success in legislating for the benefit of the colony. [260] [...] With these observations he would now submit the resolutions of which he had given notice to the House leaving out only a portion of the second which more properly belonged to the question of land grievances: and those resolutions were -   1. That this Council having taken into consideration the Report of the Select Committee appointed to enquire into and report upon all grievances not connected with the lands of the territory and to distinguish between those grievances which can be redressed in the colony and those which cannot adopts generally the opinions contained therein.   2. That in the opinion of this Council the schedule annexed to 5th and 6th Victoria c. 76 should be repealed and the whole of the General Revenue placed at the appropriation of the Governor and Legislative Council in conformity with the provisions of the Declaratory Act 18 George III c. 12 s. I.   3. That in the opinion of this Council so much of the same Act 5th and 6th Vict c. 76 as relates to the establishment of District Councils should be re-pealed.  4. That in the opinion of this Council the Police Gaol and Judicial expenditure of the colony should be adjusted on the terms prayed for in the address to Her Majesty and the petitions to both Houses of Parliament prepared by the Select Committee appointed by this Council to inquire into and report upon all grievances not connected with the lands of the territory.  5. That it is the opinion of this Council that an humble address be presented to Her Majesty to direct that the Government of this colony be henceforth conducted on the same principle of responsibility as to legislative control which has been conceded in the United Canadas and to sanction the establishment by law within this colony of a tribunal for impeachments.  6. That in the opinion of this Council an Act should be introduced to enable persons having claims of any description against the Crown or local Government to sue the Colonial Treasurer or some other public officer to be appointed for that purpose by the Governor as a nominal defendant with suitable provisions to enable claimants to enforce any judgment or decree in their behalf; but nevertheless under such limitations as may be necessary to prevent frivolous and vexatious suits. [261]  7. That it is the opinion of this Council that an humble address be presented to her Majesty praying that her Majesty will be graciously pleased to place the Judges of the Supreme Court in the same tenure of office and security of salary as have been granted to the Judges of England.  Captain Dumaresq seconded the resolutions.  A Memoir of Knatchbull The Murderer of Mrs. Jamieson COMPRISING AN ACCOUNT OF His English and Colonial History  SYDNEY Wednesday February 14 1844.  The above named individual terminated his career begun with honour and with every prospect of earthly advancement and happiness in infamy on the scaffold yesterday morning.  At the early hour of six swarms of human beings - men women and children - might be seen pressing across the Race-course from all parts of the town to the vicinity of Darlinghurst Gaol. One intense desire to witness the awful tragedy was depicted on the countenances of nearly all; here and there might be heard the heartless levity and unfeeling laugh of the unthinking or the callous and reckless jeers of the hardened but the majority appeared deeply impressed with the solemnity of the occasion; and as group after group swelled the thousands of spectators many there were whose minds appeared thoroughly imbued with the respect awe and reverence due to the melancholy scene before them.  Within the walls of the gaol at an early hour of six might be heard the clank of the gaoler's hammer unriveting the irons from the body of the prisoner while at intervals the deep and solemn voice of the unhappy culprit would swell upon the ear in the most piteous accents of earnest prayer. From that hour until nine o'clock (the hour appointed for the execution) the prisoner was in continued intercourse with those religious advisers who had so faithfully performed their duty since his condemnation.  To them he unfolded his heart in frank and open confession. He denied that the murder was premeditated; "The devil instigated me to do this deed and I DID IT !" - such were his words.  The following addressed to Mr Keck is the only confession of his guilt which has yet appeared.  "Condemned Cell "Woolloomooloo Gaol "10th February 1844.  "In the presence of Almighty God Amen.  "I am guilty of the horrid deed for which I am to suffer death; and may the Lord have mercy on my soul. Amen.  He was brought out from that cell to the scaffold which had been erected outside the gaol wall. On either side of him were the Rev Mr Elder and the Rev Mr Sharp; and following him the Rev Dr Ross and other religious friends who had attended him in his last days. He walked steadily apparently in-sensible to all around him and engaged in ejaculating prayer. At the foot of the scaffold he knelt with the clergymen and prayers were offered up. He ascended the steep ladder without failing; and to the last moment - after all the fatal arrangements had been completed and after the clergymen had left him - his ejaculations were still heard by all those in the immediate neighbourhood.  The drop fell and the struggle was but brief - death being probably hastened by the extent of the drop. The body was taken down after the usual lapse of time and removed to within the walls of the gaol.  THE MEMOIR.  John Knatchbull was the second son of Sir Edward Knatchbull of Meersham the offspring of a second marriage. At an early period of his life whilst indeed a youth at school John evinced symptoms of those vicious inclinations which have been his bane through life; a selfish gratification of his appetites an impatience of restraint and a treacherous disposition distinguished him among his schoolfellows. [228]  On his removal from school he was entered as a midshipman in the Navy and remained in the service up to the time of his transportation to this Colony and he obtained the rank of Post Captain in it. Whether this was the result of his own merits or of family influence we are unable to state; but we are bound in candour to admit that in the affairs of actual service we have heard nothing to his disadvantage. We believed he served under Lord Cockrane and received severe wounds.  On obtaining the rank as a commander Knatchbull was appointed to the command of a small 10 gun brig called the LINNET and unenviable indeed was the reputation which attended to his name throughout the Navy whilst in that situation. Woe to the unfortunate "Middy" who supplied by the liberality of friends chanced to have a purse of his own. The hawk stoops not on the dove with surer eye than did the rapacious Knatchbull on his pigeon. We shall now record the circumstances which led to his transportation to the Colony of New South Wales. In the year 1824 a person of some note was surrounded in the Vauxhall Gardens by three men who jostled him and picked his pocket. He was not sensible of his loss until some moments afterwards when the persons disappeared. Late the same evening while perambulating the street in a disconsolate mood his attention was attracted by a street-quarrel.  Among the bystanders he observed one of the men who had picked his pocket and gave him in charge. The person appeared indignant and almost speechless with passion; he declared himself to be the brother of Sir Edward Knatchbull and a Post Captain in the Navy. Of course his story was not believed and he was taken into custody.  But some gentleman of respectability having informed his accuser that the prisoner was in reality the person he described himself to be he waited upon Sir Edward Knatchbull to apologise for having given his brother into custody; and he even offered to withdraw his accusation as he could not think it was anything else than a drunken frolic.  Sir Edward thanked him for his attention and informed him there was no mistake but on the contrary there was no crime his brother would not perpetrate and that the only favour he could show his family would be to bring the charge home to him that he might be convicted and meet the disgraceful fate which was certain to overtake him sooner or later. He was tried accordingly at the Surrey Assizes under the name of FITCH or FETCH and having been found guilty was transported for fourteen years.  Put on board the convict ship ASIA the name and station of Knatchbull again asserted its influence; instead of being confined and classed among his fellow criminals he had a small apartment assigned to him between decks immediately under the Captain's cabin. The ASIA was detained four months in Portsmouth Harbour. There was a convict on board named Lovett in a very sickly state was placed at Knatchbull's disposal as a servant to him. To the poor fellow he behaved with the most wanton cruelty often beating him until the man died. As his death was attributed to Knatchbull's treatment a great excitement prevailed amongst the crew with a general feeling of repugnance to the bully.  Knatchbull arrived in Sydney in April 1825. He was assigned to Mills a publican at Penrith where he remained for some time. He alluded to his state at that period as formerly he was a "Captain in the Navy - now a slave". After several changes he was assigned to Mr Kinghorne at Emu Plains who behaved with great kindness to Knatchbull. He then took a situation as postman to carry the mail between Bathurst and Mt. York. He received two shillings and ninepence a day for his service filling the situation two years. He stated that he was comparatively happy during that time.  In the latter end of 1831 Knatchbull was apprehended on the charge of forgery on a party at Bathurst and the evidence being clear on the 25th of February 1832 he was convicted in the Supreme Court and sentenced to death which sentence was afterwards commuted to 7 year's transportation to Norfolk Island.  On his way down to Norfolk Island an attempt under Knatchbull's instigation was made to murder the soldiers and crew of the GOVERNOR PHILLIP by poisoning the coppers by means of arsenic. When however the plot amongst the prisoners was complete the poison actually mingled with the food Knatchbull discovered the scheme to the Captain to gain the informer's favour.  Having served his sentence in Norfolk Island he again returned to Sydney and was sent thence to Port Macquarie. Here we believe he behaved with considerable decency and on the recommendation of several gentlemen and magistrates in July 1842 he was allowed ticket of leave for that district.   In July last he again paid a visit to Sydney when he applied in person direct to His Excellency Sir George Gipps for an alteration of his ticket to Sydney stating he could obtain employment in Sydney by a Mr Lewis residing in Sussex-street who would give him charge of a small coasting craft. Sir George sent for Mr Ryan of Hyde Park Barracks and directed him to interview Mr Lewis which he did with the consequence that Sir George granted Knatchbull a ticket of leave passport to trade on the coast in the cutter THOMAS AND HARRIET or the schooner WATERWITCH. At the beginning of January 1844 Mr Lewis became insolvent and returned the passport to Mr Ryan stating that it was only on account of his insolvency that he discontinued to employ Knatchbull. [229]  Knatchbull did not report to Mr Ryan and was sought for. During that time Knatchbull was lurking about Sydney and there is abundant reason to believe that he was on the watch to obtain money either by fraud forgery or robbery. He took lodgings at a house of a man named Holliwell in Clarence-lane and on the night of the 6th of January commited his diabolical act. On Thursday the 18th Mrs Jamieson died and on the 24th JOHN FITCH alias JOHN KNATCHBULL came up for his trial before His Honour Mr Justice Burton at the Supreme Court Sydney on the charge of wilful murder upon Ellen Jamieson.  The circumstances of the atrocious murder disclosed at the trial were as follows. Mrs Jamieson - an industrious widow - kept a small shop in Margaret-place and was reputed to be possessed of money which she was saving for the education of her two small children. Knatchbull in some way found this out.  On the evening of the 6th of January 1844 Knatchbull was observed to be lurking near Mrs Jamieson's shop and Mr Shallis who knew him decided to watch his movements with the suspicion that he was loitering there for no good purpose. Observing Knatchbull enter the shop he ran to the door and listened. He soon heard a noise which he described to be "like that of breaking a cocoanut with a hammer".  The house the door of which Knatchbull had fastened inside was forcibly entered soon afterwards by the police-officers. The poor widow was found insensible her head dreadfully cut and blood copiously flowing. Knatchbull was apprehended inside the house and numerous circumstances combined to leave no shadow of doubt of his guilt.  The demeanour of the prisoner throughout the trial while it evinced a strong inward struggle on his part to combat the painful and harrowing feelings he must have experienced upon such an awful occasion was highly decorous and respectful. The court was densely crowded throughout the trial and exhibited a pretty large sprinkling of ladies whom we think would have shown better taste in absenting themselves from such a trial.  Sydney N.S.W. 30th Decr. 1844   My Lord  The person who by this letter takes the liberty thus abruptly to introduce himself to your Lordship's notice has no better claim to your attention than his being a native of Stoneleigh - the son of a former tenant on your Lordship's estate. My story is as follows:   About two and twenty years ago there was living at Stoneleigh a person of the name of Thomas Parkes. I recollect well the old farm house which he tenanted standing beside a green lane leading from Gibbett Hill to Kerby Corner the length of two fields from the Coventry and Warwick turnpike road. The individual who now addresses your Lordship and who is the youngest child of Thomas Parkes was not born in that old house but on another small farm a short distance from it called Candley or Candley Moat where my father and my grandfather also I believe were born. When I was a child my father left that part of the country.   [Nine lines erased]   From the time my father left Stoneleigh I might date the commence of suffering and hardship which soon resulted in bleak and lasting destitution. My father removed first into Glamorganshire and afterwards to Gloucester where he became completely beggarred losing the remnant of his little worldly means in a small retail shop. By this time my elder brothers and my sisters (except one the eldest) had left home and gone to service; and I not quite ten years of age went to work at a Rope manufactory for fourpence pr day. My father also now went out to day-labour first at gardening then harvest time coming on he took a job of reaping at which I was taken from the rope walk to assist. After the harvest he could get no further work for some time and I went back to rope-making and my two shillings pr. week. During the autumn he obtained employment to break stones for a new road then in progress from Cheltenham to Cirencister and I was again taken to partake of this new occupation as I was able to do nearly as much of this sort of work as my father. We stayed among the hills of Gloucestershire working on the new road for two months during which time we were supplied with provisions by the Contractors according to the truck system which together with our lodging consumed all our earnings. My father then returned to Gloucester. Our next employment was breaking stones on the road between Cheltenham and Gloucester which we did all through the following winter. I shall never forget that winter. My poor mother then in a state of grievous bodily debility with my eldest sister had been all this time keeping on the little retail shop already named. The profits however arising from that (if indeed there were any) added to our joint earnings were not sufficient to keep us from extreme suffering. I remember that though we were professedly sellers of bread we often had not a morsel to put within our lips. On many occasions my poor father would wake up at two or three oclock on a dark winter morning and mistaking the cry of the watchman or some other indication of the hour would hurry us off to our work with the hope (as we had three or four miles to go) of beginning at day-break; when having arrived at the spot and waited an hour or two almost frozen to death we would be apprised of the true time of morning by the passing of the London coach which we knew left Gloucester at five o'clock. On many a day we worked without food or with scarcely any. And at home our few things had long been going one after another to the pawnbrokers till we had scarcely an article left for our comfort or our use; - clothing furniture bedding all were gone. Returning home from our miserable work I am sure we often saw the trembling of each other's heart for fear of meeting with some new misery of that day's bringing. If your Lordship will pardon my quoting from a great good poet   "Our evenings then were dull and dead  Sad case it was as you may think  For very cold to go to bed;  And then for cold not sleep a wink."  At length my father determined to return back as far as Birmingham towards our native place. My mother had a brother settled in Birmingham and also a nephew named Faulconbridge (the son of another brother) who owed my father at the time he left Warwickshire I believe about forty pounds. It was the hope of getting part of this money I think which induced my father to remove to Birmingham. It must have been in the month of March that we set out on this miserable journey.   I then between ten and eleven years of age my father and mother and my eldest sister. Our money could not have exceeded ten or twelve shillings. We travelled the first day to within three or four miles of Worcester when my sister fainted on the road side and we had difficulty in reaching the nearest inn where we stopped for the night. The next day (which I recollect was a Saturday) we walked on as far as Droitwich at which place we stayed in a small lodging house till Monday morning; when we proceeded on to Birmingham arriving there about noon. The weather was very wintry during this journey; the wind and sleet at times went almost through us we were so thinly clothed; and my sister and mother when we reached Birmingham were in consequence quite ill. We went first to my uncle's who seemed half inclined to disown us; but his heart got the better of him and he took us in and set before us the only comfortable dinner which we had seen for many months. But alas two of our number could not eat; my poor mother and sister were heartbroken at the coldness of those who often feasted beneath their roof in better days. We stayed at my uncle's house two or three days when my father took a small house at his desire in another part of the town borrowing from him two chairs and two or three other articles for our use. In the mean time my father called upon my cousin who owed him the forty pounds but he said he had paid the amount to a Mr. Gilbert of Coventry one of my father's creditors. I and my father both now went out to look for work; my father obtained employment at a brick-kiln to dig out and temper the clay; and I a day or two afterwards was employed at another yard to carry away and lay down the new-made bricks from the moulder at six shillings pr. week. My father still endeavoured to get the money from Faulconbridge disbelieving that he had paid it to Gilbert; and went to an attorney who undertook the recovery of it. Upon this Faulconbridge came and proposed some arrangement which was to be completed in about a week; but on the day appointed there came in his stead a Sheriff's officer who took my father to prison at the suit of Gilbert. This Mr Gilbert had said if he could ever find my father he would prosecute him with the utmost rigour; and it appeared that Faulconbridge knowing this made a journey to Coventry or wrote to inform him where my father was living; as he came to point out our house to the officer who brought the arrest. I have said that when living at Gloucester I often went home at evening from my work with a heart trembling for fear of finding it made more miserable during the day. On this occasion I still remember I ran home with glad expectations of finding it more comfortable for my mother had told me in the morning Faulconbridge was coming to pay part of the money I found my mother and sister crying bitterly before the fireless grate; and then they told me that my father was gone to prison. For months after this we had no means of support beyond my six shillings pr. week eighteen pence of which we paid for a place to live in. At last my sister obtained employment at a staymaker's shop at five or six shillings weekly but I soon afterwards lost my work the summer season being over and brickmaking at that place suspended till the Spring. Within a few weeks however I obtained fresh employment in the work-shop of an Ivory Turner at three shillings per week. I was with this man two or three months but he was a great drunkard frequently going to the alehouse for half the week together leaving me idle; he was also in the habit of singing obscene songs and saying all manner of unkind things to me about the poverty of my mother and sister. One day when he was drinking I went out and agreed with another master in the same trade - he was an old man an excellent workman and as good a master; with him I stopped for eight years.   My other brothers and sisters came over to Birmingham at different times from Gloucestershire except my eldest brother who had before we removed gone back into Wales where he married and soon afterwards died. My sisters came to us first the youngest coming round by Warwick to see my father in prison and giving him all her wages. My father came home in about a year or year and half having taken the benefit of the insolvent's act. The attorney employed on his behalf I remember was paid afterwards by weekly instalments of two shillings and half-a-crown. My father now obtained employment in attending to gentlemen's gardens a day or two at one and then a few days at another; his first employer in this way being the lawyer who obtained his liberation from prison. My eldest sister set herself up in business as a staymaker the younger ones assisting her. And thus we lived more happily than we had done for years. My master gave me a trifle weekly above my wages for pocket money out of which when I grew to the age of seventeen or eighteen years as it increased as I became more useful I was enabled to purchase tickets for the Mechanics' Institution; and resume something like educational training which had been totally neglected from the time I was a child of seven or eight years. About this time I commenced scribbling verses though I was exceedingly illiterate not being able to spell aright the commonest words. Some of my first efforts were to immortallise Mr. Thomas Attwood. In truth I grew up a great reformer I know not my Lord what are your political tenets but in making this acknowledgement I have no apprehensions of your Lordship's political anger.   If your Lordship will bear with me a little longer I will now make short work of my rough and rambling account. At the age of twenty I left my old master and started as an Ivory Turner on my own account. I did not succeed in business as all branches of trade were suffering under great depression in consequences of the failures in America at that time. In July 1836 I married a young woman named Clarinda Varney neice of Mr J. Varney Whip Manufacturer of Cheapside Birmingham with whom I had kept company for two or three years. I was then turned twenty one years of age. My wife's friends who were better circumstanced in life than mine were opposed to our marriage; and after it took place treated us very coldly the more so as I got on but very badly in my business. We struggled on together however for two or three years when I determined to leave England. My wife was at first very much against leaving her native country; but after her consent was obtained she seemed even more desirous than I of doing so. We first thought of going to the United States but there were then obstacles in our way which we could not surmount. In November 1838 we left Birmingham and went up to London. By this time we had two children both of whom died in their infancy. Part of that winter I worked journeyman in Jacque's Ivory & Bone Toy Manufactory Leather Lane Holborn. On the 28th March 1839 I and my wife embarked on board the Barque "Strathfieldsaye" Capt. Spence bound for Sydney. The vessel left Gravesend the same day and finally sailed from Plymouth on the 8th April. We anchored on the 27th July in Sydney Cove after a remarkable fine passage without touching any where or meeting with any accident. My wife was delivered at sea two days before our arrival of our third child; we could not in consequence remove from the ship under seven or eight days. When I had taken a place of lodging and removed my few packages of baggage from the ship I found myself with my wife in her then-delicate state of health and her new-born infant without money for our support (my all amounting only to a few pence) in a land of strangers. For two weeks I searched Sydney for employment as a turner living by the sale of my few books and a few articles of turnery which my shop-mates gave me when leaving London. I could get nothing of that kind to do and I then engaged with the late Sir John Jamison M.C. as a farm labourer at the wages of £25 pr. annum with a ration and half that is food for myself and half the same quantity for my wife. We stayed on an estate of Sir John's about forty miles from Sydney for six months when I left his service with the following certificate from his son-in-law W. Gibbes Esq. J.P who superintended the establishment.   "This is to certify that Henry Parkes the bearer of this lived in the service of Sir John Jamison of Regentville Knight from August 1839 to Feby 1840 during which time he conducted himself with the utmost propriety & punctuality & is a very deserving person.   (Signed) W. Gibbes J.P.   "Regentville   Feby 21st. 1840  (The original of this sent to Lord Leigh)   When we came down to Sydney again I obtained work in an ironmonger's store at 24/- pr. week; but I did not stay there longer than a month meeting with employment in a foundry to finish brass castings &c. at 30/- weekly. I stayed at this last place about three months when I was attacked with dysentry which confined me to home for ten or twelve days. After my recovery I applied to Lt. Colonel Gibbes M.C. (father of Mr. W. Gibbes already named) who is Collector of Customs at Sydney for employment as an extra tidewaiter which he gave me; and I have been so employed to the present time. The duty of such officers is to be day and night on board ship seeing that the taking- in and discharge of cargo is carried on according to the law and regulations of the Port. We are only occasionally on duty and pay but when off duty are allowed to employ ourselves otherwise as we like. Our pay when on duty is 6/- pr. day. When off duty I follow my trade as an Ivory Turner but can get very little to do. During the last two years I have not been employed more than one third of my time by the Customs owing to the numerical diminution of shipping in our port.   I should have stated that when I first arrived in New South Wales & for a long time afterwards all the necessaries of life were at an enormous high price bread being 8d and potatoes 4d pr.lb rent too was exorbitant a single room in a small house letting for 8/- 10/- and even more pr. week. It was therefore as much as I could do to get a livelihood. It was three months before I could even purchase a bed to sleep upon making shift with some old coats and other spare clothing. I have since been hoping month after month and year after year to be able to send a trifle to my father who is still living in Birmingham I fear in great indigence; but have not yet had it in my power. My mother has died since I left home.   My Lord I now come to the object of my present application to you which is to pray your Lordship if you think after my plain story that I have struggled hard and deserved better of the world to use your influence to obtain for me the appointment to some situation in H.M. Customs a degree above a tidewaiter or employment in any other Government Department.   I will confess if your Lordship will pardon me that I am chiefly emboldened to apply to you from the fact of your being a poet. Yet it is not indeed any vain conceit of congeniality of mind; for I feel conscious that I have little claim to that high character; but poetry has been to me a world of dear companionship and sunny joy and despite the soberer admonitions of reason I am disposed to place universal trust in the ministering spirits of that world's riches. Byron has said the stars are the poetry of heaven and I am sure the poetry which is in the stars and in the flowers and shining blades of grass was a bright guardian power ever present to me in the deep wretchedness and ignorance of my early life. In my very childhood I seldom joined in the sports of children. The spirit of my later boyhood was so cowed by the sneers and taunts of those who daily gazed upon my destitution that I scarcely dared to look a happy boy in the face. I had no books and I could read but little still I would wander into the woods and fields; and then I felt alone yet with something which made me almost happy. No wonder then that Poets should be the idols of my admiration the bright sanctifiers of humanity in my most fond belief.   Herewith I send and most respectfully beg your Lordship's acceptance of a small volume of verses (I have called them Poems) which I published by subscription in Sydney two and a half years ago. I also take the liberty to send some "Sonnets" in manuscript which I have written since that publication; and I hope you will not be displeased at my enclosing with them a parcel of Colonial newspapers.   In conclusion if your Lordship should be pleased to use your influence in my behalf I beg leave to state the following particulars relative to my eligibility for the kind of office which I seek. My age is twenty-nine (29 1/2) and half years having been born on the 27th May 1815. I believe my birth was registered at Stoneleigh Church or at St. Michael's Coventry. I was married on the 11th July 1836 at Edgsbaston Church near Birmingham by the Rev. Charles Pixell vicar of that parish. My family besides my wife consists at present of two children. Of my general character I hope the testimonials forwarded to your Lordship with this will be considered satisfactory. In one of those testimonials I am recommended for the situation of Landing Waiter or of Locker either of which I should most thankfully accept. I have no objection to any of the Australian Colonies. The duty of Landing waiter is to attend during the day on the public wharf and take account of the cargo landed thereon from shipboard; and the duty of Locker is to open and close the Bonded Stores and to receive and deliver the goods warehoused. My friends at Birmingham would take the trouble to obtain a certificate of my birth or other documents if such are required. I take the liberty to send their address.   If your Lordship should be pleased not to interfere in this matter will you be good enough to forward the Credentials herewith to the address given above as I at the distance of sixteen thousand miles cannot otherwise recover them. And may I solicit most earnestly and resprctfully an answer to myself.   I am my Lord  your Lordship's most humble  and most obedient Servant  Henry Parkes.  The Right Honorable)  Lord Leigh)  &c.&c.&c.)  Captain Griffin's house was of the same primitive character as those of squatters generally consisting of rough slabs fixed in sleepers below and in a grooved wallplate above and roofed with large sheets of bark supported by rough saplings for rafters. Mahogany tables chairs sideboards &c and the other moveables of a respectable family in a town appeared rather incongruous articles of furniture in such an extempore structure; but they gave promise at least of a better house which I was told it was intended to erect as soon as the more important out-door operations of the establishment should afford the requisite leisure for the purpose the present house being intended eventually for the barn. I was amused at the ingenious nautical expedient that had been had recourse to to form an additional apartment. The carpet which the family had had in use in their dining-room in Sydney was "triced up" to use the nautical phrase during the day to the wall-plate of the slab-house; but on the usual signal of "Let go the Haulyards" being given at the proper hour for retirement at night the carpet descended like the curtain of a theatre and not only formed a partition between the sitting-room and a commodious bed-room but stretching as it did along the whole extent of the slab-wall of the latter served to exclude the cold night wind which would otherwise have found a thousand entrances by the interstices between the slabs. [277] These indeed were so numerous as to render the formality of a window quite unnecessary and a work of supererogation. As being the greater stranger on the occasion the use of this bed-room in which I found a Colonial cedar post-bed with the usual furniture of a respectable bed-room in a town was in the absence of the lady of the house assigned to me; my fellow-traveller being accommodated with a stretcher in a detached building along with Captain G.'s sons. On the whole I was much gratified with my visit to this recently formed Squatting-Station so far to the northward; as it showed how very comfortably a respectable family could be settled in the bush with comparatively moderate means and exertion in Australia with all their flocks and herds around them like the patriarchs Abraham Isaac and Jacob of old. I question indeed whether any of these patriarchs was ever more comfortably lodged than Captain Griffin; for I should certainly prefer an Australian slab-house roofed with bark to a tent however patriarchal. At all events although any one of these eminent patriarchs would doubtless have been most willing to have treated my fellow-traveller and myself to a kid of the goats or a fatted-calf and a cake baked in the ashes - which in Australia is usually styled a damper - I am quite sure that not one of them could have added to the entertainment the never-failing and universally acceptable beverage of the bush in Australia - a comfortable cup of tea.  THE TOWER OF THE DREAM.  PART I.  How wonderful are dreams! If they but be  As some have said the thin disjoining shades  Of thoughts or feelings long foregone or late  All interweaving set in ghostly act  And strange procession fair grotesque or grim  By mimic fancy ; wonderful no less  Are they though this be true and wondrous more   Is she who in the dark and stript of sense  Can wield such sovereignty - the Queen of Art!  For what a cunning painter is she then  Who hurriedly embodying from the waste  Of things memorial littering life's dim floor  The forms and features manifold and quaint  That crowd the timeless vistas of a dream  [20] Fails in no stroke but breathes Pygmalion-like  A soul of motion into all her work;  And doth full oft in magic mood inspire  Her phantom creatures with more eloquent tones  Than ever broke upon a waking ear.  But are they more ? True glimpses oft though vague  Over that far unnavigable sea  Of mystic being where the impatient soul  Is sometimes wont to stray and roam at large ?  No answer comes. Yet are they wonderful  However we may rank them in our lore  And worthy some fond record are these dreams  That with so capable a wand can bring  Back to the faded heart the rosy flush  And sweetness of a long-fled love or touch  The eyes of an old enmity with tears  Of a yet older friendship ; or restore  A world-lost mate or reunite in joy  The living and the dead !-can when so wills  Their wand's weird wielder whatsoe'er it be  Lift up the fallen-fallen however low!  Give youth unto the worn enrich the poor;  Build in the future higher than the hope  [21] Of power when boldest ever dared to soar;  Annul the bars of space the dens of time  Giving the rigid and cold-clanking chain  Which force that grey iniquity hath clenched  About its captive to relent-yea stretch  Forth into fairy-land or melt like wax  In that fierce life whose spirit lightens wide  Round freedom seated on her mountain throne.  But not thus always are our dreams benign ;  Oft are they miscreations-gloomier worlds  Crowded tempestuously with wrongs and fears  More ghastly than the actual ever knew  And rent with racking noises such as should  Go thundering only through the wastes of hell.  Yes wonderful are dreams: and I have known  Many most wild and strange. And once long since  As in the death-like mystery of sleep  My body lay impalled my soul arose  And journeyed outward in a wondrous dream.  In the mid-hour of a dark night methought  I roamed the margin of a waveless lake  That in the knotted forehead of the land  [22] Deep sunken like a huge Cyclopean eye  Lidless and void of speculation stared  Glassily up-for ever sleepless-up  At the wide vault of heaven ; and vaguely came  Into my mind a mystic consciousness  That over against me on the farther shore  Which yet I might not see there stood a tower.  The darkness darkened until overhead  Solidly black the starless heaven domed   And earth was one wide blot ;-when as I looked  A light swung blazing from the tower (as yet  Prophesied only in my inner thought)  And brought at once its rounded structure forth  Massive and tall out of the mighty gloom.  On the broad lake that streaming radiance fell  Through the lit fluid like a shaft of fire  Burning its sullen depths with one red blaze.  Long at that wild light was I gazing held  In speechless wonder till I thence could feel  A strange and thrillingly attractive power ;  My bodily weight seemed witched away aloft  I mounted poised within the passive air  [23] Then felt I through my veins a branching warmth  The herald of some yet unseen content  The nearness of some yet inaudible joy  As if some spell of golden destiny  Lifted me onwards to the fateful tower.    PART II.  High up the tower a circling balcony  Emporched a brazen door. The silver roof  Rested on shafts of jet and ivory work  Made a light fence against the deep abyss.  Before that portal huge a lady stood  In radiant loveliness serene and bright  Yet as it seemed expectant ; for as still  She witched me towards her soft she beckon'd me  With tiny hand more splendid than a star ;  And then she smiled not as a mortal smiles  With visible throes to the mere face confined  But with her whole bright influence all at once  In gracious act as the Immortals might  God-happy or as smiles the morning when  Its subtle lips in rosy beauty part  [24] Under a pearly cloud and breathe the while  A golden prevalence of power abroad  That taketh all the orient heaven and earth  Into the glory of its own delight.  Then in a voice keen sweet and silvery clear  And intimately tender as the first  Fine feeling of a love-born bliss she spoke  "Where hast thou stayed so long? Oh tell me where?"  With thrilling ears and heart I heard but felt  Pass from me forth a cry of sudden fear  As swooning through the wildness of my joy  Methought I drifted-whither ? All was now  One wide cold blank ; the lady and the tower  The gleaming lake with all around it one  Wide dreary blank ;- the drearier for that still  A dizzy clinging ghostly consciousness  Kept flickering from mine inmost pulse of life  Like a far meteor in some dismal marsh ;  How long I knew not but the thrilling warmth  That like the new birth of a passionate bliss  Erewhile had searched me to the quick again  Shuddered within me more and more until  Mine eyes had opened under two that made  [25] All else like darkness ; and upon my cheek  A breath that seemed the final spirit of health  And floral sweetness harbingered once more  The silver accents of that wondrous voice  Which to have heard was never to forget ;  And with her tones came warbled as it seemed  In mystical respondence to her voice  Still music such as Eolus gives forth  But purer deeper ;-warbled as from some  Unsearchable recess of soul supreme  Some depth of the Eternal ! echoing thence  Through the sweet meanings of its spirit speech.  I answered not but followed in mute love  The beamy glances of her eyes ; methought  Close at her side I lay upon a couch  Of purple blazoned all with stars of gold  Tremblingly rayed with spiculated gems ;  Thus sat we looking forth ; nor seemed it strange  That the broad lake with its green shelving shores  And all the hills and woods and winding vales  Were basking in the beauty of a day  So goldenly serene that never yet  The perfect power of life-essential light  [26] Had so enrobed since paradise was lost  The common world inhabited by man.  I saw this rare surpassing beauty;-yea  But saw it all through her superior life  Orbing mine own in love ; I felt her life  The source of holiest and truth-loving thoughts  Breathing abroad like odours from a flower  Enriched with rosy passion and pure joy  And earnest tenderness. Nor ever might  The glassy lake below more quickly give  Nimble impressions of the coming wind's  Invisible footsteps dimpling swift along  Than instant tokens of communion sweet  With outward beauty's subtle spirit passed  Forth from her eyes and thence in lambent waves  Suffused and lightened o'er her visage bright.  But as upon the wonder of her face  My soul now feasted even till it seemed  Instinct with kindred lustre lo ! her eyes  Suddenly saddened ; then abstractedly  Outfixing them as on some far wild thought  That darkened up like a portentous cloud  [27] Over the morning of our peace she flung  Her silver voice into a mystic song  Of many measures which as forth they went  Slid all into a sweet abundant flood  Of metric melody! And to her voice  As still she sung invisible singers joined  A choral burden that prolonged the strain's  Rich concords till the echoes of the hills  Came forth in tidal flow and backward then  Subsiding like a refluent wave died down  In one rich harmony. It strangely seemed  As though the song were ware that I but slept  And that its utterer was but a dream ;  'Tis traced upon the tablet of my soul  In shining lines that intonate themselves-  Not sounding to the ear but to the thought-  Out of the vague vast of the wonderful  And might when hardened into mortal speech  And narrowed from its wide and various sweep  Into such flows as make our waking rhymes  Most wildly musical be written thus:- [28]     THE SONG.  Wide apart wide apart  In old Time's dim heart  One terrible Fiend doth his stern watch keep  Over the mystery  Lovely and deep  Locked in thy history  Beautiful Sleep !  Could we disarm him  Could we but charm him  The soul of the sleeper might happily leap  Through the dark of the dim waste so deathly and deep  That shroudeth the triple divinity  The three of thy mystical Trinity:  Gratitude Liberty  Joy from all trammels free  Beautiful Spirit of Sleep !  Beautiful Spirit !  Could we confound him  Who darkens thy throne  Could we surround him  With spells like thine own  [29] For the divinity  Then of thy Trinity  Oh what a blesseder reign were begun!  For then it were evermore one  With all that soul freed from the body's strait scheme  Inherits of seer-light and mystical dream.  And to sleep were to die  Into life in the Infinite  Holy and high  Spotless and bright  Calmly peacefully deep  Ah then ! that dread gulf should be crossed by a mortal  Ah then ! to what life were thy bright arch the portal  Beautiful Spirit of Sleep.    PART III.  She ceased and a deep tingling silence fell  Instantly round-silence complete and yet  Instinct as with a breathing sweetness left  By the rare spirit of her voice foregone ;  Even as the fragrance of a flower were felt  [30] Pervading the mute air through which erewhile  It had been borne by the delighted hand  Of some sweet-thoughted maiden. Turning then  Her bright face towards me as I stood entranced  Yet with keen wonder stung she said "I love thee  As first love loveth-utterly ! But ah  This love itself-this purple-wingëd love-  This life-enriching spirit of delight  Is but a honey-bee of paradise  That only in the morning glory dares  To range abroad only in vagrant mood  Adventures out into the common world  Of man and woman thither lured by sight  Of some sweet human soul that blooms apart  Untainted by a rank soil's weedy growths  Lured thither thus yet being even then  A wilful wanderer from its birthplace pure  Whereto it sadly must return again  Or forfeit else its natal passport ere  The dread night cometh. Yet of how great worth  Is love within the world ! By the fair spring  Of even the lowliest love how many rich  And gracious things that could not else have been  Grow up like flowers and breathe a perfume forth  [31] That never leaves again the quickened sense  It once hath hit as with a fairy's wand!"  She spoke in mournful accents wild and sweet  And lustrous tears brimmed over from the eyes  That met my own now melancholy gaze.  But not all comfortless is grief that sees  Itself reflected in another's eyes  And love again grew glad: alas not long  For with a short low gasp of sudden fear  She started back and hark ! within the tower  A sound of strenuous steps approaching fast  Rang upwards as it seemed from the hard slabs  Of a steep winding stair; and soon the huge  And brazen portal that behind us shut  Burst open with a clang of loosened bolts-  A clang like thunder that went rattling out  Against the echoes of the distant hills.  With deafened ears and looks aghast I turned  Towards the harsh noise there to behold between  The mighty jambs in the strong wall from which  The door swung inward a tremendous form !  [32] A horrid gloomy form that shapeless seemed  And yet in all its monstrous bulk to man  A hideous likeness bare ! Still more and more  Deformed it grew as forth it swelled and then  Its outlines melted in a grizzly haze  That hung about them even as grey clouds  Beskirt a coming tempest's denser mass  That thickens still internally and shows  The murkiest in the midst-yea murkiest there  Where big with fate and hid in solid gloom  The yet still spirit of the thunder broods  And menaces the world.  Beholding that dread form the lady of light  Had rushed to my extended arms and hid  Her beamy face fright-harrowed in my breast!  And thus we stood made one in fear; while still  That terrible vision out upon us glared  With horny eyeballs-horrible the more  For that no evidence of conscious will  No touch of passion vitalized their fixed  Eumenidèan stone-cold stare as towards  Some surely destined task they seemed to guide  Its shapeless bulk and awful ruthless strength.  [33] Then with a motion as of one dark stride  Shadowing forward and outstretching straight  One vague-seen arm from my reluctant grasp  It tore the radiant lady saying "This  Is love forbidden !" in a voice whose tones  Were like low guttural thunders heard afar  Outgrowling from the clouded gorges wild  Of steep-cragged mountains when a sultry storm  Is pondering in its dark pavilions there.  Me then he seized and threw me strongly back  Within the brazen door ; its massive beam  Dropped with a wall-quake and the bolts were shot  Into their sockets with a shattering jar.  I may not paint the horrible despair  That froze me now; more horrible than aught  In actual destiny in waking life  Could give the self-possession of my soul.  Within without-all silent stirless cold  Whither was she my lady of delight  Reft terribly away? Time-every drip of which  Was as an age-kept trickling on and on  Brought no release no hope; brought not a breath  That spake of fellowship or even of life  [34] Out of myself. Utterly blank I stood  In marble-cold astonishment of heart !  And when at length I cast despairing eyes-  Eyes so despairing that the common gift  Of vision stung me like a deadly curse-  The dungeon round pure pity of myself  So warmed and loosened from my brain the pent  And icy anguish that its load at once  Came like an Alp-thaw streaming through my eyes;  Till resignation that balm-fragrant flower  Of meek pale grief that hath its root in tears  Grew out of mine and dewed my soul with peace.  My dungeon was a half-round lofty cell  Massively set within the crossing wall  That seemed to cut the tower's whole round in twain ;  A door with iron studs and brazen clamps  Shut off the inner stairway of the tower ;  And by this door a strange and mystic thing  A bat-winged steed on scaly dragon claws  Stood mute and rigid in the darkening cell.  The night came on ; I saw the bat-winged steed  Fade melt and die into the gathering gloom  Then in the blackness hour by hour I paced  [35] And heard my step- the only sound to me  In all the wide world-throb with a dull blow  Down through the hollow tower that seemed to yawn.  A monstrous well beneath with wide waste mouth  Bridged only by the quaking strip of floor  On which I darkling strode. Then hour on hour  Paused as if clotting at the heart of time  And yet no other sound had being there  And still that strange mute mystic bat-winged steed  Stood waiting near me by the inner door.    PART IV.  At last all suddenly in the air aloft  Over the tower a wild wailful song  Woke flying many-voiced then sweeping off  Far o'er the echoing hills so passed away  In dying murmurs through the hollow dark.  SONG.  In vain was the charm sought  In vain was our spell wrought  Which that dread watcher's eyes drowsy might keep;  [36] In vain was the dragon-steed  There at the hour of need  Out with his double freight blissward to sweep.  Lost-lost-lost-lost !  In vain were our spells of an infinite cost  Lost-lost-lost-lost !  Yon gulf by a mortal may never be crossed  Never ah never!  The doom holds for ever  For ever ! for ever!  Away come away!  For see wide uprolling the white front of day !  Away to the mystic mid-regions of sleep  Of the beautiful Spirit of sleep.  Lost-lost-lost-lost !  The gulf we are crossing may never be crossed  By a mortal ah never!  The doom holds for ever!  For ever ! for ever!  So passed that song (of which the drift alone  Is here reached after in such leaden speech  [37] As uncharmed mortals use). And when its tones  Out towards the mountains in the dark afar  Had wasted light began to pierce the gloom  Marbling the dusk with grey; and then the steed  With his strange dragon-claws and half-spread wings  Grew slowly back into the day again.  The sunrise ! Oh it was a desolate pass  Immured in that relentless keep to feel  How o'er the purple hills came the bright sun  Rejoicing in his strength ; and then to know  That he was wheeling up the heaven and o'er  My prison roof tracking his midway course  With step of fire loud rolling through the world  The thunder of its universal life !  Thus seven times wore weary day and night  Wearily on and still I could not sleep.  And still through this drear time the wintry tooth  Of hunger never gnawed my corporal frame;  No thirst inflamed me ; while by the grim door  That strange unmoving dragon-footed steed  Stood as at first. Mere wonder at my doom  Relieved the else-fixed darkness of despair !  But on the seventh night at midnight-hark !  [38] What might I hear ? A step ?- asmall light step  That by the stair ascending swiftly came  Straight to the inner door-then stopped. Alas!  The black leaf opened not; and yet the while  A rainbow radiance through its solid breadth  Came flushing bright in subtle wave on wave  As sunset glow in swift rich curves wells forth  Through some dense cloud upon the verge of heaven:  So came it filling all the cell at length  With rosy lights; and then the mystic steed  Moved and spread wide his glimmering bat-like wings.  When hark ! deep down in the mysterious tower  Another step ! Yea the same strenuous tramp  That once before I heard big beating up-  A cry a struggle and retreating steps !  And that fair light had faded from the air.  Again the hateful tramp came booming up;  The great door opened and the monster-fiend  Filled all the space between the mighty jambs.  My heart glowed hot with rage and hate at once;  Fiercely I charged him but his horrible glooms  Enwrapped me closer in yet denser coils  Every dread moment! But my anguish now  [39] My pain and hate and loathing all had grown  Into so vast a horror that methought  I burst with irresistible strength away-  Rushed through the door and down the stairway-down  An endless depth-till a portcullis hinged  In the tower's basement opened to my flight  It fell behind me and my passage lay  By the long ripples of the rock-edged lake.  Then breathless pausing in my giddy flight  I saw the lustrous lady upward pass  Through the lit air with steadfast downward look  Of parting recognition-full of love  But painless passionless. Above the tower  And o'er the clouds her radiance passed away  And melted into heaven's marble dome !  Then fell there on my soul a sense of loss  So bleak so desolate that with a wild  Sleep-startling outcry sudden I awoke  Awoke to find it but a wondrous dream;  Yet ever since to feel as if some pure  And guardian soul out of the day and night  Had passed for ever from the reach of love !    THE FORGOTTEN. [40]   He shone in the senate the camp and the grove  The mirror of manhood the darling of love.  He fought for his country the star of the brave   And died for it's weal when to die was to save.  And Wisdom and Valour long over him wept   And Beauty for ages strewed flowers where he slept.  And the bards of the people inwrought with their lays   The light of his glory the sound of his praise.  But afar in the foreworld have faded their strains   And now of his being what record remains?  Within a lone valley a tomb crumbles fast   And the name of the Sleeper is lost in the past.    [41] A LAMENT.  FLOWERS in their freshness are flushing the earth   And the voice-peopled forest is loud in its mirth   And streams in their fulness are laughing at dearth -  Yet my bosom is aching.  There's shadow on all things - the shadow of woe -  It falls from my spirit wherever I go   As from a dark cloud drifting heavy and slow   For my spirit is weary.  Ah ! what can be flowers in their gladness to me   Or the voices that people the green forest tree   Or the full joy of streams - since my soul sighs ah me!   O'er the grave of my Mary.  Under the glad face of nature her face   Hath carried down with it all beauty and grace;   Pale is it there in that dark silent place -  Mary! oh Mary! [42]   Children are by me - her children ; oh God !   To see where their feet have unwittingly trod   Tiny tracks in the loam of the new broken sod  Betwixt them and their mother!  Betwixt them and the true one who loved us in truth   Who bore them and died 'mid the hopes of her youth !   Who would live in a world where nor anguish nor ruth   May avail the bereaved ones.  Yet must I live lest her spirit should say   Meeting mine in its flight from this vesture of clay  "Where are our little ones ? Where do they stay ?  And why did you leave them ?"  If for them only then so must it be   See I remain with them Mary! but see   How lonely we stand in a world without thee!  Mary! oh Mary!  I live but death's shadow is over me cast ;   And even when wearied woe sleepeth at last   Some dream of the dead sighing out of the past   Is alive in the darkness ! [43]   Could I but weep it were comfort though brief;   But the fountain of tears by the fire of my grief   Hath been dried to its dregs and can shed no relief   On the thirst of my eyelids.  As music that wasteth away on the blast   As the last ray by the sunken sun cast   All my heart's gladness hath died in the past -  Mary! oh Mary!    THE CLOUD.  ONE summer morn out of the sea-waves wild   A speck-like Cloud the season's fated child   Came softly floating up the boundless sky   And o'er the sun-parched hills all brown and dry.  Onward she glided through the azure air  Borne by its motion without toil or care  When looking down in her ethereal joy  She marked earth's moilers at their hard employ; [44]   "And oh!" she said "that by some act of grace  'Twere mine to succour yon fierce-toiling race  To give the hungry meat the thirsty drink -  The thought of good is very sweet to think."  The day advanced and the cloud greater grew   And greater; likewise her desire to do   Some charity to men had more and more   As the long sultry summer day on wore   Greatened and warmed within her fleecy breast   Like a dove fledging in its downy nest.  The heat waxed fiercer until all the land  Clared in the sun as 'twere a monstrous brand  And the shrunk rivers few and far between  Like molten metal lightened in the scene.  Ill could Earth's sons endure their toilsome state  Though still they laboured for their need was great  And many a long beseeching look they sped  Towards that fair cloud with many a sigh that said:  "We famish for thy bounty ! For our sake  O break thou! in a showery blessing break !"  "I feel and fain would help you" said the cloud  And towards the earth her bounteous being bowed ;  [45] But then remem'bring a tradition she   Had in her youth learned from her native sea   That when a cloud adventures from the skies   Too near the altar of the hills it dies !   Awhile she wavered and was blown about   Hither and thither by the winds of doubt;   But in the midst of heaven at length all still   She stood ; then suddenly with a keen thrill   Of light she said within herself "I will !  Yea in the glad strength of devotion I Will help  you though in helping you I die."  Filled with this thought's divinity the cloud   Grew worldlike vast as earthward more she bowed !   Oh never erewhile had she dreamed her state   So great might be beneficently great !  O'er the parched fields in her angelic love   She spread her wide wings like a brooding dove   Till as her purpose deepened drawing near   Divinely awful did her front appear   And men and beasts all trembled at the view   And the woods bowed though well all creatures knew   That near in her to every kind the same   A great predestined benefactress came. [46]   And then wide-flashed throughout her full-grown form  The glory of her will! the pain and storm   Of life's dire dread of death whose mortal threat   From Christ himself drew agonizing sweat   Flashed seething out of rents amid her heaps   Of lowering gloom and thence with arrowy leaps   Hissed jagging downward till a sheety glare   Illumined all the illimitable air;   The thunder followed a tremendous sound   Loud doubling and reverberating round;  Strong was her will but stronger yet the power   Of love that now dissolved her in a shower   Dropping in blessings to enrich the earth   With health and plenty at one blooming birth.  Far as the rain extended o'er the land   A splendid bow the freshened landscape spanned   Like a celestial arc hung in the air   By angel artists to illumine there   The parting triumph of that spirit fair.   The rainbow vanished but the blessing craved   Rested upon the land the cloud had saved. [47]     THE CREEK OF THE FOUR GRAVES.  A SETTLER in the olden times went forth  With four of his most bold and trusted men  Into the wilderness - went forth to seek  New streams and wider pastures for his fast  Increasing flocks and herds. O'er mountain routes  And over wild wolds clouded up with brush  And cut with marshes perilously deep -  So went they forth at dawn ; at eve the sun  That rose behind them as they journeyed out  Was firing with his nether rim a range  Of unknown mountains that like ramparts towered  Full in their front. and his last glances fell  Into the gloomy forest's eastern glades  In golden gleams like to the Angel's sword  And flashed upon the windings of a creek  That noiseless ran betwixt the pioneers  And those new Apennines - ran shaded o'er  With boughs of the wild willow hanging mixed  From either-bank or duskily befringed  With upward tapering feathery swamp-oaks  [48] The sylvan eyelash always of remote  Australian waters whether gleaming still   In lake or pool or bickering along   Between the marges of some eager stream.  Before them thus extended wilder grew   The scene each moment and more beautiful ;  For when the sun was all but sunk below   Those barrier mountains in the breeze that o'er   Their rough enormous backs deep-fleeced with wood   Came whispering down the wide up-slanting sea   Of fanning leaves in the descending rays   Danced dazzlingly tingling as if the trees   Thrilled to the roots for very happiness.  But when the sun had wholly disappeared  Behind those mountains - O what words what hues  Might paint the wild magnificence of view  That opened westward! Out extending lo!  The heights rose crowding with their summits all  Dissolving as it seemed and partly lost  In the exceeding radiancy aloft;  And thus transfigured for awhile they stood  Like a great company of archaeons crowned  [49] With burning diadems and tented o'er  With canopies of purple and of gold.  Here halting wearied now the sun was set  Our travellers kindled for their first night's camp  A brisk and crackling fire which seemed to them  A wilder creature than 'twas elsewhere wont   Because of the surrounding savageness.   And as they supped birds of new shape and plume   And wild strange voice came by; and up the steep   Between the climbing forest growths they saw   Perched on the bare abutments of the hills   Where haply yet some lingering gleam fell through   The wallaroo look forth. Eastward at last   The glow was wasted into formless gloom   Night's front; then westward the high massing woods  Steeped in a swart but mellow Indian hue   A deep dusk loveliness lay ridged and heaped   Only the more distinctly for their shade   Against the twilight hearen - a cloudless depth   Yet luminous with sunset's fading glow;   And thus awhile in the lit dusk they seemed  [50] To hang like mighty pictures of themselves   In the still chambers of some vaster world.  At last the business of the supper done   The echoes of the solitary place  Came as in sylvan wonder wide about   To hear and imitate the voices strange   Within the pleasant purlieus of the fire   Lifted in glee; but to be hushed erelong   As with the darkness of the night there came   O'er the adventurers each and all some sense   Of danger lurking in its forest lairs.  But nerved by habit they all gathered round  About the well-built fire whose nimble tongues  Sent up continually a strenuous roar  Of fierce delight and from their fuming pipes  Drawing rude comfort round the pleasant light  With grave discourse they planned their next day's deeds.  Wearied at length their couches they prepared  Of rushes and the long green tresses pulled  From the bent boughs of the wild willows near;  Then the four men stretched out their tired limbs  Under the dark arms of the forest trees That mixed aloft high in the starry air [51]  In arcs and leafy domes whose crossing curves   Blended with denser intergrowth of sprays   Were seenin mass traced out against the clear   Wide gaze of heaven ; and trustful of the watch   Kept near them by their master soon they slept   Forgetful of the perilous wilderness   That lay around them like a spectral world;   And all things slept ; the circling forest trees   Their foremost boles carved from a crowded mass   Less visible by the watch-fire's bladed gleams   That ran far out in the umbrageous dark   Beyond the broad red ring of constant light;   Andeven the shaded mountains darkly seen   Their bluff brows looming through the stirless air   Looked in their stillness solemnly asleep :   Yea thence surveyed the universe might have seemed  Coiled in vast rest;-only that one dark cloud   Diffused and shapen like a spider huge   Crept as with scrawling legs along the sky   And that the stars in their bright orders still   Cluster by cluster glowingly revealed   As this slow cloud moved on high over all   Peaceful and wakeful watched the world below.  A kind of large kangaroo peculiar to the higher and more difficult mountains. [52]     PART II.  Meanwhile the cloudless eastern heaven had grown   More luminous and now the moon arose   Above the hill when lo! that giant cone   Erewhile so dark seemed inwardly aglow   With her instilled irradiance while the trees   That fringed its outline their huge statures dwarfed   By distance into brambles and yet all   Clearly defined against her ample orb   Out of its very disc appeared to swell   In shadowy relief as they had been   All sculptured from its surface as she rose.   Then her full light in silvery sequence still   Cascading forth from ridgy slope to slope   Chased mass by mass the broken darkness down   Into the dense-brushed valleys where it crouched   And shrank and struggled like a dragon-doubt   Glooming a lonely spirit.  His lone watch   The master kept and wakeful looked abroad  On all the solemn beauty of the world;  [53] And by some sweet and subtle tie that joins   The loved and cherished absent from our side   With all that is serene and beautiful   In Nature thoughts of home began to steal   Into his musings-when on a sudden hark!   A bough cracks loudly in a neighbouring brake !  Against the shade-side of a bending gum.   With a strange horror gathering to his heart   As if his blood were charged with insect life   And writhed along in clots he stilled himself   And listened heedfully till his held breath   Became a pang. Nought heard he : silence there   Had recomposed her ruffled wings and now   Deep brooded in the darkness ; so that he   Again mused on quiet and reassured.  But there again-crack upon crack ! Awake!  O heaven! have hell's worst fiends burst howling up  Into the death-doomed world ? Or whence if not  From diabolic rage could surge a yell  So horrible as that which now affrights  The shuddering dark ! Beings as fell are near !  Yea beings in their dread inherited hate  Awful vengeful as hell's worst fiends are come  [54] In vengeance! For behold from the long grass   And nearer brakes arise the bounding forms   Of painted savages full in the light   Thrown outward by the fire that roused and lapped.   The rounding darknesswith its ruddy tongues   More fiercely than before as though even it   Had felt the sudden shock the air received   From those terrific cries.  On then they came  And rushed upon the sleepers three of whom  But started and then weltered prone beneath  The first fell blow dealt down on each by three  Of the most stalwart of their pitiless foes  But one again and yet again rose up  Rose to his knees under the crushing strokes  Of huge clubbed nulla-nullas till his own  Warm blood was blinding him. For he was one  Who had with misery nearly all his days  Lived lonely and who therefore in his soul  Did hunger after hope and thirst for what  Hope still had promised him some taste at least  Of human good however long deferred.  And now he could not even in dying loose  [55] His hold on life's poor chances still to come   Could not but so dispute the terrible fact   Of death e'en in death's presence. Strange it is   Yet oft 'tis seen that fortune's pampered child  Consents to death's untimely power with less  Reluctance less despair than does the wretch   Who hath been ever blown about the world   The straw-like sport of fate's most bitter blasts   So though the shadows of untimely death   Inevitably under every stroke   But thickened more and more against them still   The poor wretch struggled nor would cease until   One last great blow dealt down upon his head   As if in mercy gave him to the dust   With all his many woes and frustrate hopes.  The master chilled with horror saw it all;   From instinct more than conscious thought he raised   His death-charged tube and at that murderous crew   Firing saw one fall ox-like to the earth   Then turned and fled. Fast fled he but as fast   His deadly foes went thronging on his track.   Fast ! for in full pursuit behind him yelled   Men whose wild speech no word for mercy hath!  [56] And as he fled the forest beasts as well   In general terror through the brakes ahead   Crashed scattering or with maddening speed athwart   His course came frequent. On still on he flies -  Flies for dear life and still behind him hears   Nearer and nearer the light rapid dig   Of many feet - nearer and nearer still.    PART III.  So went the chase. Now at a sudden turn  Before him lay the steep-banked mountain creek;  Still on he kept perforce and from a rock  That beaked the bank a promontory bare  Plunging right forth and shooting feet-first down  Sunk to his middle in the flashing stream  In which the imaged stars seemed all at once  To burst like rockets into one wide blaze.  Then wading through the ruffled waters forth  He sprang and seized a snake-like root that from  The opponent bank protruded clenching there  His cold hand like a clamp of steel; and thence  He swung his dripping form aloft the blind  [57] And breathless haste of one who flies for life   Urging him on; up the dark ledge he climbed   When in its face - O verily our God   Hath those in His peculiar care for whom   The daily prayers of spotless womanhood   And helpless infancy are offered up!  There in its face a cavity he felt   The upper earth of which in one rude mass   Was held fast bound by the enwoven roots   Of two old trees and which beneath the mould   Over the dark and clammy cave below   Twisted like knotted snakes. 'Neath these he crept Just as the dark forms of his hunters thronged   The steep bold rock whence he before had plunged.  Duskily visible beneath the moon  They paused a space to mark what bent his course  Might take beyond the stream. But now no form  Amongst the moveless fringe of fern was seen  To shoot up from its outline 'mid the boles  And mixing shadows of the taller trees  All standing now in the keen radiance there  So ghostly still as in a solemn trance;  But nothing in the silent prospect stirred  [58] Therefore they augured that their prey was yet   Within the nearer distance and they all   Plunged forward till the fretted current boiled   Amongst their crowding forms from bank to bank   And searching thus the stream across and then   Along the ledges combing down each clump   Of long-flagged swamp-grass where it flourished high   The whole dark line passed slowly man by man   Athwart the cave !  Keen was their search but vain  There grouped in dark knots standing in the stream   That glimmered past them moaning as it went  They marvelled ; passing strange to them it seemed  Some old mysterious fable of their race   That brooded o'er the valley and the creek  Returned upon their minds and fear-struck all   And silent they withdrew. And when the sound  Of their retreating steps had died away   As back they hurried to despoil the dead   In the stormed camp then rose the fugitive  Renewed his flight nor rested from it till   He gained the shelter of his longed-for home.  [59] And in that glade far in the doomful wild  In sorrowing record of an awful hour  Of human agony and loss extreme  Untimely spousals with a desert death  Four grassy mounds are there beside the creek  Bestrewn with sprays and leaves from the old trees  Which moan the ancient dirges that have caught  The heed of dying ages and for long  The traveller passing then in safety there  Would call the place - The Creek of the Four Graves.    THE BATTLE OF LIFE.  NEVER give up though life be a battle  Wherein true men may fail and true causes be sold;  Yet on the whole however may rattle  The thunders of chance scaring cowards like cattle -  Clear victory's always the bride of the bold.  [60]   Armed in your right-though friendship deny you  And love fall away when the storm's at the worst  Count not your loss Was destined to try you -  Bear the brunt like a man and your deeds shall ally you  To natures more noble and true than the first.  Rail not at Fate : if rightly you scan her  There's none loves more strongly the heart that endures:  On in the hero's calm resolute manner  Still bear aloft your hope's long-trusted banner  And the day if you do but live through it is yours.  Be this your faith; and if killing strokes clatter  On your harness where true men before you have died  Fight on let your life-blood be poured out like water -  Fight on make at least a brave end of the matter  Brave end of the struggle if nothing beside.    TO POESY.  Dedicated to a certain M.L.C who is quite confident that Poetry "and that sort of thing" is a mockery and delusion.   YET do not thou forsake me now  Poesy with Peace-together!  Ere this last disastrous blow  Did lay my struggling fortunes low  In love unworn have we not borne  Much wintry weather ?  The storm is past perhaps the last  Its rainy skirts are wearing over  But though yet a sunnier glow  Should give my ice-bound hopes to flow  Forlorn of thee 'twere nought to me  A lonely rover !  Ah misery! what were then my lot  Amongst a race of unbelievers  Sordid men who all declare  That earthly gain alone is fair  And they who pore on bardic lore  Deceived deceivers. [62]   That all the love I've felt to move  Round beauty in thy fountain laving  Move in music through the air   Gathering increase everywhere   The more to bless her loveliness  Was Folly raving!  That to believe thought yet shall weave -  Although with arm'd oppression coping  Truth-bright banners which unfurled   Shall herald freedom through the world   And give to man her kindly plan  Is Folly hoping!   On thy breast in sabbath rest  How often have I lain deep musing   In the golden eventide   Till all the dead for truth that died  Looked from the skies with starry eyes  Great thoughts infusing!  But can it be life's mystery  Is but a baseless panorama   Peopled thick with passing dreams   Wild writhing glooms and wandering gleams  [63] And soul a breath exhaled by death  Which ends the drama?  Then is the scope of this world's hope  No more than worldlings deem it ever  Earth and sky with nought between  Of spiritual truth serene :   And if so fly! for thou and I  At once should sever.  But if there lives as love believes  All underneath this silent heaven   In yon shades and by yon streams   As we have seen them in our dreams  A deathless race ; still let thy grace  My being leaven!  Thy mystic grace! that face to face  Full converse I may hold with nature  Seeing published everywhere   In forms the soul that makes her fair   And grow the while to her large style  In mental stature.    [64] TO THE COMET OF 1843  Thy purpose heavenly stranger who may tell  But Him who linked thee to the starry whole?  Wherefore in this our darkness be it ours  To must upon thee in thy high career  As of some wandering symphony from amidst  Those highest stellar harmonies that track  Through infinite space and the great rounds of time  The mighty marches of creation.  Behold how high thou travellest in heaven!  Myriads of wondering human spirits here  Duly each night with upturned looks seek out  The mystery of thy advent.  In thy last  Bright visitation even thus thou sawst  The young the lovely and the wise of earth-   A buried generation - crowding out  With looks upturned to see thee passing forth  Beyond the signs of time - and then to know  In all the awful vastness of the heaven  Thy place no more! And when the flaming steps  [65] Of thy unspeakable speed which of itself  Blows back the long strands of thy burning hair  Through half the arch of night shall lead thee forth  Into the dim of the inane beyond  Our utmost vision; all the eloquent eyes  Now opened wide with welcome and with wonder-   Eyes tender as the turtles or that speak  The fervent soul and the majestic mind;  All these alas! - all these ere thou once more  Shalt drive thus fulgently around the sun  Thy chariot of fire fast closed in dust  And mortal darkness shall have given for aye  Their lustre to the grave.  But human eyes  As many and beautiful - yea more sublime  And radiant in their passion from a more  Enlarged communion with the spirit of truth-   Shall welcome thee instead mysterious stranger  When thou return st anew.  And thus to think  Consoles us even while we watch thee pass  Out of our times for ever; yea although  [66] Some selfish entertainment of a truth  At all times mournful whisper us the while:  So shall it be indeed for God abides  And nature born of His eternal power  Must share its dateless energy as well.  Yea all that flows from the Eternal must  If from divine necessity alone  Work with its cause for ever - still alas!  Though thence derived how fugitive and swift  How vague and shadow-like this life of Man!     THE DROWNED ALIVE.  I was one so deeply drowned  That when the drag my body found  Twas void of motion void of breath  And to sensation dead as death.  In a languid summer mood  I had plunged into a flood  [67] That to the low sun s slanting beams  Gleamed with only quiet gleams  Each with a wide flicker sheeting  From its still floor fast and fleeting  E en such a flood as one would say  Could never or by night or day  Have drenched a man s warm life away.  But what are these down in its bed  That trail so long and look so red  Moving as in conscious sport?  Are they weeds of curious sort?  But I'll drive to them and see  Into all their mystery.  Down I dive. A plentious crop!  Some shall with me to the top  For here there is too dim a light  To show their character aright.  I wind them in my arms intent  To root them up in my ascent;  But they resist me and again  I tug them with a stronger strain.  Full well I trow they hold their own  [68] Gripping fast each bedded stone  With their tuby roots that go  Down through the stiff slime below.  Well at last I find that I  Must leave them. - But in vain I try!  Fierce as lightning on my brain  Smites the dread truth - I try in vain!  Yea more and more in coils and flakes  Like long blood- red watersnakes  The deadly things around me clasp -   The more I tug the more they grasp!  My pent breath growing hot and thin  Explodes with a dull booming din;  While through my unclenched teeth the wave  Comes drenching! Is there none to save?  None near to see to guess to trace  Under the water s gleaming face  The dread extremity of one  Thus fastened down? Ah! Is there none?  Wild as vain my struggles grow-   Horror horror life must go!  Hope gives up her ghost despair;  I am dying; round me here  [69] The long weeds erst so deeply red  Look even where nearest grey as lead  As mid them settling down I sway  To and fro and fast away  Life keeps bubbling - bubbling aye  Through my cold lips wide agape  White and stiffening to that shape  They take at last when done with breath  In the rigid face of death.  And now while sullen drummings make  My spirit through mine ears to ache  Life- long memories interwrought  With all I ever felt or thought  Sacred fancies hidden long  Lest the world should do them wrong  Pent- back feelings that for years  Just below the source of tears  Folded close their glowing wings  With a million other things  All thick interthronging press  Through my drowning consciousness;  Then comes the thought of how my doom  Must wrap my mother in its gloom;  [70] And give my sire to hold his breath  For anguish hearing of my death  And wound one fond heart to the core  In the wide world evermore.  All in the same instant so  Do these quick thoughts come and go  Life within my failing brain  Full of pity full of pain.  Lastly a drear stupor blent  With a comfortless content  Into one mass of clammy clay  Kneads mind and body. Drenched away  With one faint shudder one last throe  Life stagnates and its shell lies low  Swaying weed- bound to and fro  Void of feeling and of breath  How die we if this be not death?  Ah! What thrilling thrilling pain  Kindles through my heart and brain!  Ah! What horrors o er me wave  Shadowing forth as from the grave;  Ah! Those sudden gleams of light  [71] They fall like firebrands on my sight!  Ah! What vast and heavy world  Is all at once upon me hurled  Massing into one immense  Oppression every tortured sense.  *   Yes; I now remember well  How my sudden fate befell;  And are we then in death s grim thrall  Thus consciousness of our funeral?  But where are they who most should mourn  When by bier is graveward borne?  With her whose face I yearn to see-   Where are they? And where is she?  Where the crape- trimm d followers all?  Where the coffin and the pall?  Or do death and nature strive  Within me? Is the drowned alive?    [72] THE HOME OF PEACE.  Trust and treachery wisdom folly  Madness mirth and melancholy  Love and hatred thrift and pillage  All are housed in every village.  And in such a world s mixed being  Where may peace from ruin fleeing  Find fit shelter and inherit  All the calm of her own merit?  In a bark of gentle motion  Sailing on the summer ocean?  There worst war the tempest wages  And the hungry whirlpool rages.  In some lonely new- world bower  Hidden like a forest flower?  There too there to fray the stranger  Stalks the wild- eyed savage danger! [73]   In some Alpine cot by fountains  Flowing from snow- shining mountains?  There the avalanches thunder  Crushing all that lieth under!  In some hermit- tent pitched lowly  Mid the tombs of prophets holy?  There to harry and annoy her  Roams the infidel destroyer.  In palatial chambers gilded  Guarded round with towers high- builded?  Change may enter these to- morrow  And with change may enter sorrow.  Find O peace thy home of beauty  In the steadfast heart of duty  Dwelling ever there and seeing  God through every phase of being.    [74] DORA  It was I well remember the merry springtime when  Young Dora in the eventide came singing up the glen  And the song came up the glen till one oft- repeated part  In a subtle stream of melody ran glowing through my heart.  A fond desire long cherished till then I might control  Till then - but oh! That witching strain swift drew it from my soul;  Swift drew it from my soul and she did not say me nay  And the world of love was all the world to us that happy day.  I'm happy now in thinking how happy I was then  When towards the glowing west my love went homeward down the glen;  Went homeward down the glen while my comfort surer grew  Till methought the old- faced hills at looked as they were happy too.  [75] All happy for that Dora and I so happy were!  All happy for that human love had breathed its spirit there!  Had breathed its spirit there and had made them conscious grow  Of the part they bore in that sweet time that happy long ago.    ONWARD  Have the blasts of sorrow worn thee  Have the rocks of danger torn thee  And thus shifted wreck- like drifted  Wouldst thou find a port in time?  Vain the quest! That word sublime -   God's great one word  Silent never pealeth ever   Onward!  Hast thou done all loving duty  Hast thou clothed thy soul with beauty  [76] And wouldst rest then wholly blest then  In some sunny lapse of time?  Vain the hope! The word sublime -   God's great one word  Silent never pealeth ever  Onward!  Hast thou won the heart of glory  Hast thou charmed the tongue of story  And wouldst pause then for applause then  Underneath the stars of time?  Vain the lure! That word sublime -   God's great one word  Silent never pealeth ever   Onward!  Truth and virtue hast thou wrought for  Faith and freedom hast thou fought for  And then shrinkest for thou thinkest  Paid is all thy debt in time?  Vain the thought! That word sublime -   God's great one word  Silent never pealeth ever   Onward! [77]   From endeavour to endeavour  Journeying with hours for ever  Or aspiring or acquiring  This O man is life in time  Urged by that primal word sublime -   God's great one word  Silent never pealeth ever  Onward!     A STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS  A lonely boy far venturing from home  Out on the half- wild herd s faint tracks I roam;  Mid rock- browned mountains which with stony frown  Glare into haggard chasms deep adown;  A rude and craggy world the prospect lies  Bounded in circuit by the bending skies.  Now at some clear pool scooped out by the shocks  Of rain-floods plunging from the upper rocks  [78] Whose liquid disc in its undimpled rest  Glows like a mighty gem brooching the mountain s breast  I drink and must or mark the wide- spread herd  Or list the thinking of the dingle- bird;  And now towards some wild- hanging shade I stray  To shun the bright oppression of the day;  For round each crag and o er each bosky swell  The fierce refracted heat flares visible  Lambently restless like the dazzling hem  Of some else viewless veil held trembling over them.  Why congregate the swallows in the air  And northward then in rapid flight repair?  With sudden swelling din remote yet harsh  Why roar the bull- frogs in the tea- tree marsh?  Why cease the locusts to throng up in flight  And clap their gay wings in the fervent light?  Why climb they bodingly demure instead  The tallest spear- grass to the bending head?  Instinctively along the sultry sky  I turn a listless yet inquiring eye;  And mark that now with a slow gradual pace  A solemn trance creams northward o er its face;  [79] Yon clouds that late were labouring past the sun  Reached by its sure arrest one after one  Come to a heavy halt; the airs that played  About the rugged mountains all are laid:  While drawing nearer far- off heights appear  As in a dream s wild prospect strangely near!  Till into wood resolves their robe of blue  And the grey crags rise bluffly on the view.  Such are the signs and tokens that presage  A summer hurricane s forthcoming rage.  At length the south sends out her cloudy heaps  And up the glens at noontide dimness creeps;  The birds late warbling in the hanging green  Off steep- set brakes seek now some safer screen;  The herd in doubt no longer wanders wide  But fast ingathering throngs yon mountain s side  Whose echoes surging to its tramp might seem  The muttered troubles of some Titan s dream.  Fast the dim legions of the muttering storm  Throng denser or protruding columns form;  While splashing forward from their cloudy lair  Convolving flames like scouting dragons glare:  [80] Low thunders follow labouring up the sky;  And as fore- running blasts go blaring by  At once the forest with a mighty stir  Bows as in homage to the thunderer!  Hark! From the dingoes blood- polluted dens  In the gloom- hidden chasms of the glens  Long fitful howls wail up; and in the blast  Strange hissing whispers seem to huddle past;  As if the dread stir had aroused from sleep  Weird spirits cloistered in yon cavy steep  (On which in the grim past some Cain s offence  Hath haply outraged heaven!) Who rising thence  Wrapped in the boding vapours laughed again  To wanton in the wild- willed hurricane.  See in the storm s front sailing dark and dread  A wide- winged eagle like a black flag spread!  The clouds aloft flash doom! Short stops his flight!  He seems to shrivel in the blasting light!  The air is shattered with a crashing sound  And he falls stonelike lifeless to the ground.  Now like a shadow at great nature s heart  The turmoil grows. Now wonder with a start  [81] Marks where right overhead the storm careers  Girt with black horrors and wide- flaming fears!  Arriving thunders mustering on his path  Swell more and more the roarings of his wrath  As out in widening circles they extend  And then - at once - in utter silence end.  Portentous silence! Time keeps breathing past  Yet it continues! May this marvel last?  This wild weird silence in the midst of gloom  So manifestly big with coming doom?  Tingles the boding ear; and up the glens  Instinctive dread comes howling from the wild- dogs dens.  Terrific vision! Heaven s great ceiling splits  And a vast globe of writhing fire emits  Which pouring down in one continuous stream  Spans the black concave like a burning beam  A moment; - then from end to end it shakes  With a quick motion - and in thunder breaks!  Peal rolled on peal! While heralding the sound  As each concussion thrills the solid ground  Fierce glares coil snake- like round the rocky wens  Of the red hills or hiss into the glens  [82] Or thick through heaven like flaming falchions swarm  Cleaving the teeming cisterns of the storm  From which rain- torrents searching every gash  Split by the blast come sheeting with a dash.  On yon grey peak from rock- encrusted roots  The mighty patriarch of the wood upshoots  In whose proud-spreading top s imperial height  The mountain-eagle loveth most to light:  Now dimly seen through the tempestuous air  His form seems harrowed by a mad despair  As with his ponderous arms uplifted high  He wrestles with the storm and threshes at the sky!  A swift bolt hurtles through the lurid air  Another thundering crash! The peak is bare!  Huge hurrying fragments all around are cast  The wild- winged mad- limbed monsters of the blast.  The darkness thickens! With despairing cry  From shattering boughs the rain- drenched parrtos fly;  Loose rocks roll rumbling from the mountains round  And half the forest strews the smoking ground;  To the bared crags the blasts now wilder moan  And the caves labour with a ghostlier groan.  [83] Wide raging torrents down the gorges flow  Swift bearing with them to the vale below  Those sylvan wrecks that littered late the path  Of the loud hurricane s all- trampling wrath.  The storm is past. Yet booming on afar  Is heard the rattling of the thunder- car  And that low muffled moaning as of grief  Which follows with a wood- sigh wide and brief.  The clouds break up; the sun s forth- bursting rays  Clothe the wet landscape with a dazzling blaze;  The birds begin to sing a lively strain  And merry echoes ring it o'er again;  The clustered herd is spreading out to graze  Though lessening torrents still a hundred ways  Flash downward and from many a rock ledge  A mantling gush comes quick and shining o er the edge.  'Tis evening; and the torrent's furious flow  Runs gentlier now into the lake below  O'er all the freshened scene no sound is heard  Save the short twitter of some busied bird  Or a faint rustle made amongst the trees  By wasting fragments of a broken breeze.  [84] Along the wild and wreck- strewed paths I wind  Watching earth s happiness with quiet mind  And see a beauty all unmarked till now  Flushing each flowery nook and sunny brow;  Wished peace returning like a bird of calm  Brings to the wounded world its blessed healing balm.  On nerveless tuneless lines how sadly  Ringing rhymes may wasted be  While blank verse oft is mere prose madly  Striving to be poetry:  While prose that s craggy as a mountain  May Apollo's sun-robe don  Or hold the well- spring of a fountain  Bright as that in Helicon.   Hark Ye!  Botany Bay Morality Exemplified in the Magistrate's pet  The very high claim set up by our stipendary City Magistrate to the correction of abuses whether of a public or private nature induce me to put the following queries to the modern Solan's in the most public way possible - "Was there not an Inspector in the Sydney Police some three years and a half back during the moral Colonel's rule (Faugh!) named Alexander William Hoyle a Moreton Bay expiree?"  "Was not Hoyle dismissed from his situation through gross immoral conduct having made it available in seducing the affections of mothers from their offspring - he at the same time living in a state of open fornication with a female prisoner?"  "Was not the wife of John George whom the heartless scoundrel incited to abandon her husband pulled out of a cupboard in Pitt Street where he (Hoyle) had her concealed by constable Callaghan for which abandonment she being a prisoner of the crown was sentenced 'twelve months to the third class of the female factory ?"  "Were not those immaculate P.M.'s Captain (bah!) INNIS and Misther JOHN RYAN BRENAN cognizant of these facts?"  "Was a more gratuitous wanton insult ever offered to a civilized community than the appointment of this adept in vice - this licentious Adonis to the responsible situation of collecting the names of those qualified to vote under the Corporation Act; thus bringing this polluted thing in contact with virtuous and respectable families?"  "Was not a remonstrance sent to the Governor on this disgraceful appointment and did not the Colonial Secretary reply thereto that evening to the strong recommendations of the Magistrates? His Excellency saw no reason to cancel the appointment."  "Was not J. J. Macarthur Esq then member of the Council applied to on the subject who in his reply 'regretted that a person against whom such strong objections were raised should receive so confidential an appointment; yet from the recommendations of the Magistrates he was afraid the case could not be remedied' ?"  "Where now is Hoyle ye sapient Justices? Ye discouragers of immorality? Where now is your PET! that ye foisted on the Governor for his moral good conduct? O! 'tell it not in Gath!' - living with George's unfortunate wife who on becoming free about three weeks back this miscreant allured her from home and her numerous sinless offspring to become again the companion of abandoned profligacy!!!"  "Can the annals of Botany Bay find a parallel to this unheard of villainy? and yet such a favourite is this libidinous Dandy at the Police Office that Mr Myles actually employed him in making out the Jury Lists!"  "To the authenticity of these facts I pledge myself and leave the public to draw an inference."  VERAX  It appears on the arrival of Tawell at Sydney New South Wales in 1817 he was assigned out to government and made a clerk in the internal Revenue Office Sydney; he continued some time in this situation and from the circumstance of a very few emigrants being at that period in the colony he had the opportunity although a convict of making a great deal of money. Subsequently he was employed in the surgery of Dr. Bowman who was chief physician at the hospital in Sydney.  Here Tawell obtained a very great insight into chemistry and also received much credit for his general good conduct and services on behalf of the Institution. He had also in this capacity many advantages in a pecuniary point of view; so much so that on obtaining his "ticket of leave" in 1823 he was enabled from what he had amassed whilst in the colony to open a store at Parramatta which town is about seventeen miles from Sydney and the second place of any importance in the colony.  From this time he accumulated wealth very rapidly and it was not long before Tawell could command a horse and gig in which he was accustomed to go journeys to and from Sydney to Parramatta in one of which he had a narrow escape of being murdered by two notorious bushrangers named Walmsley and Webber who at that period were the terror of all the roads in the colony. Upon this occasion he was dreadfully ill-used and robbed of a considerable sum of money by the desperadoes who shortly afterwards forfeited their lives on the gallows in Sydney gaol for the numerous robberies and murders they had committed whilst in the "Bush".  About 1828 Tawell set up a chemist's shop in Sydney upon a very large scale being the first of the kind in the colony. His profits in it were immense as he was enabled to obtain large orders from the mother country; he also increased his wealth by taking a partner a respectable man who had arrived from Scotland with a very good capital. In less than six months however the partnership was dissolved but it was well known that Tawell made considerably by the connection.  Whilst in Sydney his habits were more than ordinarily studious and regular although it was stated that he gambled very much. It is a well known fact that he increased his wealth amazingly by lending out sums of money to small capitalists at an immense per centage; he also greedily purchased the most saleable commodities on the new arrivals of shipping from all parts of the world. [234] His gains too were considerably increased by speculation in the whaling trade; and at the time of his departure from the colony he was part proprietor of two or three whaling ships. He also risked much of his capital in trafficking with New Zealand and other South Sea Islands. It is supposed that at the time of his leaving the colony his wealth could not have been much less than £120000.  Tawell's conduct it appears during the many years he was in the colony was marked by strict decorum; and it is a well known fact that he was the means of benefiting the Society of Friends of which he was originally a member to a very considerable amount during his absence abroad. It was generally known in Sydney that Tawell had been a Quaker which certainly tended to excite more respect and sympathy for him which may be said in a great measure to have led to his subsequent wealth and respectability. It is a perfect truth that for some time previous to his leaving the colony he was in the habit of mixing in the highest society not excepting the tables of the governor and executive council and other authorities of the colony.    TRIAL AND SENTENCE.  The trial took place on March 14th 1845. The rush for seats at the opening of the small court at Aylesbury was of the most riotous character.  The prisoner John Tawell aged 61 was attired in the garb of the Society of Friends notwithstanding his expulsion from that body many years ago.  The prisoner challenged thirteen of the jurors under the direction of his counsel.  Mary Ann ASHLEY; I live in Bath Place Salthill. On the 1st of January Sarah Hart was living next door to me. I saw the prisoner that day go into her house between four and five in the evening. I heard a stifled sort of scream between six and seven o'clock. I took the candle and opened the door. I saw the prisoner coming out of Mrs Hart's house. There is a little garden in front of each house seven yards long. I went to Mrs Hart's gate before the prisoner got out. He appeared agitated and could not open the gate. There was a small button which was hard to open. I said nothing to him about what I heard when I was opening the gate for him. I had made a remark before. Directly I went out I had said "I am afraid my neighbour is ill." I should think I spoke loud enough to be heard by the prisoner. He was in the pathway coming down about six or seven yards away from me. No reply was made; not a word. When I got to Mrs Hart's gate I could hear her still whilst I was opening the gate. It was the same stifled sort of scream still. When I opened the gate I merely said to the prisoner "There is a little button Sir; allow me to open it".  He made no reply. He was agitated. Mrs Hart's door was shut when I got to it I opened the door and went in I saw her lying with her head near the door. Her dress was disordered. Her petticoats were up nearly to her knees and her stockings down and torn and her left shoe off. Her limbs were not moving. I took her hands and raised her and said "Oh! Mrs Hart what's the matter". She made no reply. Froth came from the corners of her mouth. Her eyes being fixed I thought she was dying. I saw on the table a bottle & a glass with some porter little more than half full. There was a glass at each side of the table. In one glass there was porter there was only a little froth in the other. Mrs Burnett whom I called in used the empty one to get some water for Mrs Hart. She could not drink any. I sent one of Mrs Burnett's apprentices to Dr Champney's.  Mr THOMAS formerly shopman to Mr Huges chemist 99 Bishopgate Street London (now dead) deposed that the prisoner on the 1st of January 1845 between 12 and 2 o'clock bought a bottle of prussic acid.  The learned counsel called several witnesses to character and the court adjourned to Friday.  His Honour BARON PARKE summed up the evidence on Friday morning; and the jury after an absence of half an hour returned with a verdict of guilty. The judge then proceeded to pass the awful sentence of death upon the prisoner. The unhappy man received the sentence with an extraordinary degree of firmness; and beyond the nervousness which he manifested throughout he betrayed very little emotion although numbers of persons in court were in tears and some of the females sobbed aloud.  CONFESSION  It appears that Tawell drew up a confession some days since and the statement will be so far satisfactory to the public that it takes away all doubt as to the guilt of the deceased. He stated he did not commit the murder from pecuniary motives but from the dread that the relation in which he stood towards Sarah Hart should transpire and come to the ears of his wife.  EXECUTION  The hour announced for execution was 8 o'clock March 28th 1845 but about a quarter of an hour before 8 a sudden motion in the crowd showed that the moment had come - the last fatal moment when the prisoner was to be launched into eternity to meet his creator. It was an awful movement that movement of the crowd. The most intense silence prevailed - not a word escaped after the crowd had said "He is coming".  The wretched man was greatly moved when he saw the crowd; he trembled exceedingly and was scarcely able to stand as he stepped onto the platform under the drop. Carcraft the executioner and one of the turnkeys led him out of gaol and the governor stood immediately behind him. The cap having been immediately drawn over him he knelt down to pray which he did with the utmost fervour [...]. [235]  Authentic Account of the Slashing Prize Fight between William Sparkes AND Richard Green.  For £70 to £100 A SIDE.  The match between Bill Sparkes and Dick Green a Vandemonian for £70 to £100 a-side came off this morning and in consequence of the length of time that has elapsed since the appearance of "professionals" in the P.R a very numerous body of the right sort congregated to partake of the excitement of a slashing mill.  Throughout the whole of yesterday the sporting houses (that of Douglas' particularly) were thronged with anxious enquirers and the office having been given in the direction of Cook's River without stating how far beyond dragsmen pradsmen and toddlers began to move some hours before dawn this morning in consequence of the early hour (ten o'clock) at which the men were appointed to enter the ring being determined to keep themselves fresh by spending the intervening time under the hospitable roof of the worthy old sportsman Gannon where they booked themselves safe to find good entertainment for man and horse.  When we consider the disappointment which the patrons of the ring received a few weeks back we were a little surprised to see such a fair sprinking of the fancy present.  Previous to the day of battle the betting was slightly in favour of Honi Held.  "Hurrah for the Road !" was the watchword at an early hour in the morning and which was responded to hundreds of jolly dogs who pressed forward to be in time at the convincing ground.  What added to the intense interest manifested upon the result of the fistic argument was that both men had won laurels from many a hard fought "battle" Green in particular having been victorious in every mill in which he has been engaged. Friends of each being equal in numbers and strong in confidence on their respective "protogees" the betting was immense and a large sum of money changed hands on the occasion.  Arrived upon the ground a ring was formed without delay when the men "peeled" for work and flung their castors into the ring; both men appeared in first rate condition and spirits when stripped and seemed equally "eager for the fray".  Green entered the ring first attended by Huff and Bungarrabbee Jack; Sparkes soon followed and was received with a tremendous round of applause.  Preliminaries being adjusted the men attended by their seconds and bottle-holders took up their position and after shaking hands with great good humour the fight began of which the following are the details.  Round 1 Sparkes made play with his left and caught Green well on the snout when Green made two sweeping hits at Held's ribs but which fell short of the mark; a dose both down Heki under.  2. Green led with his right mawley and put a feeler on Sparkes' wind organ and for which he received one on the dice box a close when Green displayed considerable muscular power by throwing his opponent in a first rate style.  3. Sparkes put in one two on Dick's mug but wich had only the effect of causing Dick's caster to pop through the opening in opening his head in a very amusing way. Green closed both down Heki under.  4. Sparkes hit Green on the old spot when he made a spank at Sparkes' listener but falling far from the mark both fell down.  5. Sparkes delivered a smeller on Dick's upper lip a return when Sparkes went to prayers.  6. Exchange of compliments Sparkes down.  7. Green hit Sparkes a good blow on the side of the head when he went to grass.  8. When Sparkes came to the scratch he had lost the use of his right hand so that 10 to was offered on Green. Green hit out and Sparkes went to grass.  9. Sparkes game to the last hit away with his left giving a tap on Green's ivory when he received a blow on the breast which sent him to mother earth. Loud cries of "take him away" resounded around the ring.  From the above round to the 22nd nothing occurred worth noticing Sparkes came his old dodge of droping down so that Green would have a chance of hitting him foul. In the last Green got Sparkes on the ropes and leathered him well. Sparkes slipping down received a blow from Green which was declared foul by the Referee.  DREADFUL Ship WRECK  Wreck of the CATARAQUI Emigrant Ship 800 tons.  FOUR HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN LIVES LOST!  Melbourne September 13 1845  It is our melancholy duty to lay before the public the particulars of the most awful shipwreck which has ever occurred in these colonies - the total wreck of the Emigrant ship Cataraqui upon the iron bound coast of King's Island. How terrible does this catastrophe give weight to the observations we have made upon the imperative necessity of constructing light-houses on the shores of Bass' Straits whilst daily and hourly hundreds of valuable lives are incurring the same dangers as those who have thus been sacrificed.  The following particulars are from Mr. Guthrie the chief mate who with his eight fellow survivors reached the shore almost in a state of nudity having of course lost every thing they possessed.  We are sure we need not add one word in order to excite the generous sympathy of the public on their behalf.  We trust that an ample subscription for their relief will be instantly raised; and means taken to put them in the way of pursuing their avocation.  The Cataraqui Captain C. W. Finlay sailed from Liverpool on the 20th April with 369 emigrants and a crew including two Doctors Mr C. Carpenter and Edward Carpenter (two brothers) of forty six souls The emigrants were principally from Bedfordshire Staffordshire Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire. About 120 of the passengers were married with families and in all seventy-three children.  Nothing particular occurred until about a fortnight prior to the 4th August; with the exception of the weather being boisterous with a strong gale of wind from the north west to the south west and incessant rain.  On the night of Sunday the 3rd August at seven in the evening the ship was hove to and continued laying to until three o'clock on the morning of the 4th. At half past four it being quite dark and raining bard blowing a fearful gale and the sea running mountains high the ship struck on a reef situate on the west coast of King's Island at the entrance of Bass' Straits.  No opportunity had offered for taking an observation to enable the captain to ascertain the ship's course for four days prior to the ship striking; and from dead reckoning kept it was presumed that the vessel was in 1410 22 east longitude and 390 17 south which would make her between 60 or 70 miles from King's Island.  Immediately the ship struck she was sounded four feet of water being in her hold. The scene of confusion and misery that ensued at this awful period it is impossible to describe. All the passengers attempted to rush on deck and many succeeded in doing so until the ladders were knocked away by the workings of the vessel; when the shrieks from men women and children from below were terrific calling on the watch on deck to assist them.  The crew to a man were on deck the moment the ship struck and were instantly employed in handing up passengers. Up to the time the vessel began breaking up it is supposed that between three and four hundred were got on deck by the extraordinary exertions of the crew. [238] At this time the sea was breaking over the ship on the larboard side sweeping the decks every sea taking away passengers.  At five a.m the ship careened right over on her larboard side washing away boats bulwarks spars a part of the cuddy and literally swept the decks. At this critical period the captain gave orders to cut away the masts hoping the vessel might right to enable the crew to get on deck the passengers left below. The masts were forthwith cut away and everything done that could under the circumstances to get the vessel upright but it was all to no purpose.  At this time the passengers below were all drowned the ship being full of and the captain called out to those on deck to cling to that part of the wreck which was then above water till day-light hoping that the spars would be of some service in making a breakwater under her lee and thus enable the survivors to get on shore in the morning.  As the day broke we found the stern of the vessel washed in and numerous dead bodies floating round the ship - some hanging upon the rocks. Several of the passengers and crew (about two hundred altogether) were still holding on to the vessel - the sea breaking over and every wave washing some of them away. Thus those who were able continued to cling to the wreck until about four in the afternoon when she parted amidships at the fore part of the main rigging when immediately some seventy or a hundred were launched into the tumultuous and remorseless waves!  The survivors on the deck still however continued to exert themselves to recover back all they could; but many of them were dead although but momentarily immersed. Ridge lines also were stretched along the side of the wreck to enable them to hold on - The remains of the upper deck now began to break up and wash away.  The survivors now began to collect bits of rope so as to construct a buoy with the view of floating it on shore and thus enabling one of the crew to land. This measure would have enabled them to save the lives of at least a hundred; but notwithstanding every effort the buoy could not be got nearer than twenty yards from the shore owing to its getting entangled with the sea-weed on the rocks and there was no one on shore to catch it and secure it on the sand.  The fury of the waves continuing unabated about five o'clock the wreck parted by the fore rigging and so many souls were submerged in the wide waters that only seventy survivors were left crowded on the forecastle!  The buoy rope was then hauled on board to rig life lines and lash the survivors who were then clinging to the wreck. Thus the sea breaking over them the winds raging and the rain continuing heavy all night the poor survivors continued clinging to the vessel's bow. Numbers died and fell overboard or sank and were drowned at the places where they were lashed.  As the day broke the following morning it discovered only about 30 left alive - the survivors mostly dead through exhaustion and hanging where they were lashed.  The previous evening the quarter boat (the only remaining one) was attempted to be launched into which the boatswain and doctor (Charles Carpenter) with four of the crew got but she immediately capsized and all were drowned.  As the morning rose the sea was making a clean breech into the forecastle the deck of which was rapidly breaking up. About this time whilst numbers were helplessly clinging to the bows and continually dropping off without the possibility of succour the captain attempted to reach the shore but was unable and with the assistance of some of those who were able regained the deck.  The lashings of the survivors were now undone in order to give them the last chance of life. Mr Thomas Guthrie the chief mate now on the sprit sail yard was washed out to the bowsprit; he saw the captain and second mate and steward clinging at the bows with about 18 or 20 only left alive and a host of dead bodies on the fragment of the wreck. [239]  Mr Guthrie was driven to a detached part of the wreck but soon found it was impossible to live with such a sea breaking over seized a piece of plank under his arm and leaping into the water was carried over the reef and thus got on shore. He found a passenger who had got ashore during the night and one of the crew (Robinson) who got ashore in the morning. John Roberts a seaman plunged in when he saw the mate ashore and partly swimming and partly driven reached the land. Five other seamen followed and got ashore dreadfully exhausted. Almost immediately afterwards the vessel totally disappeared. Thus out of four hundred and twenty-three souls on board only nine were saved. The names of the saved are: - Mr Thomas Guthrie chief mate; Solomon Brown emigrant; John Roberts able seaman; William Jones ditto; Francis Millan ditto; John Simpson ditto; John Robertson ditto; Peter Johnson ditto; William Blackstock apprentice.  They had neither food nor drink from the time of the ship striking to Tuesday afternoon when they found one small tin of preserved fowl after eating which they went and laid down in the bush having got a wet blanket out of the water for their only covering and being almost destitute of clothes. The beach was strewed with pieces of wreck and portions of dead corpses in horrible profusion. After a vain search for water and being unable to find any more survivors they slept that night in the bush.  The following morning they found a cask of water ashore but were unable to get means to make a fire. However about 9 or 10 o'clock in the forenoon they observed a smoke which presuming they were on the main land (according to the captain's calculation) imagined it was fire of the natives.  However they shortly saw a white man approaching them who turned out to be Mr David Howie residing upon the island. It seems Mr Howie and Oakley with one black perceived there was a wreck on the coast through seeing portions of the wreck and most humanely arranged to instantly reconnoitre the whole island and fortunate indeed was it for the poor exhausted and benumbed survivors to whom he instantly afforded fire and food and constructed a shed against the weather.  As Mr Howie's boat was wrecked there was no possibility of leaving the island. The party therefore constructed a hut and remained five weeks during which time they were most hospitally provided for by Mr Howie and his party according to their means the supplies having to be carried 40 miles over a most difficult road - Last Sunday (September 7th) they saw the Midge beating for the island; they immediately signalised her by a fire and from her received every assistance. The Midge took them off the island with much difficulty by means of Mr Howie's whaleboat on Tuesday last and they arrived in Hobson's Bay at half-past ten this day.  Throughout the whole of these trying events the survivors give all praise to the captain and crew for their exertions; it was not until hope was utterly extinguished that they left the vessel. Mr Guthrie the mate also is warmly commended. It was to his encouragement that most of the seamen saved ascribe the saving of their lives in the manner above-mentioned. They employed themselves in burying the dead bodies they picked up as far as possible the mangled condition of many of which it is too painfully horrible to describe; and they speak in the most gratified manner of the exertions of Mr Howie and his party of sealers who reside upon King's Island.  The survivors also particularly wish to express their public thanks to Messrs. Fletcher and Croley the owners of the Midge for their promptness in attending to the signal upon the island and themselves incurring risk in waiting to fetch them off. Most of the ship's papers and the mail (except thirty-five letters) are lost.  Captain Finlay who was a native of Dublin has left a wife and two children in Liverpool to lament their loss.  A Voluntary letter from an OLD settler  MACDONALD'S River COUNTY of Hunter  3RD OCTOBER 1845.  "I arrived in the colony fifty-six years since; it was Governor Phillip's time and I was fourteen years old there were only eight houses in the colony then. I know that myself and eighteen others laid in a hollow tree for seventeen weeks and cooked out of a kettle with a wooden bottom we used to stick it in a hole in the ground and make a fire round it I was seven years in bondage and then started working for a living wherever I could get it.  "There was plenty of hardship then I have often taken grass pounded it and made soup from a native dog I would eat anything then For seventeen weeks I had only five ounces of flour a day We never got a full ration except when the ship was in harbour. The motto was 'Kill them or work them their provision will be in store.' Many a time have I been yoked like a bullock with twenty or thirty others to drag along timber. About eight hundred died in six months at a place called Toogabbie or Constitution-hill.  "I knew a man so weak he was thrown into the grave when he said 'Don't cover me up; I'm not dead; for God's sake don't cover me up!' The overseer answered 'Damn your eyes you'll die to-night and we shall have the trouble to come back again!' The man recovered; his name is James Glasshouse and he is now alive at Richmond.  "They used to have a large hole for the dead; once a day men were sent down to collect the corpses of prisoners and throw them in without any ceremony or service. The native dogs used to come down at night and fight and howl in packs gnawing the poor dead bodies.  "The governor would order the lash at the rate of five hundred six hundred or eight hundred; and if the men could have stood it they would have had more. I knew a man hung there and then for stealing a few biscuits and another for stealing a duck frock. A man was condemned - no time - take him to the tree and hang him. The overseers were allowed to flog the men in the fields. Often have men been taken from the gang had fifty and sent back to work.  "Any man would have committed murder for a month's provisions: I would have committed three murders for a week's provisions! I was chained seven weeks on my back for being out getting greens wild herbs. The Rev. Marsden used to come it tightly to force some confession. Men were obliged to tell lies to prevent their bowels from being cut out by the lash. The laws were bad then. If an officer wanted a man's wife he would send the husband to Norfolk Island.  "Old Jones killed three men in a fortnight at the saw by overwork. We used to be taken in large parties to raise a tree; when the body of the tree was raised Old Jones would call some men away - then more; the men were bent double - they could not bear it - they fill - the tree on one or two killed on the spot. 'Take him away; put him in the ground!' There was no more about it.  "After seven years I got my liberty and then started working about for a living where I could get it. I stowed myself away on board the BARRINGTON bound to Norfolk Island with eighteen others; it was not a penal settlement then. Governor King was there. I had food plenty. I was overseer of the governor's garden. Afterwards I went to live with old D'Arcy Wentworth and a better master never lived in the world. Little Billy Wentworth the great lawyer has often been carried in my arms.  "Old D'Arcy wanted me to take charge of his Home - Bush property but I took to the river worked up and down the Hawkesbury till I saved money to buy old Brown's farm at Pitt Town. No man worked harder than I have done. I have about me one thousand pounds ready cash. I have given that farm of forty acres to my son Joseph and three other farms and about five hundred head of cattle; and about the same to my other son. I have also got 80 acres - 30 acres 50 75 - beside my house and some fine cattle.  "We are never without a chest of tea in the house; we use two in the year. I have paid £40 for a chest of tea in this colony. Tea is a great comfort.  (signed) JOSEPH SMITH."  ADVENTURES OF A COLONIST; OR GODFREY ARABIN THE SETTLER  CHAPTER I.  THE INTRODUCTION - A CHARACTER.  THE distinguished American writer Washington Irving in his introduction to "The Sketch Book" has depicted his ardent longing when young for travel; in recording his own experience he has described the feelings of the young of Britain and America. We observe it is true many young men educated within the influence of strict commercial discipline who sink prematurely into the starched neckcloths and saturnine countenances of their forefathers while their anxious faces little accord with their extreme youth and their mock anxiety is a caricature upon the profession. We are happy to think the majority of our young men especially those who have been born free from the influence of commercial circles are more or less addicted to poetry and literary pursuits; many rear Utopian schemes in early life while a few - a favoured few - go beyond this and end by becoming enthusiasts. Out of this latter class our intellectual great have sprung - our beautiful prose writers and sublime poets our finest painters and most celebrated sculptors our brave commanders and most distinguished circumnavigators and travellers. Indeed were it our object to write an essay on enthusiasm we would draw a distinct line of demarcation between practical and speculative enthusiasm; but this is not our purpose and we merely wish to introduce a young man of enthusiastic temperament to our readers. [6]  Godfrey Arabin was the third son of a respectable trader in a county-town in England. At the early age of eight he was sent to the care of a relative in the south of Scotland and went to a school of repute in the neighbourhood of his relation's dwelling. He attended the school regularly; his relation was a bachelor and he was allowed to follow the bent of his wild fancy. He mixed with the country-people and acquired much information - for as a people the Scotch stand pre-eminent for intellectual ability and many of the lower orders are passionately attached to the literature of their country. The country-people are rather fond of fictitious and speculative literature and the schoolboy would often spend the winter evenings with some one who would talk over the adventures of Ivanhoe. When he did not meet with agreeable company he used to wander among the mountains thinking on the warriors and people of the long-forgotten past until he would inspire the dull landscape with imaginary beings. He stood in fancy at the head of an array of warriors while on the opposite side was the enemy's camp. He unsheathed his sword gave his war-cry and led to the attack - the opposing forces are scattered as chaff before the wind. He remembered when with his mother he went to view one of England's "old cathedrals" and gazing with astonishment upon the tombs of the Crusaders his impression of that strange order was vague and mazy something like that we might derive from the description of Coeur de Lion Ivanhoe and Conrad of Montserrat in the novel of "Ivanhoe." He would brood over the battles and sieges of the Crusades until his heart throbbed and his cheek flushed. He was often overpowered by an intense melancholy which he however kept concealed yet at times the most trifling incidents would chill his heart. He commonly took refuge in pious exercises which he would perform fervently for two or three weeks when we regret to add some new fancy would occupy his mind or his attention would be captivated by some one of the many fictitious works then emanating from both the London and Edinburgh press. [7]  When he had attained the age of fifteen he was removed to Edinburgh to finish his education at the University: he was unwilling to leave his acquaintances but at the same time was glad that he should have opportunities of seeing life and procuring books. He was no sooner established in a lodging-house than he began to feast upon the contents of the circulating libraries. Hitherto he had merely fallen in with works of fiction by chance and with the exception of one or two of Sir Walter Scott's novels they had been romances of the old school - emanations of the Minerva Press as it has been designated; but now he revelled among the works of fiction which then almost daily issued from the press. The great change in the quality of the fictitious literature of the country was a leading feature of the time. The vulgarity crudeness and mawkishness which had marked the former school of fashionable romances was no longer to be observed; the works of Miss Edgeworth were the first which marked a new school and soon after Sir Walter Scott was hailed as the head of a renovated style of fictitious literature for as before the most improbable tales had been dished up with a seasoning of satyrs hobgoblins &c Sir Walter Scott's tales on the contrary were rounded upon the more permanent basis of history and being moreover executed in a style which almost placed imitation at defiance they were not only favourably received but the author acquired perhaps a more enduring fame than any former prose writer in our literature. The young scholar often neglected his lessons to indulge in his passion for novel-reading; he made little distinction between the good and the bad; indeed he devoured everything in the shape of a romance which came within his reach. Here we may remark that many may observe in Arabin some resemblance to the character of Waverly; we firmly assert however that we have not copied from the great work of the "Wizard of the North" indeed it is because the character is rounded upon truth and permanent that it must resemble. The future career of Arabin will have no affinity with "the fortunes of Waverley" for from the peculiar constitution of society in the present day there are many Waverleys and Arabins. [8]  In his humble sleeping-room Arabin lived in a fictitious world; from the occasional neglect of his studies he was regarded by his teachers as a boy [9] of slender abilities; nay he often feigned bad health to escape the irksome restraints of a public school. At certain periods however the meanness of such conduct would break upon his mind and then he would decline the practice and pay more attention to his lessons.   He had attained the age of eighteen before his teachers considered he had a sufficient knowledge of languages. About this time he determined to devote his attention to the science of medicine. The medical college of Edinburgh is justly celebrated; and as the young scholar had a taste for medical studies his advances in the science astonished many of his former friends who had regarded him as a dull boy. Even at this period the same feature of melancholy marked his character; the translations from the German writers which were just then becoming the rage were eagerly devoured by him and their dreary metaphysics pleased him and increased the flame of melancholy which glowed in his heart engendered by solitary habits and the Byronian style of fictitious literature. This morbid misanthropy bid fair at one time to nip the flower in the morning of life for he would crouch about without enjoying the pleasures of nature. Then again he would fancy himself a character of romance and to keep up the deception would wander among the ancient churches and transport himself centuries into the past. What magic exists in the past for novelist poet and enthusiast! - how can we expect any admiration for our poor labours which are to be devoted to the present and perhaps even towards the future? In plain words Arabin was a melancholy enthusiast. Have we overdrawn the character? or on the contrary might it not be found to assimilate with that of many young men of the present day even among the classes known as tradesmen? We have observed in the world too great an anxiety to ape the misanthropy in which the Byron school of poets have so completely enveloped their heroes. [10]  Arabin passed the usual examinations and having received his diploma left the metropolis of Scotland for his native land. His father died and he found himself possessed of £500 with the world before him. He ruminated upon the course which he was called upon to pursue and being unable to come to a determination went over to the Continent and travelled in France and Spain for some months. He then decided upon returning to England and on his arrival in London tried to establish himself as a surgeon in one or two parts of that vast metropolis without success. He returned to his native city rather disconcerted; he had squandered a considerable portion of his small patrimony and the want of success which had attended his efforts paralysed his energies and nourished the melancholy which preyed upon his heart. His mind gave way and reeled under the wild fancies of which it had become the arena. The most horrible ideas would at times suggest themselves a constant dread of future calamity weighed down his spirits he bade fair to become a wreck at the age of twenty-one.   Arabin was decidedly an intellectual person and as it has often been noticed that the persons who have possessed the finest minds have had to endure a large amount of mental anguish it may not be out of the way to give our opinion on the cause. The finest intellects are the most grasping and the most restless; this very restlessness however frequently becomes a curse because it suggests fears and whims which an inferior mind cannot perceive. Fine minds are from home in the tame course of every-day life; common things appear "flat stale and unprofitable." Few around can appreciate the peculiarities of genius and it has to retire within itself and create an ideal world peopled by beings of a more remote character than the rotaries of the desk and shop-table. They have a charm more potent than ever a witch possessed - they wave their wand and as Sir Walter Scott has written [11]  "From haunted spring and grassy ring  Troop goblin elf and fairy" -  Or who does not remember the finest poem which Mrs. Hemans has left upon record on the funeral day of Sir Walter Scott? The following lines are very beautiful : -   And he is silent! he whose flexile lips  Were but unsealed and lo! a thousand forms  From every pastoral glen and fern-clad height  In glowing life upsprang - vassal and chief  Rider and steed with shout and bugle-peal  Fast rushing through the brightly-troubled air  Like the wild huntsman's band.  Mrs. Hemans was a kindred poet who could bring a thousand forms rushing through the brightly- troubled air at a beck; let her memory be hallowed for hers was a noble gift. [12]   There was another very marked trait in the character of Arabin - his independent spirit. He scorned to crouch or cringe to any person; his manners too were abrupt and he had but slender prospects at home. The medical man of modern times must have studied politeness as well as medicine - how to tie his cravat and dress; as well as how to amputate a limb - and above all the art of pleasing whether he knows the art of healing or not. Now all this indispensable knowledge Arabin regarded as contemptible yet he knew without them he could not succeed; he however cared not. "I have enough for the present" he would say; "and if I cannot provide for the wants of this poor body in future why I shall make quick work for dependent I never shall be." To the genuine man of the world without mind or character these feelings may appear absurd; be that as it may we are writing of a bird of a different tribe with whom they can have little in common except to hear his history.   There was another marked feature in the character of Arabin at this time; he would rush heedlessly into the most absurd speculations and without even affording them a fair trial he would throw up one after another and get out of them at any sacrifice of property. He found his small capital dwindling away rapidly; no means of recovering it presented themselves to his eager mind and he began to consider his case almost hopeless - that he was destined to be unfortunate. We must add that he was very bashful; he could not endure the sight of those whom he knew; he was afraid lest they should penetrate into his mind and become masters of his secret thoughts - that they should pity him which he could not endure. He was mistaken; his friends never regarded him as possessing either a mind or feelings; they looked sour because he was eccentric which they misunderstood and set him down as wild; he was not of their class and they did not know what to think of him. He determined to return to London and disappeared nearly as suddenly as he had reappeared. "London again!" he exclaimed as he found himself one foggy November evening entering the dreary regions of Wapping having left a steam-boat the moment before; "London again!" he said as the faint traces of scenes he well knew broke upon his sight. "There is no city like thee! but to me all your princely mansions and magnificent marts of business form but a desert - it will not afford me bread." What magic is there in the very name of London to the young! - how many have longed to reach it - how many have panted to try "their luck" in a city so vast in extent so dazzling in splendour so rich in trade! Thousands throng there: some are awed by the very extension of the field and depart without endeavouring to find an opening; others bolder endeavour by every art to push forward but they are lost in the crowd thrust hither and thither and give over the attempt in despair. Still young men swarm towards the mistress of the world and perhaps a few a very few may succeed; and after a life of toil behind the shop- table towards its close find themselves worth a little heap of gold. If the acquirement of this be success they have we allow succeeded. [13] [14]   Arabin once again endeavoured to push forward into business without any better success. He resolved therefore as a last and desperate measure to go abroad and he fixed upon the Australian Colonies as the scene of future attempts; in fact he determined to emigrate with the crowd rushing towards the East. He soon found an opportunity and sailed in a vessel bound for the Australian shores.   The detail of the long dull voyage would not interest the general reader and as it has been so often described we pass it over.     CHAPTER II.  COLONIAL POLITICS. [15]   We have introduced Dr. Arabin to our readers but before we proceed with his history we are compelled to offer a few preliminary remarks on the Colonial policy of our Government. Reader you have heard doubtless of the Colonies of Britain; you are however peculiarly fortunate if you happen to know the mighty interests comprehended under the name. The Secretary of State for the Colonies enters upon the duties of his office without perhaps having been aware of the existence of one-half of the Colonies of Britain; yet the dictum of such a person is the law which the oppressed Colonists must obey. We believe that many ministers have discharged the functions of this onerous office with great ability and energy; but however anxious the Secretary of State for the time may be to govern the Colonies impartially and how noted soever he may be for the possession of sagacity and energy he must act in the twilight for it is a moral impossibility that any stranger could legislate for so many conflicting interests. We must observe moreover that too much confidence is placed in Governors. The Secretary of State is very frequently misled by "Their Excellencies" who altogether are far from being so honourable a class as might be at first expected. Many of these "excellent" men are adventurers of rather a high grade. It is far from uncommon to hear of Governors purchasing or reselling land while others are landowners and stockowners and perhaps speculators in Colonial trade. What more certain than that a large holder of land should desire his land to be enhanced in value? and any Governor who raises the Crown lands is certain to be popular with the landowners for the time being though the measure might entail the most ruinous consequences on the Colony. Again the majority of the Governors have too much in view the favour of the Home Government. To prevent unnecessary trouble every complaint is studiously concealed; the real feelings of the Colonists are kept in the background and the most arbitrary measures are carried into effect without any regard to the feelings of the suffering Colonists. Many of them too are paltry in their style of living and instead of spending their salaries in the scene from which they have been wrung they speculate and save every farthing: indeed I could find many Governors with £3000 a year who do not spend beyond £500 per annum. This is unfair: the Colonial Secretary of State ought to know these persons and prevent them from obtaining other appointments. A well- meaning generous-hearted man of average ability will govern a Colony better (if he do not mix too much in Colonial politics) than a keen active man of parsimonious habits although the latter may possess abilities of a high order. [16]  There is but one opinion as to the abilities of Sir George Gipps - they are very good. Yet strange to reflect upon the Colony has retrograded from prosperity to adversity during the time that he has discharged the functions of Governor and the causes of this singular revolution we are now to detect and describe. [17]  A race of English economists has been at great pains to inculcate doctrines connected with Colonial policy who happened at the same time to know nothing about either the Colonies or the development of their resources. Edward Gibbon Wakefield ranks at the head of these fireside economists. In an evil hour the Home Government adopted the new-fangled principles; and since that time everything has gone wrong with our Colonies in the East. These principles as we could show are absurd: our limits however compel us to proceed. It is clearly impossible that Governors or Parliaments should affix a certain value to waste lands and compel men to purchase; whatever the exchangeable value of land may be it is evident that its intrinsic value is exactly in a ratio with the profits it can be made to yield. Speculation may advance it beyond this price but legitimate demand never.   The price of land in Australia was originally the same as in our British American Colonies; in an evil hour it was advanced to 12s. an acre - then the large landowners rejoiced because they considered that their property was doubled in value. South Australian land was settled at 20s. an acre upon the principles enunciated by Gibbon Wakefield; and the Governor of New South Wales and the Bishop of Australia represented to the Government that land in New South Wales was worth as much as land in South Australia and the price of Crown land was immediately settled at 20s. an acre in New South Wales. To show that the measure had a contrary effect to what was intended we may state that in a few years afterwards there were no buyers at any price; land was when pressed into the market knocked down at anything frequently as low as 1s. 6d. an acre. In British America land is sold at about 6s. an acre and the price is determined by the Colonial Legislature; in no respect is Australian land more valuable than Canadian except from the brighter skies of the former. The land in Canada is moist and the crops luxurious. Australia is frequently visited by droughts and in some seasons by myriads of destructive animalculae; therefore the greater portion of the country can only be occupied as grazing stations. The rich "bottoms" - the deposits of alluvial soil usually yield however luxuriant crops: in many parts of the country 25 or 30 bushels may be grown upon an acre. In general however want of moisture is the great drawback to agricultural pursuits. Of course we do not include the rich soil of Australia Felix where droughts are almost unknown and where anything may be produced. [18]  When we take a retrospect of the policy of the Home Government towards the Colony we are almost inclined to curse the ignorance and neglect which could have consigned a land so noble to almost premature decay; we are positive that but for the invention of steaming down sheep for tallow which affixed a minimum price to the surplus flocks of the Colony the whole of the Colonial interest would have been ruined. View this in any way it is a grand invention - tallow even at the low price of 41s. in the London market will make ordinary sheep worth about 5s and cattle £3; but the Government did not foresee this and it deserves no credit on account of it. Does not the insolvency of nearly every man of note in the length and breadth of the land demonstrate more powerfully than our feeble pen can the ignorance and baseness of our Colonial despots? more cruel and rapacious from their personal insignificance while the supreme power in Downing Street knows nothing about the matter. What is there to encourage capitalists to come here? Let the land be reduced to 5s. and prosperity will once more dawn on our Australian settlers - an order little known but which deserves respect from the indomitable perseverance moral courage untiring energy and rough honesty of its members. They may be poor for the race is not to the swift but at any rate let them have bare justice: we should wish them to have fixity of tenure. At the present moment the Australian settler may be deprived of his run of stock at the caprice of a Government pimp called a land commissioner. The authority of these officials is supreme: there is no appeal from it but to the land commissioner of a neighbouring district who as a matter of course confirms the decision of his cotemporary; for as the Scotch proverb goes "one corbie will not pluck out another corbie's een." These commissioners travel about the country to settle the limits of the runs of the different settlers; in all disputes they take part with those who happen to be favourites and those who are injured are afraid to take any notice because the commissioner might ruin them; they are idle fellows withal and commonly to be found in the town instead of attending to public business in their districts. We therefore hold that no settler will be comfortable while such persons are allowed to oppress him. The land should be given to the settler at so much per acre with time to pay the money or the stations ought to be leased for nineteen years at a certain annual rent. Were this effected let us look on the probable result. The settlers now live in huts hardly fit for the beasts of the field; their food is of the poorest quality from negligence in preparing it; their minds have been tainted - and some we regret to add have sunk into immoral and dissipated courses; their independence is gone for they feel they must be dependent upon the Government understrappers; they do not cultivate the soil because any person might go to the Government Office and request that the station should be put up to auction and either purchase it or purchase it for one year as the case might be. On the contrary however if the Australian settler had fixity of tenure he would conjoin agricultural and pastoral pursuits; he would build a comfortable house and eat his food independently of the land commissioners. We except those whose souls have rusted from neglect and who scorn the habits of civilisation; they are already independent because they can go out into any part of the wilderness with their flocks. Government influence preponderates too much in Australia; the Governors can create their own tools magistrates and extend their influence. The respectable settlers know but too well that no other door is open to preferment but the door which the Governor can open or shut at his pleasure. The young of Australia know also that they must favour and flatter His Excellency before they can become rich or great; and this tends to check the development of that independent spirit which is so much to be wished. [19] [20] [21]   If land were reduced to 5s. an acre many small capitalists would hither emigrate; a demand would necessarily arise for stock and farming implements and both production and consumption would increase. Instead of exporting £400000 per annum in specie for wheat as hitherto the Colony would export wheat in large quantities.   The political economist it is true may here argue that the Colony imported grain at a cheaper rate than it could produce it; but we only answer - Then you must prove first that the Colonists were more profitably employed - they were employed either in buying and selling land worth nothing or in rearing stock; the last was as unprofitable as the first because there did not exist a market for surplus stock; and thus any argument against our position must crumble down for we are positive that before this splendid country can arrive at prosperity the occupiers of stations must have a vested interest in the land or they must have fixity of tenure. The next question would be what is land worth for sheep farming? We answer that it might be worth 2s. an acre or it might be worth 40s. an acre. For sheep farming it is in our opinion worth 5s. an acre payable by annual instalments for ten years. An acre is worth much more for agricultural purposes; but of course it would sell by auction at what it might be thought to be worth for either. The Home Government must bear in mind that the Australian Colonies deserve attention because each Colonist consumes more than twice the value of British manufactures that the Colonists of British America or the West Indies do. [22]  We must not blame the high rate of land alone for the large amount of distress because other causes have co-operated. These we must notice without comment: the sudden want of cheap labour when the assignment system ceased at the very moment that land advanced and the withdrawal of the Commissariat expenditure the fall in the price of wool and the advance in the price of labour; the extravagant credit afforded by the banks to land speculators principally on the Government deposits which were withdrawn for emigration purposes in 1840; the ruin of both banks and speculators in consequence the breaking up of all the Colonial companies including banks and perhaps the failure of the crops in 1839 and 1840. We allow that much distress has arisen from over-speculation and the decay of commerce and stoppage of emigration; but had the farming and grazing interests been in a healthy state it would not have extended beyond the social conventions of the towns. Of late years too the Colonial shipping interest has suffered especially that portion of it embarked in the whaling trade.   The Insolvent Law which was framed by His Honour Mr. Justice Burton (and which has been facetiously termed "Burton's purge") came into operation in 1842 and was just in time for the crash. Many availed themselves of the opportunity to clear accounts with their creditors by going through the Insolvent Court who had no occasion to adopt any such course. The restraints which had bound society to honesty and plain dealing broken down men turned round upon their creditors at pleasure. It was exactly the same as American repudiation. Those who would not pay often could have paid. Upon the same principle that the bricks in a house hang by and support one another are the members of our commercial societies dependent: the one pulled down the other and the insolvency appeared nearly universal. [23]  The storm has blown over: all the large speculators have been thrown out of the commercial circles; the business is now in the hands of safe men - the Colonial property is in the hands of real owners. It wants but some reform to be the most prosperous Colony in the world. The settlers must however be protected in some way or other by the Home Government.     CHAPTER III.   AN ECLAIRCISSEMENT. [24]   We now proceed to open the first scene not in Britain but in Australia. It was a beautiful day in January about midday that two persons walked to and fro in a small garden which was laid out in front of a white cottage. The one was a young lady of surpassing beauty; the other a man who appeared hardly more than twenty-five but his features were unnaturally worn and his eye gave a quick unsteady glance which altogether put it beyond the power of an observer to hazard anything like an accurate guess of what his age might be. The day was not oppressively hot the air was pleasant and the too powerful rays of the sun were intercepted by the thick forest. The casements of the house were open the front rooms appeared to contain no unwelcome listeners and the two paced along without any dread of being interrupted.   The first surmise of a concealed observer would most probably have been that they were lovers. A rather more attentive inspection of their manners and features would have occasioned a change in their opinion. The face of the young settler for such he seemed betrayed anxiety and mental irritation while his lovely companion struggled hard to repel the uneasiness she felt at her position. Her timid eye wandered about and her ear was on the stretch watching for some friendly intruder to break the tête-á-tête which every moment became more irksome. The young man gazed earnestly in her face once or twice and seemed as if he was anxious to address her upon some powerfully exciting topic; but his courage failed and he turned off with some common-place remark like a soldier who would fain attempt a daring deed but whose valour fails at the critical moment. He seemed aware of his weakness and at last made a desperate effort - his breath almost stopped and his brain reeled as he uttered "Miss Waller there is something I wished to say to you." [25]  The young woman looked as if the worst had occurred; but she did not jump or start or scream or blush - nay she did not either faint or go into "hysterics." She replied quietly that she should be happy to hear anything which Mr. Willis could have to say to her.   "You must know" gasped the person addressed as Mr. Willis "that I am - in - love with you - that is - that - I would - wish - to - to - to - marry you. I have not got very much property it is true; but what I have will maintain us in a humble sphere of life. You will have to cast in your lot with one who has few friends but who is the more likely to love you upon that account. I hope you will favour my addresses. I am not it is true very much in the habit of speaking to ladies - or I have not been for some time past; but if I express myself in a clownish fashion you must excuse my manner on account of my earnestness."   [26]   His companion had listened to his passionate address in silence. He ventured to take her hand and clasped it with something like ecstatic fervour. A severe inward struggle had kept the young lady silent; but when he took her hand she answered -   "Mr. Willis I am sorry to be placed in this disagreeable position; you know that it must give me infinite pain to refuse your offer. My affections are still disengaged; and even were it otherwise I would not marry without the consent of my relations - and their consent I do not think you would get."   "Well" interrupted the settler "will you let me ask it? Your sister would not refuse me; Butler might as he has no favour for me but he is only your brother-in-law."   "It would be of no service" replied she; "I cannot - in fact it is better to be plain and not deceive you I am sorry I can never think of accepting your offer. I wish you well and happy. I must go inside to my sister."   "Stay but one moment lady" said Mr. Willis almost choking with emotion. "Might not time effect some change in your feelings? Do not deny me in a rash or harsh manner."   "Mr. Willis" replied the girl in a tone of severe dignity "I have heard of women who took time to consider offers and battered their hand for a certain specified amount of comfort and fine furniture; but I despise them. I will not take a day to consider the offer - nor an hour nor a minute. Although I am an Australian I am not mercenary; I am not thank God tainted with the too common vice of my countrymen - and alas! countrywomen too. It may suit the old worn-out cockney flirts whom I occasionally see here to weigh the advantages or disadvantages of offers but it suits not me. I am sorry to repeat that I cannot entertain your offer." [27]  It was but too plain even to the excited young man that she was resolute and determined. In a moment after she excused herself and entered the house. The settler remained standing in the same position; who shall describe the reflections which tortured his mind? To be refused by a mercenary woman who will weigh you in the scale with the property you possess is a lucky escape; but to be refused by one who is worth possessing is exquisite torture. The settler partially recovered himself and without re-entering he left the garden and tore himself from the spot. "What an éclaircissement!" he said mentally. "I was an ass a tom-fool a spooney to put it in the power of any person to slight me. I was positive that she loved me and how eminently I was mistaken! - Loved me! - bah! what a contemptible dolt! what a sentimental love-sick puppy! what a noodle! what a silly-billy! A man of the world too like me who has played his part in many a gay and noble scene to be slighted by a native 'cornstalk!' I cannot yet believe it - it must be but a dream and a lie. - But how I loved the girl too! She is not to blame; no hang it! I must not censure the girl only I mistook her glances. I was a conceited idiot and fancied because she looked upon me that she loved me: I deserved it all. And then she will tell her sister and that puppy Butler who will laugh in his sleeve at me and think me an inferior. Well I wish them all well - I am compelled to do that; however bitter my heart is I cannot curse them; but I curse myself! I curse the country! I curse my station! I curse my agent! I curse my lawyer! I curse my barber!" He threw himself on the ground and tore his hair with rage. [28]    CHAPTERIV.   A NIGHT IN THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH. [29]   UPON one of those sultry afternoons which occur so often during summer a horseman was wending his way across the -- Plains. The day had been oppressive; a hot wind had blazed fiercely during the forenoon; whilst towards evening the wind died away but the heat still increased. Everything around was parched and withered the dust on the roads was pulverised the scorched ground seemed actually to pant for rain. As night approached the sky changed and the clouds which were gathering in the east warned the experienced Bushman that a thunder- storm was brewing. In the west however the sky was unstained and the traveller's face being towards the setting sun he was too intently engaged in admiring its gorgeous splendour to heed the danger in his rear. He was apparently about twenty-three; but a close observer of mankind might have traced in the lines of his dark countenance marks of sorrow - the sorrow which communion with a vain and selfish world brings; or shall we designate it by the term of warm feelings turned into gall?   The vast plains which the young man was traversing lie adjacent to the town of B--- which is indeed on one side of the range. They extend thirty miles from east to west and twenty miles from north to south; but the view towards the north is bounded by Mount M--- the towering summit of which stands in solitary magnificence as a bold relief to the monotonous plains. Lofty ranges may be seen far away in the south; no other object is visible but the wide stony range the solitude perhaps occasionally partially interrupted by a stunted shrub or tree just well calculated to make the desolation of the landscape more complete. Far as the eye can wander it rests on the silent boundless plains; neither house nor living thing is visible not even a bird: the traveller might be buried in the bosom of an African desert There is however a grandeur present in the scene - a magnificence derived from its vast proportions: compared with it the scenery of Britain is tame; its tiny parks and its petty forests its mimic mountains and brawling rivulets are all insignificant. In an Australian scene you have Nature in her grandest aspect and most gigantic proportions; you gaze around and the heart thrills because you feel you are nothing when alone with your Maker. [30]  To return however to the traveller. It was already late in the afternoon and as he had been detained crossing a punt he pressed his horse to its utmost speed. In two hours or less it would be dark and he had many miles to ride across the dreary plain. He looked frequently in the rear and observed the thick drapery of dark clouds rising and beginning to stretch across the horizon towards the west. Soon after the wind changed and began to moan and cross the plain in fitful gusts the certain indications of a thunder-storm in Australia. The horseman was not indifferent to these symptoms and he urged his jaded steed; the animal thoroughly ragged only answered the spur by a shuffling attempt to run away. So long as he had maintained the old cart-track dignified with the name of the road the nag had kept gallantly along; he had however diverged into the wide plain and then the beast to the no little chagrin of the traveller gave pretty plain indications of its intentions not to proceed very much further unless it were allowed to select its pace. After one or two vain essays the horseman shrugged his shoulders and giving the attempt over was soon buried in deep thought. [31]  We must put our readers out of pain and acknowledge- that we are following the adventures of Arabin. Two years had passed since we took leave of him in Britain; in that short time he had entered upon a new sphere. He had emigrated to the Australian Colonies and settled in the adjoining town. When he arrived although he did not possess much money he would not deliver the few letters of introduction which he had brought with him. He was shy because he was perfectly aware that he was poor; and he despised those who superior perhaps in wealth were very inferior in mind. He scorned their patronage and positively determined to depend in the struggle to get forward on his own exertions. He had been more than twelve months settled in Australia and like most nervous men had been unsuccessful; he had no quality to recommend him - he was timid and independent. If sent for professionally he would perform his duty anxiously and faithfully; but then he would not wait and hear the characters of half the town torn to shreds - he could not sit an evening and make himself agreeable and therefore did not get on: indeed he was regarded as a self-conceited person and made himself very disagreeable. He had very little to do. There were two other surgeons in the town: one was a dapper personage who would bow and scrape for half an hour and who knew more scandal than any other man in the place; he was ever riding about touching his well- brushed hat to everybody and a ready companion for either a lady or a gentleman: of course they employed this surgeon. He was not popular with the lower orders; their favourite was the other surgeon: he was a rough vulgar man and rather addicted to dissipated and rakish courses; he might be observed at night in a tap dressed in a faded shooting-jacket smoking an old black pipe and keeping the inmates laughing almost constantly for he possessed a great deal of humour; the lower orders would have no other attendant when he could be had. The practice was pretty fairly divided between these two and Arabin therefore came in for the poorest share. But he cared little about it for he had hitherto managed to earn a precarious existence and did not envy his professional brethren for having been more successful than him-self because he was perfectly aware of the reasons. He was careless too in matters of account and seldom would accept money from the wretched although there are few poor in Australia. For his kindness he received little recompense: indeed his brethren laughed at him for attending the poor as regularly as the rich and not charging them. [32] [33]   Arabin had been sent for about a week before to visit a young settler or grazier: he had attended was requested to repeat the visit within the week and was now on his way to perform his professional duties. The visit was not likely to be pleasant as the settler had been labouring under mental derangement. He had now arrived at a deep ravine which intercepted his progress. The banks being steep and rocky he could not perform the passage without some danger and therefore retraced his way along the banks until he reached the cart-track. A road wended down the bank by many a fold and another zigzag path enabled him at last to reach the open plains beyond. The first thing he did after he had emerged from the dangerous ravine was to take a survey of the wide plain. A conical hill was just visible far far away across the plain: this was the desired land-mark and taking a course parallel with it and keeping the frowning masses of Mount M--- to the right he recommenced his journey across the wide dreary level. It would have been a bold act for an experienced Bushman to cross the plain with night approaching - and such a night! Dr. Arabin was insensible to the danger and not accustomed to calculate distances on extensive ranges he supposed the conical mount to be little more than eight miles from where he then was; the real distance was about twenty miles and on a fine evening he could hardly have reached it by the light of day and would even then most probably have gone astray in the darkness.   It was far from agreeable on the plain when the air became cold and the evening to fall. He once more endeavoured to push forward but his horse was tired and would not increase its pace. The threatening clouds which now canopied the heavens and the sudden gusts of wind which from time to time crossed the plains at length brought conviction to the mind of the traveller. He was frightened at the thoughts of a night on the plain and made a last desperate endeavour to cross the dreary intervening waste and reach the land-mark already noticed by daylight. Twenty miles is a long journey to ride across stony ridges; before he had passed half the distance it was almost dark the rain began to fall slowly it increased it rained in torrents and the lightning played with awful sublimity; then came the slow muffled thunder distant at first each successive peal sounded nearer - it was crossing the plain and would pass directly overhead. It approached; Arabin was brave but the lurid blue flames of the electric fluid as it whirled past like a thought and the deafening peal of the thunder almost daunted him. He hesitated - should he attempt to cross the plain? - a shiver ran through his frame - he decided that he would proceed but now he could not find any land-mark to indicate the direction. He therefore determined as the forlorn hope to make the best of his way back to the road and endearour to get under cover in some hut until morning. [34]  Dr. Arabin was not exactly afraid - perhaps startled would be the proper expression; he repented of his temerity in attempting to traverse the plains so late in the day and stared wildly at the fast-flashing lightning. To those in Europe who glance at these pages the terror of Arabin must appear childish; but perhaps having never been more than a few miles from the abodes of men they have but an imperfect conception of the utter desolation of the boundless plains of Australia. The solitude is too awful for a creature formed for social intercourse to bear; his littleness and his feebleness become apparent. Then when the Maker of all speaks in His thunders it is time to reflect upon former courses. To the reflecting mind He speaks as powerfully in the majesty of nature - the calm blue sky the murmuring or brawling stream the luxuriant vegetation of the mimosa and casuarina the silent heave of the perpetual ocean. In courts and cities the denizens may forget Him - here they scarcely can. [35]  Still the rain fell in torrents; the attending obscurity rendered objects invisible at a very limited distance. Dr. Arabin could not regain the road; he lost confidence and wavered in his course. At last he came to a dead stop; he was bewildered and reflected on the course he should adopt. Oh heavens ! what an awful shock! a thunderbolt struck a stone within a few yards of where he was (within two paces of his horse's legs) and shattered it to atoms; the animal reared and fell heavily with its rider on the ground and at the same moment the thunder broke overhead with a crash so horrible that he almost thought nature laboured under a convulsion. He shook from head to foot and put his hands to his head almost instinctively to deaden the sound; the earth shook palpably - it was awful. A moment and it was over; he arose from his watery pillow for the whole plains were flooded by this time; his face was wild and fearfully pale - it was more fitted for the charnel-house than the living earth. [36]  Sir   Most Humbly I do Intreat your kindness to pardon the Liberty that I have taken in addressing you Sir you whas good enough to tell me you would give me your horses to handle in which Sir I am now remaining out of any situation and att the expence of paying the sum of 15 Shillings per week for board and Lodgins and necesity Compilling me to make away with my Little necesereys to defray that expence if your honer will be good enough to asist me evin in giving me your horses. Mr. Biley proffers me his Stables a dwelling and paddocks for one pound per week where with the asistance of a friend I may establish a liverey Stable Horse & reaking and allso all Vituarisiary Practice in which I am well able to perform with Creditt there is nothing in a horse but I can do to the greatest satisfaction of aney one which shall Committ aneything to my Charge. Sir you will be good enough to bear in mind I left Parramatta for the sole purpose of Ingagin into your Sirvices and ham now rendered unable to retirin for whant of the means my dettermanation whas had I stopped to discharge the duty of a honest sirvant and not lead your or your family astray I feel myself bound to Say had I stopped with you only for one year you would been 200 pounds in Pocket by my Sirvices your horses would attained Creditt and your Stables fitt for the Inspection of the first rank in Sociaty Sir I must now bear on your mind as a gentleman that as necesety calls me to need your favour that your kind mode of humanity will render me yours and your familys asistance in aney ways you may be pleased to asist me with in which Duly will ever cause me to pray & I am your most Humble and Obediant Sirvant   Henry Myatt  Sir your answer will be thankfully received and most Gratfully acknowldged please to direct to Mr. [?] [?] near Mr. Dillon and he will deliver itt to me safe.  PP: Sir I will be much obliged if you will please to Lett me no your purpos all [?] if that you would wish to Ingage me by the year to Breakin or occashionally dive [?] four in hand as I will of meeting your wish so Ingage for that purpose  Chapter I  Why then the world's mine oyster.  Respecting the parents of Ralph Rashleigh little needs here be said save that they were of a decent rank as London shopkeepers and that they were thus enabled to afford their son the advantage of a good plain English education upon the completion of which he was articled to a conveyancer in extensive practice who resided near Chancery Lane a romantic neighbourhood to which Ralph was compelled to restrict his rambles for the first two years of his servitude; but on the expiration of that period in compliance with a stipulation contained in his indentures a small allowance being made to him he ceased to reside under his master's roof and occupied a lodging by himself.  He was now fairly launched upon the great ocean of Life for although his office hours were sufficiently long yet abundance of time still remained during which Rashleigh was completely his own master; and amid the varied amusements offered to his choice in the modern Babylon he soon found nothing deficient for enjoyment except money with which he was but sparingly supplied. This hiatus of course giving him much pain he naturally set himself to work to remove it if possible but for a long period without any success.  Among the number of his boon companions was a young man who though only receiving from his employee an equal salary to himself yet always appeared to be possessed of means for the gratification of his pleasures; and as he ever seemed to distinguish Ralph with his friendship the latter one evening when both were tolerably warm from the effect of numerous potations in which they had indulged begged his friend to explain how he managed so well with his limited income as always to have cash for any expense he chose to incur.  His companion whose name was Hartop after many injunction of secrecy informed him that as his employer usually sent him to make payments and receive money upon account of the business he had for a long period been in the habit of occasionally passing bad sovereigns using however great precaution and never carrying more than one at a time upon his person. Then be picked his customers - mostly people from the country or residing at a distant part of London - to whom he would tender a queer piece; and if it were objected to would immediately replace it by a good one Wondering how he came by it etc. At other times when he thought he could do so safely in telling over money he was about to receive he would dexterously exchange one of the good ones for another he had previously concealed in his hand which of course was bad. [2] The result of this manoeuvre would be that when be objected to the one he had himself put down the person about to pay him probably knowing all the pieces he had tendered to be genuine would exchange the one questioned without hesitation. Nay so good were the imitations he made use of that often in paying considerable sums of money in gold into banks - where the specie was weighed in the lump - a bad sovereign would pass current enough among many others and not excite any suspicion.  This communication over Hartop offered our hero his services to procure him a few of these inimitable imitations of the current coin of the realm adding that be could pay for them when he was lucky. To this offer Ralph nothing loath assented. A few days after he received from his friend twenty spurious sovereigns that being deemed enough for his first essay.  Thus did Ralph Rashleigh commence his career of dishonesty and for a long period escaped with impunity owing to the able manner in which he adopted and followed the cautious counsels of his sage tutor. At length finding that he could obtain all the luxuries of life not to mention necessaries only without any very arduous exertion be became so very idle careless and inattentive to his employer's business that after many fruitless remonstrances and unavailing lectures from his worthy principal he received his dismissal his articles being cancelled.  This event indeed did not much concern him as he believed be should always be able to supply his wants by means of passing bad money as heretofore. Its order however to lull suspicion which might have been awakened had he remained without any employment or apparent means of earning a livelihood whatever Ralph who now wrote a remarkably fine and quick legal hand obtained out-of-door copying from a law scrivener intending to do only just as much work as might be supposed to afford him subsistence.  After this resolution his custom was to work two or three hours per day at his lodging and to employ the rest of his time perambulating London varying his rambles every day and sit times shifting the scene of his exertions to a fair or tare in the country where he generally met with tolerable success.  But the period of his profitable trading in this line was rapidly drawing to a close and one unlucky day having extended his operations so Maid-stone at the time of a fair he was apprehended. As contrary so his usual custom he had then two bad sovereigns in his pocket he was committed to take his trial upon a charge of uttering counterfeit coin. At the ensuing assizes in spite of a most ingenious defence he was found guilty and sentenced to pass twelve months in imprisonment at hard labour in the house of correction. [3]  This being prior to the invention of treadmills or the improvement of prison discipline there was no restraint to free communication with his fellow unfortunates. And the species of employment which consisted only of picking oakum and beating hemp afforded ample opportunities for the relation by his companions of the many marvellous exploits cunning schemes hair-breadth scapes and successful stratagems for which the lives of each had been remarkable.  It may very easily be imagined that such society produced its full effect upon the mind of our adventurer who had in fact never been notorious for any great nicety in distinguishing the difference between Meum et Tuum and he now emerged from his confinement a most finished adept in all those arts by which the unprincipled portion of mankind contrived five and twenty years ago to victimise their unwary fellow-countrymen.  Ardently longing to reduce the praiseworthy theoretical knowledge he had thus acquired to practical purposes Rashleigh returned from the gaol to London in which he still possessed some good clothing and a few trinkets. The latter he now turned into cash for his present subsistence and then proceeded to the town of Winchester where he had been informed by an old cracksman (housebreaker) - whom he had left in durance at Maidstone - there was a jeweller's shop from which a large booty might easily be acquired. In fact before he was released Ralph had concerted a plan of operations with his informant to be put in practice for this purpose when the latter should have served his full sentence and again acquired his liberty.  But our hero had no intention of waiting for an associate as be wisely deemed the spoil would suffer much by participation with another. Therefore the very day after that on which he had returned to the metropolis beset off for Winchester per coach provided with the necessary implements of every kind for his nefarious purpose carefully put up with a change of clothing in a carpet bag.  Having duly arrived at the proposed scene of action he adjourned from the coach office to a small public-house on the outside of the town where he dined. He then proceeded to view the shop in question. Everything here was apparently as he had been informed and having spent a few minutes inside the shop ostensibly for the purpose of purchasing a trilling article he returned to his inn there to digest his plans at leisure. These were soon arranged and Rashleigh having taken his supper discharged his reckoning and went to bed requesting that he might be called at two o'clock there being a coach to start for Portsmouth at that hour.  The morning proved as dark as Erebus for it was in the month of November. [4] A chill sleet had completely driven the ancient guardians of the night to their retreats and not a single sound disturbed the tranquillity of the town. Ralph therefore met with no difficulty or obstacle in his route to the shop. Once there to remove a panel of the shutter with his centre-bit and chisel was an easy task. The glass next presented itself. This was also cut through with a diamond and prevented from falling by means of a piece of putty held against it. There was a small brass wire grating next the window; but it was movable and the robber had nothing to prevent him from filling his pockets with the various articles which he could feel lay in the cases before him; when lo the lusty shout of a watchman at a distance crying the hour warned him to be cautious. Accordingly be clapped a piece of dark-coloured paper against the opening of the panel and hastily betook himself to the kind concealment afforded by the shadows of an antique porch hard by.  The vigilant conservator of public property quickly passed apparently in great haste to return to his box or the comforts of the watch-house fire and the coast being thus once more clear Ralph repaired to his unhallowed occupation. To fill his bag pockets and hat wish valuables and all kind of trinkets was but the work of a few minutes. Then replacing the paper before named to prevent too early an outcry he made the best of his way by unfrequented paths to the outskirts of Winchester where he had during the afternoon noticed a wood in which he now carefully concealed all his ill-gotten booty near the foot of an old and remarkable tree. He then cut across the fields until he reached a by-road leading to the town of Basingstoke. He walked upon this road until morning dawned having for the last few hours had the benefit of the moon's friendly beams which so much assisted his progress that at daylight he found himself four and twenty miles from Winchester and near a small public-house by the wayside. Here he stopped to refresh and in a short time a coach coming by he embraced the opportunity of obtaining a ride to Farnham where he intended to stay a day or two.  In the evening weary of the solitude of his own apartment in the public-house where he put up Ralph descended to the large room which served the inn "for parlour for kitchen and hall" in which he found the assembled rustics gaping around a man who had just arrived from Winchester and who was giving them the details of a most audacious robbery which had there been done the night before property to the value of £1500 having been abstracted from a jeweller's shop. The whole town and neighbourhood were in a complete ferment at this very palpable proof of the presence of some dexterous thieves of whom it was supposed a whole gang must have been employed to effect this atrocious act. And all whom the sapient magistrates of Winchester thought fit to consider as loose or idle characters among the lower classes of the townsfolk had been apprehended and examined. [5] Such a turmoil of arresting searching questioning and cross-questioning had never been known in Hampshire since the death of William Rufus. Moreover as a finale to prove they did something as well as talk so much after all this uproar two poor sailors who were begging their way to Portsmouth in the hope of getting a ship were apprehended and each sent six months to hard labour in gaol because they could give no better account of themselves than their true history.  It may easily be credited that Rashleigh was no indifferent auditor of this tale. He was in sooth much overjoyed to find that the police of Winchester were so far astray in their suspicions and he consequently resolved to pay a visit to some relatives he possessed at Southampton for a few days after which he proposed to return for his spoil to the place of its concealment.  Accordingly the next day he put this determination into practice. His friends at that pretty little sea-port received him most cordially the rather no doubt that they had not the slightest idea of the manner in which he had lately spent his time but believed him to be still employed as a lawyer's clerk in London and that he had now come down to keep a holiday. A few days were therefore passed most agreeably among them; but as the weather was too inclement to permit much out - of-door exercise the sameness of the scene began to pall upon the mind of our adventurer who soon longed for a return to the more varied pleasures of the great Babel. While here however a singular and rather romantic adventure happened to Rashleigh which will be found narrated in the next chapter. [6]    Chapter II  Thro' the haze of the night a bright flash now appearing; "Oh ho!" cries bold Will "The Philistines bear down; "Never mind my tight lads never think about sheering; "One broadside we'll give. should we swim boys or drown."  Ralph Rashleigh had embraced the opportunity of a somewhat dry day to walk out as far as the ruins of Netley Abbey a venerable monastic pile in the New Forest and spent so long a period in musing over the traces of fallen grandeur which it so abundantly presents that evening was rapidly closing before he became aware of it. When he intended to retrace his steps to the town he missed his way and became quite bewildered among the ruins and in the forest. At length however having his upon a well-beaten path which seemed to lead in the wished-for direction he hastily turned into it and having proceeded for some distance at length discovered to his dismay that it only led to the banks of Southampton Water among an incongruous mass of ruins and rocks which covered the beach in picturesque but not - by him at least - much admired profusion. It was now quite dark and our wanderer had the not very pleasing prospect before him of passing the night in a solitary ramble along the winding recesses of this famed harbour when at a short distance he saw a light towards which of course he quickly bent his steps. He had scarcely set out when he recollected that these ruins were said to be the resort of deer stealers smugglers and other outlaws to intrude upon whose privacy might be dangerous. This induced him to proceed more cautiously and to reconnoitre the vicinity carefully. But now the light had disappeared and Ralph was puzzling himself to account for this when it suddenly became again visible. Once more all was dark and again the deceitful gleam was shown.  "Could it be a will o' the wisp or other ignis fatuus " thought our adventurer half resolved to abandon the chase when a voice apparently near but below him - as it sounded as if emanating from some man at the bottom of a well-hailed loudly  "Bob! Bob! Is all rights"  Immediately to Ralph's great dismay the light he had pursued so long in vain was now shown close so him in the hands of a rough-looking sailor whose truculent features bespoke intimate acquaintance with the display of fire-arms he ostentatiously bore in his belt. Half frightened to death at his very look Rashleigh suddenly sank down among the long grass and rubbish scarcely daring to breathe for fear of discovery. [7]  The voice from beneath now asked "Is Curtis in sights" as it seemed while the person to whom it belonged was ascending.  The man with the light replied gruffly enough "No he an't."  Soon after both men appeared to join each other at a very short distance from Ralph who lay perdu.  One now remarked that "it was d-d strange".  The other assenting said "it could not be for fear of the hawks for they were all off the Wight on the look-out for Jack Simmons who had sent a note to an old pal of his at Cowes purposely that it might fall into the hands of the preventive men in which he stated that be should try it on that night at Blackgang or the Undercliff. Consequently the cutter from Southampton another from Portsmouth and all the spare officers had been sent over to the Island."  It seemed by their further conversation that all this was known to the smugglers through one of the revenue men in their pay and that the whole affair had been prearranged so as to leave the coast clear for their operations at the spot where they then were.  A few minutes more elapsed in silence when one of the men suddenly exclaimed "By G - ! There she is! Now for the signal !"  A long loud whistle was given and almost instantly the trampling of many horses accompanied by the clatter of harness was heard all round Ralph's hiding-place. Presently the splash of oars indicated the approach of a boat and a scene of great bustle ensued. This boat and two others were rapidly unladen their contents being transferred to the backs of the horses and to two or three light waggons which had also been brought down to the shore.  Suddenly another whistle was heard at some distance. It was repeated while just around the spot occupied by our hero many exclamations such as "Look out for the hawks !" "'Blast them they're coming !" were spoken in low and hurried voices warning him that the revenue officers were at hand and coming to attack the smugglers one of whom seemed to act as leader and now directed that the loaded waggons and horses should be driven off as quickly as possible while himself and a few others cried to keep back the officers for a while until the cargo should be in safety. The horses and waggons accordingly went off at a gallop the persons who drove them seeming so well acquainted with the route that in spite of the many obstacles and the extreme darkness of the night they were quickly our of hearing.  The remainder of the smugglers in obedience to the order of their chief had either lain down or sheltered themselves behind masses of rock when a strong party of the coast-guard appeared advancing round a projecting point many of them bearing links (or torches) by the light of which the whole bay was partially illuminated and the logger might be seen crowding all her canvas to escape. [8] But the officers being unprovided with boats and supposing besides that the cargo had been already landed confined their attempts to the capture of the latter leaving the lugger to get off unmolested except by a few useless shots fired at her from the shore more it would seem out of bravado than with any idea of damaging her crew. Soon the foremost of the officers came into contact with the concealed smugglers and instantly the blaze of twenty muskets streamed amid the gloom.  Two of the officers fell. The remainder hastily retreated and a consultation having taken place among their leaders they appeared to resolve upon trying to pass the flank of their opponents and they therefore turned inland; but very soon after again exposed themselves to a most galling fire from the smugglers who lay in safety secured by their position from the shot of the coast-guard party while else latter through bearing torches and still endeavouring to advance suffered considerably.  Another pause ensued when the leader of the King's men cheering on his people they fairly rushed in among the smugglers who after discharging their guns at random leaped up and endeavoured with the butt ends of their pieces to parry the cutlasses which were aimed at them. All this time poor Ralph lay in a state of mortal fear which was not much diminished when the fray became most violent immediately around him the leader of the smugglers and the commander of the coast-guard having singled out each other and else bravest of their followers rushing to their assistance. At last fresh and lively cheers from the wood and loud cries of "Down with the blasted hawks !" indicated that more help had arrived to the party of smugglers upon which some of the King's men forcibly carried their officer away from the scene of conflict; when they all retreated in good order along the beach still keeping their faces to the for and occasionally firing at any whom they fancied they could distinguish plainly enough for that purpose.  The smugglers on their part did next molest them or attempt any pursuit but busied themselves in searching for their dead or wounded companions. A number of lanterns now speedily made their appearance and the bearer of one of them approached Rashleigh who lay breathless and counterfeiting death as well as he could.  Seeing by his dress that he did not belong to either of the conflicting parties the man exclaimed "Why what have we got here? I zay Jack here's a gemman. Let's ace whether he's got anything in his pockets."  Jack a fierce-looking fellow with enormous whiskers now came up and holding his lantern close to Ralph's face said "By the hokey he an't dead. He's only shamming - or else in a swound." [9]  The voice of their leader was now heard demanding "why they didn't come on what they were doing there and whether they wanted to bring all the sojers in Southampton down upon them."  To this one of Ralph's captors replied "that they had found a man who pretended to be dead and that they thought he must be a spy from his dress."  "A spy hey!" replied the smuggler. "Bring him along. We'll put him from pretending death any more; he shall swing from the Beaulieu Oak before the night's an hour older."  Here Ralph quite lost what scanty remains of self-possession he had left and begged his captors in the most moving terms for mercy but in vain. They hurried him along half running between them striking his legs against every projecting root or stone in the way.  At length after having proceeded two or three miles in this manner following the sound of their companions' footsteps and guided sometimes by a whistle from the front they reached an open forest glade in the centre of which was an enormous and aged oak. At the foot of this tree stood three men among them the leader of the smugglers whose voice Ralph had so often heard in the roar of that night's conflict. He now asked the prisoner who he was to which Rashleigh could only reply while his teeth tattered with terror that he was a stranger who had come on a visit to Southampton and had lost his way near Netley the previous day.  "A d-d fine tale" replied the smuggler. "You are a blasted spy and shall die a dog's death. Here's a good strong rope. You Bill! Count a hundred. And Harry and Jack be ready when he has done to strap this fine shaver up."  Poor Ralph now went upon his knees to beg for pity while he alternately prayed and invoked the most direful imprecations upon His head if he were a spy or if he had not spoken the truth; to which the only reply vouchsafed was that be might as well spare the little breath he had left for he would find there was no mistake about them.  In the mean time Bill had counted 64 and Ralph offered all he possessed if they would let him go; 65 - 66 - - 67 were calmly repeated but no reply came from the smuggler; ó8 - 69 sounded in his ears and driven to utter despair while the leader was preparing a noose on the fatal cord Ralph shook himself suddenly free from the grip of the two men who held him and snatching a gun which stood against the tree dealt such a vigorous blow with the stock of it on the chief's head that he at once laid him sprawling on the earth and broke his weapon short off by the breech leaving only the barrel in his hand. [10]  He then sprang off and ran with the speed of a hunted deer closely followed by one of the smugglers who seemed to be armed only with a stick. When they had run a considerable distance Rashleigh finding his pursuer gained upon him rapidly dodged short round hoping to strike him unawares. But his foot slipped and he fell to the ground. The smuggler seized the gun barrel and after dealing the prostrate runaways a blow or two which he intended for his head but which were saved by his arm he began dragging the unlucky Ralph back to the tree in spite of all his struggles or his loud outcries for assistance which served only to procure him fresh blows. At length another of the men came to the assistance of his fellow and between them they soon hauled their victim back to the spot they destined to end all his earthly struggles.  The smuggler chief was now seated under the tree and one of the men was binding up his wounded head which seemed to have been bleeding profusely. He welcomed the party with a grim laugh saying "So ho my shaver. You thought to have settled me; but long Prank has got a harder head than you reckoned for. Now my boys what are you gaping at? Chuck the end of the rope over that bough. And put the noose round that bloody dog's neck We'll give him five minutes' good choking."  In an instant the rope was adjusted and the rod having been disposed as directed three of the smugglers laid hold of the part that hung over the bough to haul the sufferer off the ground.  Already the rope was drawn tight when a loud voice close at hand roared out "Oh ho you blasted thieves! We've got you at last have we?" And suiting the action to the word the three fellows who held she rope were seized by a number of armed men so great that all resistance was out of the question. The smuggler chief and the other man who till that moment had continued his grasp upon Ralph had both disappeared. As for Rashleigh he fell to the ground and was soon surrounded by a number of persons who from their dress and appearance seemed to be gamekeepers and their assistants.  This proved to be the case. While they had been in search of some deer stealers they had been attracted to this spot by the outcries of our adventurer whose life they had thus opportunely saved. They listened to Ralph's tale with much astonishment and many execrations upon their three prisoners whom as the daylight was now at hand they proposed to escort to Southampton Gaol.  On their way thither they were met by two decent-looking men who took the head gamekeeper aside. After some conversation Ralph was called to join them when he was asked whether he had any objection to forgiving the smugglers if a sum of money were paid to him in atonement for their offence. The gamekeeper who probably looked upon smuggling as a very venial crime or at any rate as being of much less enormity than that of deer stealing raised not the smallest difficulty at letting the prisoners go; while Ralph who hated all law and detested the idea of appearing before a magistrate considered besides - since the chief smuggler had escaped with his principal coadjutor - that neither of the three men who were taken had been active in persecuting him. [11] So our adventurer agreed if the sum of £20 were paid to him as a douceur and the rest of the party satisfied why he was content to let the matter drop.  By this time they had reached a small ale-house in the purlieus of the forest the inmates of which being with some difficulty aroused the whole party went in at the invitation of the ambassadors; and as some refreshment was much needed by all - but by none more than Rashleigh - a smoking breakfast though somewhat of the earliest was welcomed with great satisfaction. After breakfast one of the strangers took our adventurer aside and paid him £10 in part of the sum agreed on the landlord of the house binding himself to produce the other ten the same evening. Ralph now bade his adieux to the company who were fast getting all drunk together left the inn and returned to Southampton.  His absence had created a great sensation and innumerable were the questions to which the disordered state of his dress gave rise on his arrival at his relatives' house. But he parried them all by saying that he had lost his way and torn his clothes in a thicket mentioning a different part of the forest to that in which he had actually been so as to evade any apparent knowledge of the past night's affray. After taking some repose he went in the evening and received the promised balance of the money agreed to be paid. In a few days thereafter taking farewell of his friends he went over to Portsmouth where he sojourned a week. [12]    Chapter III  Hath not a Jew - eyes?  As three weeks had now elapsed since the robbery at Winchester and all talk of it had ceased Ralph determined on springing his plant or in plain terms securing his booty. For this purpose he provided himself at Portsmouth with a new travelling trunk which he conveyed per coach to his destination. On his arrival at the latter place his first care was to fix his abode at an inn near his precious deposit his next to see that all was right in the coppice where it lay. Having satisfied himself in this particular he waited until evening when by means of two different visits to the spot he removed the whole of the articles without exciting any suspicion to his present headquarters which he left next morning for London where he arrived in due course without accident.  His next care was to dispose of the various articles produced by his enterprise. For this purpose he selected an accommodating Israelite whose fame had been very often spoken of in the gaol he had left as a safe fence and a perfect patterns for all cross coves. A dingy marine store shop in a court leading to the Minories was the domicile of this descendant of a chosen people and thither our evening Ralph bent his way. Our adventurer expected to see in Mr Jacobs a withered and filthy old bring similar in external appearance to those of his race who then perambulated the metropolis as dealers in cast-off clothing. His surprise therefore was great when upon enquiring from a little Jewess in the shop for the matter of it a man in the prime of life and of most respectable exterior was shown to him. Having been provided with a password as a shibboleth of introduction known only to the initiated he was not long before he spoke his errand and it was agreed that they should meet at Rashleigh's lodgings the next forenoon in order to make their bargain.  At the time appointed Mr J. made his entree. Ralph was prepared with a list and specimens of what he had to sell as he did nut deem it altogether prudent to acquaint his new associate with too much at once nor did he wish to let him know that all rise property was then in that house. After overlooking both list and articles with a very businesslike air Mr Jacobs said to Ralph "Vell how mush do you vant for de lots"  "At a word one thousand pounds."  "Mine Gust! Are you mad? Vere you tink all dat money shall come from?" [13]  "Oh Mr Jacobs ! You know you could easily find twenty times as much money as that and I am sure they are a very great bargain."  "I vill tell you vat it ish. Py mine vord I never did know de monish so shcarce in all de days of my life; and is pesides if I was to porrow so mosh to puy all dis lot of trinkets yen de devil you tink I get all my monish pack again? Eh? Can you tell me dat?"  "Well well Mr Jacobs if money is really so scarce you can buy half of what's on the list and I will look out for another mark to take the rest. What will you give for the fair half? You know we can divide them into two heaps and toss up for first choice."  "Mine Gott! Vat a hurry to be in! yell let me see let me see ... All dese bracelets ... very poor very poor ... all French ... all French and Jarman. Bad gold bad gold ... Sell petter in England dan over de varer. Put if I puy dem dey mosht go to Hambro' ... Vell I vill tell you at von vord how mush I vill give you. I vill give ... Yes I vill give you ... free hundred pounds for de fair half ... de monish in your hand. So take it or leave it."  As he said this he pulled out an immense roll of bank notes from some cunningly contrived pocket beneath his arm and rose at the same time as if to go away if the other did not take his offer.  Ralph only replied "'Tis too little. Say £350."  "Not I py mine Gott! Shall I go?"  "Yes. If you won't give any more than that we can't deal."  The Jew seized the knob of lie door partly opened it then returned close to Rashleigh and said in a mysterious whisper "I vill give £640 for de whole."  Ralph shook his head and Mr Jacobs ran our of the room and downstairs.  Our adventurer had arisen from his seat and gone to the window in order to watch the Israelite intending if he actually left the house to follow him when Mr Jacobs again returned closed the door after him and mid "Now I will give you £650 for dem all and upon my shoul I don't expect to get a finif (£5 note) py de pargain. But I vant to send some jewels to Hambro' and dese vill do as yell as any."  At last Ralph agreed to take £660 which was forthwith paid down by the buyer in Bank of England notes after which he departed with the portmanteau and jewellery.  For some time after this Rashleigh led an idle dissipated life frequently appearing at the theatres gaming-houses etc until the slippery goddess took it into her head to desert him and he found himself nearly penniless. It now became necessary for him to bestir himself.  Fortune happened to throw in his way an acquaintance in the person of a female who had formerly been a servant to his employer with whom he had had a liaison which he now renewed. [14] She at present lived in the service of an elderly gentleman of great wealth in Welbeck Street. Our adventurer procured by her means admittance into this her master's house and thus enjoyed ample opportunities of observing the locality of the butler's pantry where he learned the plate was kept.  In order to succeed in the plan he had formed for plundering the place however it was necessary for him to procure an associate in his enterprise; and he thought himself lucky that about this time he accidentally met in the street one of his quondam companions at Maidstone Gaol. This man was now very seedy in appearance. Having only just been liberated and being without a shilling he was ripe for anything that could tend to put money in his pocket. With him therefore Ralph made his arrangements and all bring duly prepared a hackney coachman who had frequently served Ralph's associate before in similar transactions was engaged to be in waiting at a public-house near the scene of their intended operations so that he might be at hand to receive the booty.  The same night about twelve o'clock Ralph and his pal went to the spot fully prepared for action with all the usual implements of house-breaking. There was as usual a circular iron plate let into the pavement to admit of coals being shut into the cellar beneath. This was lifted up and Ralph who was then but very slender got down without difficulty. The covering was then replaced by his associate who retired to some distance while Ralph who was well provided with skeleton keys speedily got out of the cellar and through several doors into the butler's pantry where he found the plate apparently packed up as if for a journey! He soon carried it all into the cellar. Nothing had as yet occurred to alarm him; but just at this moment a small dog who was asleep in the area awoke and came running towards him. Upon smelling his legs the dog only fawned upon him because he had been sprinkled with a liquor which never fails to neutralise the opposition of the must ferocious dog.  Ralph now locked himself into the cellar where he awaited most impatiently the approach of his associate who was to have resumed in half an hour with the coach; but more than two hours elapsed before they came during which our adventurer was a prey to the fiercest pangs of uncertainty and apprehension. At length the appointed signal was given and the coach stopped. The plate was quickly transferred to it and in a few minutes they were driving rapidly towards Paddingrun where a furnished room had been taken by Ralph the day before. On arrival they soon secured their booty paid the jarvey and lay down to rest. The next day being resolved to lose no time Ralph went to the home of a well known fence in Saint Mary Axe where everything was so very well regulated and the system adopted so cunning that it seemed to have reached the very pitch of perfection insomuch that the buyer never saw the seller nor the seller the buyer thus effectually preventing any after chance of unpleasant recognition. [15] There was a box turning in a wall so connived that upon placing any article you wished to dispose of within it and ringing a bell the box revolved. After the lapse of a few minutes it again turned and in lieu of the article left a sum money being the price the proprietor was willing to pay for it made its appearance. If the seller refused to take this he again rang the bell when his article was returned; but no second offer was ever made. It may easily be conceived that this establishment must have met with great support. In fact it was the means of immense gain to its proprietor who thus fixed his own price for all that he bought. But still the thieves of London much approved of the principle as they were never seen by anyone while disposing of their ill-gotten booty - thus removing at least one great cause for fear of detection. It was therefore continually well supported; and so cunningly did the owner contrive that although his premises were repeatedly searched upon the best-founded suspicions that there was stolen property concealed therein yet nothing was ever found to warrant a conviction.  Once a police officer chased a thief who had stolen a silver teapot from a gentleman's breakfast table and kept him in full view until he arrived at the door of the house in question. In ran the thief. In two minutes the officer was after him; but there being two doors to the shop nobody was there. The house was searched from top to bottom and nothing was found like a silver teapot.  The fact was that next door to this place the owner's brother had a concealed crucible which was constantly kept in operation and which communicated also with the house in question. In this every article bought that would melt was instantly thrown so that no matter how costly the workmanship in a few minutes any sized piece of plate was converted into what the fence used jocularly to call his "vite soop".  To this famed spot Rashleigh now repaired and soon ascertained the price he could get for the plate. It was but 2s. 6d. per ounce; yet this was pretty fair upon the crass and the confederates divided £200 between them as the proceeds of their night's spoil. [16]    Chapter IV  "Steal!" pho! a fico for the phrase - "Convey" the wise it call.  Soon after this occurrence Ralph was walking in the city when chancing to go into Lombard Street he observed that the common sewer was open for the purpose of repairs being effected. Now not far away from this opening there was an opulent banking-house and Ralph had often heard that in the vaults beneath these city banks considerable sums of gold and Bank of England notes were deposited and he thought of a plan by which he might perchance break into one of the vaults. To gain as much information as he could with regard to the positions of the house he went into the bank pretending to enquire whether a certain country establishment had failed or not. There were several people within and Rashleigh had thus a chance of strictly scrutinising the place. It seemed from the narrowness of the frontage that there could be no spare room on this floor and he naturally conceived that the hoard of valuables must be deposited below as he had before heard.  This was on Thursday and by Saturday night he had fixed on his plan in pursuance of which he told the people of the house where he lodged that he was going a little way into the country that evening and should not probably return before Monday. He then provided the usual implements: plenty of false keys a strong crow-bar technically called a jemmy an instrument used for cleaning bricks some spirits and a slight provision of bread and meat. All these he stowed away in his carpet bag which he carried under a large boat cloak and about eight o'clock steered towards the city. Here he waited in a coffee room until it was past eleven and then started for the scene of his proposed exploit. As he had a long distance to walk it was after midnight when he reached Lombard Street which not being inhabited by any of the working classes was now quite deserted save by the watchman.  Just at this moment propitious fortune seemed to favour his design for it began to rain heavily and Ralph met no person whatever near the opening of the sewer. After hastily reconnoitring to make sure he got into the cavity and with some difficulty reached the bottom. Keeping close to the side of the sewer he proceeded along it groping his way and taking note as he went of the branch drains by which he relied on finding the house besought as there was usually one of these openings to each dwelling leading into the main sewer. He had carefully counted the houses gratings etc. from the bank to that part of the street where the chasm was formed. [17]  At length he pitched upon an orifice which he felt sure would lead him to the scene of his proposed exploit and having first procured a light by means of phosphorus and a wax taper - of which he had brought an ample supply - he crept along the branch drain sounding its sides at short intervals until he was aware through the hollow jar produced by the wall that he must be opposite one of the apartments in the basement of the bank.  He now stripped himself and went seriously to work prizing out first one brick and then another. Soon from the closeness of the drain he was in a state of profuse perspiration; but he kept steadily on varying his position as well as he could for he felt almost cramped to death by the confined spot and constrained posture in which he was working. Thus he had wrought for a long period while all around him was as still as if he had been a thousand fathoms deep in the bowels of the earth when all at once a confused crash astounded him with its noise and almost smothered him with dust and broken mortar. After the lapse of a few seconds this having partially cleared away he found that several yards of the brick crown and sides of the drain had fallen in so that his egress was completely blocked up. This however gave him but little uneasiness as he felt sure that if he were only fortunate enough once to get in to the haven of his hopes he would easily find some way to get out. But shortly after this discovery he cast his eyes above him and found to his utter dismay that a large part of the wall he was then undermining had become loose and was apparently about to give way threatening to overwhelm and crush him to atoms. He recoiled from the sight in consternation and retreated beneath a sound part of the drain which he had hardly gained before down came the portion of wall carrying away a large piece of the drain in its fall some flying fragment of which struck our adventurer on the head and stretched him senseless in the bottom of the sewer.  How long he lay there of course he could not tell; but on recovering he fancied it must have been some time for a considerable quantity of water had accumulated in the drain which was before dry. This must have greatly assisted Ralph's recovery by its coolness for he was lying in it; and if the injury he sustained had been more serious it is very probable he might have been suffocated.  As it was having raised himself with some difficulty he groped about until he found the phosphorus bottle and his tapers which he had fortunately put on one side out of the way of his operations. Having procured light his next care was to look for his bag of tools and refreshments which had also escaped injury. A hearty poll at the spirit flask revived him and he soon after mustered up courage to approach the scene of his late discomfiture when he found to his great joy that a considerable breach had been formed in the wall of the house through which he could discern an apartment or cellar of some sort. [18] He speedily enlarged the opening and got in taking care to remove all his implements at the same time.  Upon searching this room however he quietly discovered that it contained not the object of his ambition and he therefore examined the door intending to try one of his skeleton keys. But alas there was a key in the lock and from its peculiar make it seemed to bid defiance to his efforts at forcing it. At last he dislodged the door from its position tearing out frame and all from the brickwork when he found that the opening led into a dark passage in which were three other doors either open or having keys left in them; but nothing could be found to induce Rashleigh to suppose this any portion of the bank premises as the rooms contained nothing but empty packing-cases old hampers broken bottles and straw. The powerful odour of drugs that pervaded all these dens convinced Ralph that he had commenced operations on the wrong side of the drain having in fact broken into the house above the bank next to which he now recollected there was a wholesale druggist's warehouse; and it was clear he had entered the latter.  Almost reduced to despair by this discovery which rendered all his previous toil and danger abortive our adventurer was on the point of abandoning his enterprise as he perceived on looking at his watch it yet wanted two hours of day and he thought he could leave the sewer unobserved. But at last he determined to persevere chiefly induced by reflecting that this being Sunday there was little fear of any interruption at any rate for some hours further.  He then returned to the drain from whence he had come and after having again sounded the opposite side of it fixed upon a place for commencing his labour. Rendered much wiser by experience than at first he now commenced by taking out a double row of bricks above the scene of his intended operations. Therein he inserted into the wall a strong piece of wood after the manner of a lintel to support the brickwork above while he made his opening below. Again he toiled incessantly until his hands were galled and blistered to a most painful degree. Stimulated however by hope of a golden reward he suffered not his energy to relax until he had pierced through this partition when he found a more serious obstacle presented itself. This wall for the sake of either security or dryness had been lined with oak planking which stood perpendicularly against it well secured to horizontal pieces of timber built into the wall. After having in vain attempted to dislodge a plank no resource remained but the centre-bit and keyhole saw with which after about an hour more of arduous toil Ralph succeeded in making a square opening large enough to admit his whole person.  His joy was now boundless to find that he was at length in the wished-for treasure cell of which he had no doubt at the first glance. [19] There were several eases of copper and silver money lying open before him and some smaller cases which still more attracted the attention and excited the cupidity of the plunderer. To force some of these was his first care. But the greater part of them contained only blanks to fill up as bank notes for different sums. There was also one case of bill stamps. Ralph began to think his toil would be but ill repaid after all when a chest which stood by itself in a corner attracted his attention. Antique in its appearance and secured by many a clasp and many a massy band besides three huge padlocks it bade defiance to all his efforts until he remembered having heard an experienced thief in Maidstone Gaol say that after trying every other means in vain to rob a strong chest he often found it might be easily broken open at the bottom if it could only be turned over the reason being that if there be any damp near it is sure to be drawn under an article of this kind which causes the wood with which it comes into contact to decay much sooner than any other part.  Acting on this idea Ralph capsized the box in question with some difficulty and discovered that the bottom was in fact quite rotten and presented no serious obstacle to the tools with which he effected his purpose. He then saw that the chest in question contained many bags which on examination he found with joy were full of coined gold. There was also a small open case in which were many Bank of England notes. Here then at last was the fruit of his labours his suffering and his danger; and after having puzzled himself for a while which was the best booty he determined on taking as many sovereigns as he could well carry and all the Bank of England paper he saw. He then emptied his carpet bag of its contents replacing them by sovereigns and notes until he judged that he must have nearly ten thousand pounds' worth. Next carefully removing all the implements he had brought with him he withdrew through the drain into the adjoining house where he resolved to conceal himself during the day as it was now nearly eight o'clock. Choosing the most out-of-the-way nook on the whole floor he made himself up a comfortable bed of straw from the empty hampers which he then disposed around him in such a manner that it would not be very easy to discover him even in case of a search. He then made a hearty meal drank some spirits and resigned himself to sleep.  When he awoke it was just getting dark and he began now to consider the means of egress as he did not like the idea of removing the bricks and rubbish from the drain which he knew most be done before he could return by that path. He shortly found out a grating in the corner of one of the druggist's cellar rooms which he doubted not communicated with the main common sewer that he had come up and upon his removing it this proved to be the case. [20] He now collected every tool he had used and threw them into a cesspit reserving only the phosphorus box and a taper for fear of an accident.  All being now ready for his departure he waited with anxiety the hour of twelve which he had fixed upon because before that time there were many stragglers always in the streets; but after that especially on Sunday nights the city was comparatively quiet. At length the wished-for number of strokes tolled from a neighbouring church clock and Rashleigh cautiously commenced his return. When within a few yards of the opening from the sewer into the street he put out the taper he had hitherto carried and threw it together with the phosphorus box into the deepest hole near him. He now listened attentively and hearing no sound of footsteps or aught else he clambered without loss of time into the street heartily rejoicing in his success so far.  The night was very dark. It was still raining and from the sloppy state of the streets appeared to have been doing so without any intermission since the night before. Ralph had made his way to the foot pavement when a watchman suddenly stepped from under a door and stood before him. Though he was somewhat startled Ralph preserved his equanimity as well as he could merely saying in his blandest tone of voice "Good-night. watchman."  "Good-night sir" said the other. "Do you know I thought you came up our of the middle of that big hole just now." And he laughed heartily at the idea.  Ralph smiled in return saying as he went on "I crossed the street just by that opening which perhaps deceived your sight."  It being now too late to obtain a hackney coach in that neighbourhood Rashleigh made the best of his way to the riverside where he knew there was a house kept open all night for the accommodation of persons arriving by late packet boats into which he gained admittance. Not being much inclined to sleep he spent the remainder of the morning in reading a book he found by chance in his bedroom. Soon after daylight he went to a neighbouring stairs where he hired a boat for Lambeth. Here he breakfasted and took a hackney coach for his lodgings at which it was his first care to hide every portion of his spoil in various secret places he had before contrived for this purpose. He then put on a new sporting suit of clothes that he had provided for his country excursions which consisting of a Jolliffe white hat with an enormous brim a bottle green Newmarket-cut coat white cord breeches and top boon effected a most surprising change in his personal appearance. In the next place being very desirous to ascertain the earliest intelligence respecting the steps likely to be taken for his own discovery and apprehension as the perpetrator of the late robbery he now repaired to the White Horse Cellar Inn Piccadilly carrying with him a valise and umbrella. [21] Here he ascended a coach just arrived from Bristol which was going into the city to the Swan With Two Necks Lad Lane intending to remain there for a day or two fishing for information which might tend to guide him not only in the disposal of his booty but as to what part of the world he had better go to. Having arrived at the inn he gave his name out to be Mr Robert Rowland from Bristol and shortly afterwards stepped out taking an opportunity of passing by the scene of his depredation and went into a coffee-room hard by but did not hear a breath respecting the matter.  At last he returned to the Swan where as he was dining in the travellers' room it was not long before he overheard a conversation between two persons occupying the box next to himself relative to the robbery. One of these two seemed to have been near the bank when the discovery was made which did not take place until after ten o'clock that morning. It also appeared that the civic police were quite at fault; the means by which the house had been robbed by being broken into were plain enough for the instant that the cashier went into the strong vault he saw all was in confusion and a very slight search led to the discovery of the opening into the sewer; but they knew not how to account for all the rubbish in the branch drain nor could they at all conceive how the robbers had escaped after executing their purpose. It was agreed however by all that several thieves must have been concerned as it appeared to them the labour performed was far greater than the truth.  The only persons upon whom suspicion had as yet fallen were the workmen employed in repairing the sewer all of whom had been directly taken into custody; but it seemed two of their number who had been at work with them on the Saturday previous had not returned that morning to their task; nor could they be traced by any enquiry which had been made. Therefore very heavy suspicion attached itself to them and a high reward had been offered for their apprehension. In the mean time placards had been largely circulated giving intimation of the robbery publishing the numbers of the notes stolen and promising £500 for the detection of the guilty parties.  Rashleigh devoured all this story with great avidity and felt very easy us his mind it being quite apparent that all the police authorities were perfectly astray as yet. The next morning he attended at the Guildhall to pick up what further news or information he could upon the examination of the workmen; but he failed as this being only a preliminary investigation was held in private.   CHAPTER I  THOMAS and Anne Thompson were among those who determined to leave England for New South Wales. They had been married eight years; their family was increasing and labor becoming scarcer and scarcer. They heard of other families emigrating and that they easily got high wages and lived in plenty: so they thought with their four children they would do so also. They were both honest hard working and strong people and Anne had been well brought up by a careful and pious mother who had lived many years as servant in the squire's family. Anne was her only child and she had been able to keep her at school and what is of far more consequence she had set her a good example. Old Nurse Gordon as she was still called was well provided for by her former master's family and though it was near breaking her heart when she heard of their plans to emigrate she could not find any reason against it. She laid down her spectacles on the old Bible from which she had been reading and wiping away the tear from her eye with the corner of her white apron she patted her little grandchild's head and answered "well Anne dear I'm not learned enough to gainsay you may be 'tis just as you and Tom say; but if it was God's will I should have wished to have you close my old eyes and see me laid in the grave - but His will be done!"  "Aye mother that's the way to look on it" said Tom - "cheer up and we'll save you a little something in that country which will go to make you more comfortable." [4]   "Thank ye kindly Tom" said the old woman "but I am thank God well cared for-while my missis lives I shall never want - night and day I pray God to bless her and her's - and you must do so too for oh! it's a cruel comfort to think that though we've no silver nor gold we have one way of repaying they that are kind - we can pray to God for them. And now" continued she "let's have a cup of tea together" and she and her daughter spread the tea-things and produced the loaf.   This was the last time they ever met in that little cottage. It was Sunday evening. The old woman wore her Sunday gown and white apron; the meadows seen from the door looked green; the sun set very gloriously and threw its slanting red beams on them as they sat: the roses and sweet briar smelt very sweetly and they heard the chimes of the village church; for in that place they chimed every Sunday evening. As they sat feeling sorrowful and sad the old mother again spoke "I'm thinking that's a sound ye'll not hear yonder; I suppose there's no church bells across the seas."  "I suppose not" said Tom"it is a new country a fine place for farming and grazing."  "Well I hope God will prosper you - but mind my last words - when I'm dead and buried mind my words- 'honor the sabbath day and keep it holy.' When once we forget this we don't know where to stop: and Anne my dear see I give you this book this Prayer Book; use it and teach the children out of it; look my name is on it - read it Tom." Tom read -"this book was given to Anne Gordon by her mistress as a reward for her punctual attendance at church."  "Yes " said the old woman as she followed her son-in-law's voice - "yes that's it - and now I give it to you Anne Thompson with my blessing; and you Tom you have been a kind and sober husband to her; and now you are going so far be sure you mind all your duty - may be there'll be no good parson like Mr. Howe - but remember his words and keep your church and fear God." [5]  It was now time for them to go so putting the children's hats and bonnets on Thomas and Anne returned home; they had a walk of a quarter of a mile but it was a pleasant evening and they talked cheerfully of the future; how they should save money and buy a farm and perhaps grow rich.     CHAPTER II  In five months from this time the family of the Thompsons reached Sydney. They had encountered some troubles on the voyage: Anne was very sick and it made her very weak and inclined to be discontented and cross tempered and there were many discomforts on board the ship. There were a great many passengers and some of the bad ones quarrelled; but Tom was steady and sober which was a great comfort. He attended to the children when Anne was ill and was always ready to lend a helping hand when it was wanted so that he became a favorite.  Their little boy John the eldest got very ill so ill that they began to fear it might be their lot to bury him in the ocean as one other poor mother had done her child. This was a sore trouble to Anne; she thought she could have borne to bury her child under a green sod; but to hear the coffin plash down into the waves of the deep sea - that was dreadful.   While she was thinking in this way her mother's gift came into her head and she opened the Prayer Book. She turned to the burial service; there she saw that the same good and holy words would be used as if she were at home in Ringford church yard; and at the bottom of the service she saw that there was something written expressly for a sea burial; it spoke of the sea giving up the dead and of God's subduing all things to Himself. [6]  Now this comforted Anne and she felt what a blessed book the Prayer Book was; there were prayers for every thing; in sickness in death or in joy. Whether on dry land or on the deep waters turn to your Prayer Book and you will find words of comfort and instruction; the self same words too which all good christians have ever used the same words which are uttered in every church throughout the world.' Thinking of these things and watching by little John was of use to Anne; she felt she had been impatient and fretful at the discomforts of board-ship and as she sat by the sick child she prayed for forgiveness and for grace to help her to quench such feelings in future. Thus the trial was turned into a blessing and Anne felt every day more ready to submit cheerfully to God's will. But it pleased the Almighty to spare them the trial of losing their child. Little John recovered; and before they reached land he was as rosy as before and said his catechism every Sunday out of the Prayer Book to his mother.    CHAPTER III.  I cannot tell you all that happened to them or how many plans they had when they first landed; but they at last set up a little shop in some of the outskirts of Sydney; and besides this Tom was able to get plenty of work at his trade which was gardening. Every thing seemed to go on well: they had plenty of custom and Anne's tidy appearance and respectful manner brought people to the shop. [7]  There was no church where they lived but the service was performed in the school room every Sunday; and the two eldest children went to the school. The custom of the place was for all these little shops like the Thompson's to be kept open during Sunday. The shutters were half closed; and many persons bought all they wanted on Sunday instead of coming on Saturday afternoon. At first this struck Anne's conscience: she thought of locking up the house and going to church at the school house with all the children; but her husband objected and said that would never do they must do as others did - it was the custom of the country; and if they refused to serve customers on a Sunday they should have none.   "And that's true sure enough" sighed Anne - " there's Mrs. Harris over the way and the Browns and scores of others that make no more account of the Sabbath than if it was a common day; but it's hard to be forced to serve and slave on a day of rest."   "Never mind Anne" said her husband - "its only for a time let us make haste and save some money and then we can do as we like we can keep Sunday as we did at home and you shall be quite a lady."   Anne smiled for she wondered what sort of lady she'd make; and then she washed the children's faces and tied their pinafores and led them out to the door.   "Now go on steady there's my dears and behave well in church and mind the text Johnny." Then she turned into the little room which formed both kitchen and shop. She took out her book intending to read but presently Mrs. Harris over the way stepped in and Anne had to serve her with tea and sugar; some spice was wanted which could not be found without more light so she went to open the shutter. [8]  Just then Mr. Martin the clergyman passed: Mrs. Martin and their three children were with him. Anne dropped a curt'sy for she had not left off that custom which some people think unnecessary after they leave England. Her good mother had always taught her to be respectful to her superiors and that politeness to one another is taught in the Bible. So Anne curtsied - but how ashamed she felt. She fancied Mr. Martin looked sternly at her - she thought that Mrs. Martin stared at her dirty apron.   "Ah" thought she "it used not to be so on a Sabbath morning at home but it is just like no Sunday here no bells no church no any thing."   "What are you so long about taking down the shutters" called her husband: so Anne hastily put down the shutter and went in; but her heart was ill at ease - she did not feel happy.   Next Sunday however she minded it less; she did not see Mr. Martin pass. Mrs. Harris and Mrs. White came and laid out upwards of a pound between them for Mrs. Harris was expecting some friends from Sydney to tea. They talked of the new store further on the road where very cheap and good things were to be had; "but they will not do" said Mrs. Harris "they shut up on a Sunday because she's a Methodist. Such nonsense expecting people to lose Saturday which is always a busy evening because they won't weigh out a penny-worth on Sunday; besides really in this country folk hav'nt the convenience for keeping things and it is very hard not to enjoy a good dinner on a Sunday."   "Well Anne" said her husband that evening "this good day; we'll put up the money to buy a cow - I saw a beauty the other day - when we've got two or three head then I shall think we are fairly in for good fortune." [9]    CHAPTER IV.  SUNDAY after Sunday passed; weeks and months came and went; all prospered with the Thompsons. They had bought a cow and calf and put it out to a run; they lived well and put by a little besides; still neither of them looked so nice or so cheerful as when they lived hard at Ringford.   Anne's clothes got out of repair; she never had any time to mend them; she was in the shop every day. They had plenty of custom and all her time was occupied. She worked hard and now she did not look forward to any day of rest. There was no quiet Sunday when cares and troubles were forgotten; no regular attending church but only now and then when she could persuade Tom to mind the shop. There was no quiet evening walk; no hearing the children read. They had meat and bread and butter and plenty of tea and sugar it is true besides many other little luxuries; but it was eaten in discomfort; there was no regular time for any thing. All days were alike; no Sunday came to mark the time - to begin another week with the minister's blessing after a grateful rest to the mind and body.   Anne was not happy but she did not perhaps put it down to the right cause. Her conscience had spoken and had not been heeded and now it did not prick her. We soon slip down a hill when we once begin.     CHAPTER V. [10]   ONE day about this time Mr. Martin came into the shop. After asking a few questions about her children and husband he said "How is it I do not see you at church Mrs. Thompson ?""Why sir I do go whenever I can." "Very seldom I fear" answered Mr. Martin "it is but too much the custom in this country to neglect church and I am sorry to see that amongst others your shop is not shut on a Sunday; surely you know this is breaking the fourth commandment?" "I know it sir I know it is very wrong" and Anne burst into tears "but what are we to do? people will buy on a Sunday and we depend on the shop."   "It may be a trial my good woman; but if a few decent people held out refusing to serve any one on a Sunday taking care to be doubly attentive and careful on other days I do not think they would really lose. Besides suppose they did lose - suppose at the year's end they were so many shillings or even pounds the poorer they would still have gained." - 'Better is little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure' &c. - " It is positively and openly breaking God's commandments and you cannot expect His blessing. Besides the evil it is to yourself it is setting a bad example and we are all answerable for this."   "Oh it is not the likes of us people would take example from" said Anne; "though I know it is a sin in us - I always said so." And she cried again.   "Well but if you really think that it is wrong do not do it. Begin at once; it may be hard but pray humbly that God will help you and you will be able to resist the temptation. I am sure you have been taught your duty: your manners and appearance and that of your children told me at once that you had been taught. Surely you did not keep Sunday thus at home ?" [11]  "Oh la! no sir - God forbid! But oh that was all different; every body went to church and bought things on Saturday; and the bells rung and seemed to tell us it was Sunday. Oh I wish we were back again !"   "There are no bells it is true" said Mr. Martin. "In this new country much is wanting that we are used to at home; but it only makes it the more necessary that each be more careful of himself and pay even greater respect to the Sabbath. We can all even the poorer contribute to this. We can all observe the Sabbath and try to pray in church as God has commanded; and many can lay by out of the store which God gives them to help towards erecting real churches and having bells. But I will call again; I see a customer waiting. Good morning."  "Good morning sir and thank you" said Anne and after serving the young woman who had just come in she thought over all Mr. Martin had said. She felt it was all true every word; her old mother's words too came back and going into her little bedroom she knelt down and begged God to forgive her and help her to be better. She found it was not so easy to pray as it used to be; she had forgotten the prayers. Ever since Sunday had not been regularly kept she had become less regular in her own daily prayers. She left it to chance; when she thought she had time she said a prayer; but very often she passed the day without. Now she could only remember the Lord's prayer but she repeated it several times and then she began to resolve to keep Sunday. But the great difficulty lay in persuading her husband. However he was very kind to her and always seemed to take her opinion so she determined to try and not be discouraged. [12]   Accordingly that evening when Tom was making up his accounts and seemed pleased at finding a good round sum was coming to him he said "Come Anne what's the matter? I declare you're as blank as November - you shall have a new bonnet by Christmas as I'm alive; and we'll have roast beef and a bottle of Ale and I wish old mother was just here to share."   "Oh Tom that word is a dagger to me; poor mother what would she say to see us so? don't you think Tom that now we could do without serving customers on the Sunday ?"   "Why I thought you'd as good as forgotten that;" said Tom "you know we do more business Sunday morning than any other day in the week."  Anne then repeated all that Mr. Martin had said and added "She was sure that though they were richer they had not been happier; and that they both felt weary and worn out on a Monday morning instead of rested as they used to be at home: Besides" added she "I'm willing to try and make good the loss; I can take in a bit of washing; I can do clear starching as poor mother shewed me and can make a penny by it."   "Well well do it if you like but see if we don't lose our custom; but do as you will."    CHAPTER VI.  THE next day Anne told every one who came to the shop that she intended to take in clear starching; and when Saturday night came she began to feel rather nervous and ridgetty. She put away all she could; hid the scales and weights and removed as much as she could out of sight. [13]   Tom looked on at these preparations rather gloomily; but Anne took courage and went on. She took out their Sunday clothes all in readiness as she used to do and though tired when she went to bed late that night she felt lighter at heart than she had for some time. But when we have allowed ourselves to do wrong for any time we must not expect that it will be easy and smooth for us to alter just when we please. It will be hard at first nor shall we feel always that peace which the consciousness of doing right is expected to bring. This is our punishment and we should receive it humbly.   The next morning Anne shut the door and dressed herself and children for church. Soon came a dirty ragged little girl for a pound of candles. "The shop is not open to day my dear" said Anne quite boldly; and she could not help feeling how much better it was to have one's children clean and neat as her own were.   So far it was well and little Johnny sat down and began saying over the commandments which he was learning for school.   Then came a knock at the door. "See who it is Tom" said Anne who was in the bed-room tying on her bonnet. "It's Mrs. Harris that's who 'tis better not offend her mind - she's out and out our best customer; always pays regular and has long bills." Anne fidgetted at her bonnet strings. "Oh dear dear what shall I do there she's knocking again do speak to her Tom.""Mrs. Thompson" called Mrs. Harris "are you in ?""Yes" said Ann stepping forward "but but - " "Why where are you going hey ? come be quick I want a lot of things to-day."   Tom went into the bed-room: he had promised Anne she should do as she liked; but he could not stand this.   [14]   "We have determined to shut up shop Sundays" said Anne timidly "I was just going to church."  "To church ! shut up shop ! you astonish me! are you mad woman ? do you mean to lose all your business just because you want to be my lady ?"   "No " said Anne "not to be a lady but to go to church."   "Hoity toity heard I ever the like;" and Mrs. Harris laughed loud and rudely: she looked red and angry too.   "Well Mrs. Thompson as you like; but I'm not going to be insulted: if you choose to refuse to serve me you know what you lose. I consider I've been a pretty good customer and this is what I call downright uncivil."   Here Tom put out his head and with an expressive gesture intimated his wishes to Anne.   Poor Anne! she stood in perplexity. It was a dear loss indeed if Mrs. Harris left them; her resolution began to waver; she was going on towards the counter when as she passed her children as they sat on the bench she heard John saying to himself "Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day &c." Then quick as lightning came back her old mother's words; she could almost fancy she saw her standing before her. Had Anne refused to listen to her conscience then it is awful to think what might have been the consequence; but she did listen: her little boy's voice "Remember the sabbath day" rang in her ears; she stopped. "I'm very sorry I hope you'll not take it ill in me Mrs. Harris but I cannot serve on Sundays any more."   The effort of saying this brought the colour into Anne's face - Mrs. Harris flounced out of the shop - Tom swore that her cursed nonsense had ruined them - and poor Anne sank on the bench in a flood of tears. Tom refused to go to church so she set off very sorrowfully with the children. Mr. Martin was not there so she had not even the comfort of feeling that he would observe she had minded his advice. The day was spent sadly and Anne felt that it is far more difficult to climb up the hill again after slipping down than to go on steadily every day. [15]    CHAPTER VII.  The following week Anne secretly hoped would bring Mr. Martin; she felt it would be a comfort; but he did not come and she had a great deal to bear from the remarks made by idle gossiping persons; for Mrs. Harris had taken care to spread the story and every one wanted to know about it. Some turned up their noses and talked of hypocrisy and trying to appear better than other folks and some said it was only just laziness that she might take holiday on Sunday.   Tom still seemed annoyed and one day after meeting Mrs. Harris coming out of another store and being abused by her in no measured terms he said he could stand it no longer and they must leave the place; he had no idea of being laughed at or pointed at.   Poor Anne! all this was very trying and she almost felt inclined to give up the point but just then she caught sight of the Prayer Book as it lay on the shelf and that brought in thoughts which drove the others out. As far as she could reckon up there would be a great loss this week; so she determined to go and apply to Mrs. Jenkins for fine washing. Her application was successful; she had a few things to try how she could do it and she was obliged to rise earlier in the morning in order to get them done.   When Saturday evening came she put on her bonnet and went round to some of the neighbours and asked if they should be wanting tea sugar or candies as if they did she would weigh it out and send it down for the shop would be shut on Sunday. One or two said if it was shut on Sunday they could go elsewhere but others said they should be much obliged for her to send it down that evening: and the parcels came so neatly tied and such good weight that they declared after all Anne Thompson was a decent little woman and civil and honest; and they did'nt care if they had got all in before Sunday - it was more comfortable like - and then when they found they had not to go to the shop they had more time on the Sunday and nothing to think of and some of them went to church. [16]  This Sunday no one came but some strange man to the shop and Anne's earnings by her washing nearly made up the loss of the other Sunday customers; so Tom was in a better humour and went with her to church.   Mr. Martin was there and preached on the duty of keeping the sabbath. Anne and Tom both listened eagerly.   When he summed up the vices and consequences that usually attended sabbath breaking Anne trembled. She joined heartily in the prayer after the sermon "That the words she had heard that day might bring forth in her the fruit of good living"&c.    CHAPTER VIII.  ANNE and her husband were now very regular attendants at church. Christmas came Anne had not her new bonnet. They were not so rich as they might have been had Mrs. Harris and the others continued to deal with them; but the little cottage looked cleaner and more comfortable: they had their baked beef for dinner; and as they took a stroll in the evening together they both acknowledged that it was well to have one day in seven to rest and to be able to read the Bible and hear good things in church. "The thoughts last out the week" said Anne. "Yes I often think of them when I'm digging" said Tom: "the other day when I was pruning Mr. Short's vines I minded what the parson said about the vine on Sunday that as we pruned the plants there was finer fruit so it was with us - we must prune ourselves and cut away all that grows out wildly like." [17]  As they were talking a man came up and asked if they were called Thompson and on being informed they were he said he supposed this letter was for them he had just arrived from England and had brought it from Mr. King of Ringford. "Ah that's our clerk and that's from mother" said Anne.   The letter was written by the clerk; it was to tell them that good nurse Gordon had quietly and peacefully breathed her last; that she sent them her last blessing and left them her Bible and what little clothes she possessed.   Upon comparing notes Anne found that her mother had died on the very day on which Mr. Martin called and spoke to her about shutting up the shop on a Sunday. She felt very glad she had by God's grace profited by this visit. She looked upon it as an especial warning of a watchful Providence and she never afterwards felt tempted to break the Fourth Commandment.   This performing one duty helped her on to many others. Going to church opened her mind to other faults and it brought a blessing which the world and its riches could neither give nor take away.   They had trials and disappointments but they knew from whom they came; and Tom and Anne lived to see their children turn out well. No cottage so clean and neat as the Thompsons with its gay little flower border before it. The shop continued to support them and they put into the plate at church every week something towards a real church and as Anne hoped a peal of bells. [18]  Mr. Martin had often called and proved a good friend to them. One day when he was observing how much more comfortable and tidy every thing was about them than in the other cottages and how much more leisure they seemed to have; Anne colored up and said "Ah sir it is you next to God and my poor mother we've to thank. It is all owing to keeping the Sabbath day."   Readers go and do likewise.    HANNAH AND ANNE SANDFORD; or THE QUICK AND THE SLOW GIRL  "O perfect pattern from above  So strengthen us that ne'er  Prayer keep us back from works of love  Nor works of love from prayer."  CHAPTER I. [21]   HANNAH AND ANNE SANDFORD were the daughters of a small settler in this country. Their brother David who was fourteen years old assisted his father in the farm. Hannah was twelve and Anne eleven. They were old enough to be useful at home in minding the younger children or attending to the dairy and pigs; but their parents were good kind of people and were willing to sacrifice this for the sake of their attending the Church School. John Sandford the father had given his portion towards building the School-house and he felt interested in it; and on a Sunday morning he sometimes walked down and heard Mr. Neville the clergyman catechise the children and explain the Epistle and Gospel for the day. He was a plain honest man; he had not grown quite so rich as many others but that was because he could never find it in his heart to ask more than the right value for an article: he was no great hand at making a bargain. He worked hard all the week; but on Saturday night he laid aside work and anxious thoughts about his crops and cattle just as he laid aside his working-clothes; and on Sunday Sandford came out in his coat and white trowsers and a heart that felt glad and at peace. He was always to be seen in his accustomed corner in church and his conduct while there was very different from some others who seemed to come only to look about them during the prayers; and then if the sermon chanced to hit their fancy listen to it as a matter of curiosity.   Sandford often wished that he could persuade his wife to accompany him or he offered to take it by turns to stay at home and let her come. But Anne Sandford was one of those busy bustling thrifty women who give themselves no time for thought; she said that it "was impossible for her to go to church." She thought her whole duty consisted in making the most of everything keeping her house clean and everything polished and bright. She often blamed her husband for neglecting to turn a penny when he might have done so. And very proud was she of the sum her butter and eggs and poultry brought her in. [22]  Now all this was praiseworthy and right. It is right to be saving and thrifty and neat and clean and for many persons it is right to work hard and have little time for quiet; but it is not right to set our hearts upon these things - it is very dangerous to do so.   The cares of this world are apt to choke the good seed which was planted in our hearts at Baptism just in the same way as weeds in our garden destroy the seed we have put into the ground. We ought to try to balance our duties that is not to be so intent upon being neat and thrifty as to forget the other duty of prayer and thoughts of God; nor to be so fond of thinking and being quiet as to make us forget our daily duties and to be active and industrious.   Those who have the care of a family and farm upon them have necessarily much to do. Their appointed task is to be industrious and active; they have not so much time for reading the Bible and thinking as single persons - or old people or those who by weak health are shut out from hard work. But let them beware of making the world their idol -of forgetting God.   One day in every seven is mercifully set apart for the benefit of all. Every one may on the Lord's day go to church and leave off from the busy duties of the week. [23]   What did our Saviour say to Martha ? She was cumbered about much serving; she was desirous to have everything neat and nice for her Divine Master: it was her duty as mistress of the house to attend to these things. But our Lord knew the danger of it and he said to her kindly but in a warning manner "Martha Martha thou art careful and troubled about many things; but one thing is needful."    CHAPTER II.  Now having told you something of the parents I must turn to Hannah and Anne.   Hannah was tall of her age; she had dark brown eyes and hair and was rather pale. She was slow and quiet in all her ways very timid in manner and preferred sitting under a tree doing nothing to playing about: she was of an humble temper and was very fond of those about her. Her younger brothers and sisters liked her better than Anne though she was not so gay and cheerful with them; but she was never cross or passionate and never spoke quickly or roughly to them: her fault seemed to be indolence. She was not very quick at learning but it was a great pleasure to her; and she liked listening to Mr. Neville better than anything else. Often it brought tears into her eyes as he talked kindly but gravely to them about their different faults. She felt then that she was very wrong in many things: she felt undeserving of any blessing; and so she went on feeling and thinking till she quite forgot to act.  Anne was the opposite to her sister; her blue eyes always looked merry. She was always singing and was as active and quick in her motions as Hannah was slow: she was clever too and learnt very fast. Her mother always praised Anne very much; she was quite in her way - a smart light girl who would do an hour's work while Hannah stood and thought about it. Sometimes Anne was quick and cross in her temper but she never thought much of this; she always excused herself by saying "It was soon over and it was enough to provoke her if any thing went wrong." [24]  From doing so much more than Hannah she was much more like the eldest sister; and by degrees Anne had come to value herself and her services very highly and to look down upon Hannah as a poor spiritless creature. And so I believe did her mother; but her father encouraged Hannah and said "she would do by- and-by and that she was a good child and very obedient and dutiful."   When this was said it always brought tears into Hannah's eyes. She felt very grateful to her father and wished to show it. It made her very happy for the moment to think that her father loved her; but then half-an-hour afterwards instead of busying herself about something that would please her parents and trying to throw off her slow way she would sit and think to herself "Ah! Father only said this out of kindness; he did not mean it - really. No one can like me such a poor silly creature!" And then she made herself quite miserable with her thoughts whereas she ought to have been grateful for having what she felt she didn't quite deserve: she ought to have been cheerful and have begun at once to try and conquer her faults which weighed so heavily on her. [25]     CHAPTER III.  ONE day that Mr. Neville rode by Sandford's house Mrs. Sandford complained a great deal of Hannah's indolence. She said that she was so unhandy about everything and so slow that it was less trouble to do it herself.   "I am very sorry to hear this" said Mr. Neville "I thought that Hannah was a dutiful child."  "She's not to say undutiful sir neither" said Mrs. Sandford; "she never gives me a pert word and always does just as she's bid. I've nothing to complain of in her conduct or temper; but she'll be fit for nothing if she grows up so slow and sawny like."   When Mr. Neville reached the school he gave his horse to one of the boys to hold and then took his seat in the great chair.   After some questions were asked of the master he told the children to open their Bibles and read the 10th verse of the 9th chapter of Ecclesiastes. "Hannah Sandford do you read it" said Mr. Neville; and she read it. He then talked to them a great deal about this verse and told them how necessary it was to remember this : - To do everything as well as we can; to do it heartily as unto God - not in a half way lazily and indifferently but as if our performing this duty be it ever so trifling was to show how real and earnest we are in our desire to be good. Much more he said which I cannot repeat here. He did not allude to any one particularly by name but Hannah applied it all to herself: she knew that her fault was not doing things with all her might. She thought they were very beautiful words and that she should always remember them. Anne too thought that it was suitable to Hannah and she felt proud that it was not for herself. [26]   That evening when they returned home Anne was quicker than ever; she laid out the tea-things and made up the fire and swept the ashes away and began brightening the metal tea-spoons all the time feeling how good and useful she was and despising Hannah for being so different.   Mrs. Sandford said "There's Anne as usual always busy and putting things to rights and Hannah I suppose is doing nothing."   Hannah was sitting in the corner behind the door out of sight and she was intent on darning some stockings which she knew that her mother wished to be done. She said nothing; she felt she deserved all her mother said but she wished very much to do better and she worked very busily till tea time. After tea she took up the cups intending to wash them but Anne snatched them from her and said "Oh la! let them alone you are so slow I'll do them while you are looking at them." Hannah was sorry and hurt for she had begun to try and do better. This checked her and answering nothing she walked outside the hut and sat upon a log. Here with her hands on her face and elbows on her knees she sat. She looked up to see the sun go down; and then the white clouds with their bright pink edges and the soft colour of the sky made her look longer. "Oh! how glorious how beautiful" thought she; and then the verses in the Psalms came into her head which spoke of the sun: "In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun which cometh forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber and rejoiceth as a giant to run his course. It goeth forth from the uttermost part of the heaven and runneth about unto the end of it again; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof."   The pleasure which this bright and glorious scene gave her reminded her of Mr. Neville. Whenever he spoke of serious things or whenever she heard him in church Hannah felt the same kind of pleasure the awe and the admiration which it now gave her to see the sun set. It was in Hannah's nature to look up to people and to cling to them very much as the creepers we see throw their long tendrils round a tree or a fence or anything which can support them. She sat a long time thinking of Mr. Neville and of all the good words she had heard from him; and then the advice which he had given them that very day came into her head and as her tears flowed she resolved to persevere and try to mend - to try to be more industrious and active like Anne. [27]    CHAPTER IV.  NEXT Sunday was the first Sunday in Lent; and Mr. Neville explained to them what Lent was and why our Church has appointed it to be kept. That as our Saviour for forty days retired into the wilderness and fasted and became subject to temptation that we might follow His example; so we ought to fast and watch and pray. We ought to humble ourselves and examine our hearts and try to correct whatever is wrong; that when the great festival of Easter draws nigh - that day on which Our Saviour rose from the dead and ascended into heaven - we may be able to rejoice and have hope in His resurrection; and be able with clean hearts and subdued tempers to partake of the Lord's Supper which is offered to every one on that day.   No one can properly and wholly rejoice in Easter who has not in some way striven to take up his cross during Lent - who has not in some especial manner denied himself and in thoughts accompanied our Lord through the period of His sufferings whilst on earth. [28]  Mr. Neville spoke a great deal about self-denial - denying ourselves in little things - seeking to please others rather than ourselves - denying ourselves in our pleasures as well as in our food. He said that even children could do this. God gave every one of us many opportunities for denying ourselves. The withstanding any particular temptation - watching ourselves strictly not to run in the way of temptation - setting a watch on our words and even our thoughts - bearing with other people's temper - submitting to be found fault with when we feel we do not quite deserve it and not indulging in any favorite habits. All this was a way of taking up the cross and denying one's self. He hoped they would all try to do this and then Lent would not have been in vain to them: and he hoped they should all be able to rejoice together at Easter.   Before the School broke up that day he mentioned that he wished them all if possible to wear their new frocks which they had been saving money for on Easter Sunday. He liked the old custom of putting on new and best clothes on that day; and he hoped they would all make their frocks themselves which would prove them not to have been idle.   From school they all went to church and then returned to their respective homes. There was only one service at this church as Mr. Neville had to go and do duty at some distant place besides. The Sandfords' home was full two miles from church; it was a pleasant walk almost all the way through the bush; and now that it was not hot weather they enjoyed it. Hannah was inclined to linger and enjoy the green look of everything or to pick some of the blossoms which grew in the way; but Anne did not care for all this she wanted to be back she said. Hannah recollected what she had just heard about self-denial and she began to walk on so fast that Anne was quite out of breath and wondered what had come over Hannah. "Oh" said she to herself "she is thinking about her new frock and she's afraid that may be mother'll let me choose instead of her." [29]  In the evening Sandford told the girls they might take a walk with him to a neighbour's if they liked it; but Mrs. Sandford said the calves must be fetched in first. Anne was very anxious to see Jane Grove to whose house her father was going so she said "Oh never mind the calves I'll put them up when I come back."   Hannah liked a walk with her father on a Sunday evening better than any thing but she recollected about "self-denial;" so she took off her bonnet and put it away and begun tying on her blue pinafore. "So you're not going this evening?" said her father. "La no" returned Mrs. Sandford "she's too lazy she'd rather sit on a log and gaze at the stars or the sky any day."  Nothing more was said. Anne the two younger children and their father set off; and when they were out of sight Hannah went out to drive the cows in. This was a matter of some difficulty to her; as fast as she got the calves in they ran out again before she could get the slip rails up. At length in running very fast after one she stumbled over a log and tore her frock and pinafore sadly - meanwhile all the other calves scampered off. Mrs. Sandford coming out said "well how mortal clumsy you are to be sure! such a difference between two girls in the same family! why Anne would have had them in in five minutes."   Mrs. Sandford now went after them herself; and Hannah sat down with the baby thoroughly convinced she was a most unfortunate clumsy little girl. The baby was rather cross and Hannah had to walk about with it and do all sorts of things to amuse it: at last it was tired out and Hannah laid it in the cradle; and then she sat down by it and began her favorite custom of thinking. [30]  That night Hannah felt more cheerful and happy than usual. This was because she had really and in good earnest tried to conquer herself. She kept this up in little things every day: sometimes she forgot herself but never for long; and as she was always in the habit of adding the Sunday's collect to her other prayer this brought back the remembrance that it was "Lent" every morning and evening.    CHAPTER V.  As it drew towards Easter there was some consultation about the new frocks. Mrs. Sandford who had a very good taste had chosen some neat grey stuffs which would be serviceable through the winter but she did not buy them; she wished the girls to go to the store and get them for themselves.   Anne however thought that grey would look too plain by the side of Jane Grove's smart silk dress and she chose a bright green instead. Hannah did not go with Anne the day she bought hers; she happened to be busy and she thought that a day's delay made no difference.   That evening Anne was busy cutting out her frock: her mother called to her "Anne put away your best bonnet;" but Anne was eager and interested in what she was doing and did not move. Meanwhile the puppy found its way into the bedroom seized the bonnet and very quietly amused himself with pulling it to pieces.   When Anne looked up from her work and saw that the puppy had something playing with she ran to take it from him. "Goodness me he's got my bonnet my best bonnet; he's torn it to bits; Oh what shall I do!" and then she kicked the puppy and sent it off howling. Her mother was very angry and said it was her own fault for being so careless to leave it out; "if it had been Hannah I should'nt have so much wondered but for you who are so neat and careful I must say 'tis too bad." [31]  Anne cried bitterly and her mother said that she would have to wear her old shabby bonnet to church or not go at all for she had no money to buy her another. "Only to think of that nice new frock and that old burnt brown bonnet." said Anne sobbing; "I'll not go at all I should be right down ashamed." Hannah who had come into the room was very sorry for Anne: she thought it an unfortunate accident because Anne was always so very careful; and then only this once she left it out and it was spoilt. Hannah was going to the store this evening to choose her gown and she was to bring home some groceries for her mother. While she was waiting for the woman to take down the grey stuff her eye rested on a row of nice straw bonnets. "I wish Anne could have one of these" thought she. When the woman turned round she enquired the price of them and found that it was two shillings less than what she had for the gown. "The money is all my own" said she; "father said I might do as I liked with it: I can do without a new frock; a clean white pinafore will hide its shabbiness; I don't mind these things so much as Anne: she's got the character for being so neat and tidy 'twill vex her sadly to wear that dirty bonnet and no one will notice it in me." As these thoughts ran through her head the grey stuff was put upon the counter: it was very pretty very tempting just the color that would please Mr. Neville; [32] but she pushed it aside and begged to see the bonnets: and choosing a nice one she pinned it carefully up in her handkerchief and without taking another look at the pretty grey stuff she took her mother's parcel and walked towards home.  They were all very busy attending to a foal which had in some way injured itself when she arrived. No questions were asked about the gown; and Hannah carefully hid her treasure intending to choose a good time for surprising her sister. Two days after this Mr. Sandford said "Hannah what is become of your frock? I hav'nt seen you working at it; you'll be behind hand as usual." "I did not buy any" said Hannah. "Not buy any! well what vagary is this? I thought you always wished to please Mr. Neville. I suppose it is old tricks again to avoid the trouble of sewing at it." Hannah did not like to say what she had done it looked like boasting so she did not make any answer; but when Anne began the subject again as they were going to bed Hannah said rather quickly "It is not from laziness." Then she recollected about self-denial and was sorry for being hurt and annoyed. She wished to take out the bonnet and show it at once to Anne but she thought "No I've been angry; I will deny myself to-night." So she merely begged Anne not to think it was laziness and she should know the reason soon. She went to bed.    CHAPTER VI.  THE next day was Good Friday and going to school and church occupied Hannah's thought so much that she for a time forgot all about the bonnet. On this solemn day she attended more than she had perhaps ever done to the prayers. Her daily practice of watching herself and trying to deny herself which she had now kept up since Lent began helped her on this day to feel all that Mr. Neville had said more deeply. And as they walked home thinking of the sermon which was adapted to the day she felt grave and thoughtful. She fancied she had better put off showing the bonnet till to-morrow: it did not seem suitable just then to introduce the subject. [33]  In the evening her father desired the girls to repeat as well as they could all Mr. Neville had said to them in school for he was not able to go from home so early to-day. Hannah remembered nearly every word but she was timid and shrunk from repeating what appeared to her so good and beautiful. Seeing her hesitation Anne began; and as she too had a good memory she gave very tolerably the substance of all their good minister had said. "Well now I should like to have that down in writing" said their father when Anne had ended. "Hannah you are the best and quickest writer try what you can do." Hannah obeyed very cheerfully: she wrote a very good free hand and finished her task before bed-time.   "Thank you my dear" said her father; "I thought you knew all about it as well as Anne." "Why she's just heard me repeat it hasn't she ?" said Anne who had been so long accustomed to receive praise that she was jealous of losing any. "Aye so she has; but her words are not quite like yours Anne: and there's some good things here which you didn't mention. I'm thinking this is most nigh Mr. Neville's explanation after all." Hannah went to bed very happy: she was glad to have pleased her father; and she was looking forward to the next morning with great pleasure. She kept awake till she saw Anne was asleep and then she pinned the bonnet to the curtain by Anne's side. [34]    CHAPTER VII.  Of course Anne was much surprised and much delighted when she saw the nice new bonnet and heard it was for her. She was a little uncomfortable however; for she felt it would be right to say how she got the bonnet that it might account for Hannah's having no frock; and then she knew that it must bring out the story of her own carelessness and untidiness which occasioned the destruction of her other bonnet. Anne was very proud of being regularly neat and tidy: she liked being thought so by others. She trusted too much to her own strength and wanted humility. She was careful and tidy not so much because it was right to be so in the sight of God but to be seen of men to obtain credit and praise; and she had gone on so long in this bad dangerous habit that she did many little mean things rather than lose a word of praise - it made her jealous too. She knew and felt that it was a very kind thing of Hannah to give her this bonnet - that it was very generous of her; but she did not like that any one should do better than herself: so these bad feelings prevented her from thanking Hannah very heartily. Hannah however did not notice this; for she knew that she always found it very difficult to thank people when they were kind: she judged Anne by herself. Nothing was said about the bonnet that day. Anne did not mention the subject even to her mother; and of course Hannah did not. The next morning Anne came down dressed in her new green gown. Her mother remarked her bonnet and when she heard about it she said "Well it was kind to be sure in Hannah; but she was always kindly natured and it was more the pity she was so dull and slow." Sandford said "She is a good girl; and I dare say this gives her as much pleasure as a new frock." Anne didn't half like all this but she had expected more to be said about it. Hannah thought it was quite enough and drew her father's attention to Anne's frock: it looked very pretty and was nicely made for Anne was clever at her needle. "Well I'm glad you've got green" said Sandford. "Easter always falls in Spring in England and then everything is green. I've often missed it here; for the young green leaves and buds seemed to be rising out of death and spoke words to us as well as the Prayer Book." Hannah felt this was a very good thought and she kept it in her mind as she walked to school. This made her forget her shabby frock entirely; nor did the recollection of it return till Mr. and Mrs. Neville began to remark and praise some of the other girls. They both said Anne's was very pretty and made very neatly and they were glad to see she was so industrious. When it came to Hannah's turn she kept rather behind the others. She blushed up for she thought Anne would say why Hannah had no frock; and Hannah was as shy of public praise as Anne was fond of it. [35]  "Well Hannah no new frock ?" said Mr. Neville;"how is this ?" "But she looks so neat and clean with that white pinafore" said Mrs. Neville kindly "that she does as well without it; no doubt she had some good reason for it." Nothing further was said. Anne and Hannah both felt relieved though from different causes; and the usual duties of the school were attended to.   Lent had now passed away but the advantages and blessings of it did not pass away in those who had tried to keep it well. [36]  Hannah did not give up her attempts to conquer her faults; from that time forth she persevered till at last no one - not even her mother could find fault with her for want of industry. She never could be quite as quick as Anne but she made up for it by being more steady and pains-taking. She still loved to sit and watch the sun or to think of Mr. Neville or of any good and glorious thing she had ever heard of; but she did not often indulge herself. And by degrees she found that even when most busy pleasant and good thoughts stole in; and she was far more cheerful now that she tried to mend in earnest instead of only thinking about it.   I am sorry to say that Anne's faults were not so easily corrected. The great reason was that she had never felt herself to be very wrong; she had trusted to herself; she had been vain of her good qualities. When conscience told her that she ought in fairness and truth to have told every one of her sister's kindness she stifled the still small voice and afterwards it did not speak much. Jealousy and vanity and self-esteem grew upon her.   No wonder then that Anne did not improve clever and quick as she was. And no wonder that Hannah did improve though naturally slow and indolent; for God giveth grace unto the lowly.  At the distance of twenty miles from the mouth of the river and from thence to the point where the river ceases to be navigable the brush land is interspersed with small alluvial plains clear of trees and varying in extent from fifty to a hundred acres. These clear patches of ground possess all the exuberant fertility of the brush land and have now been cultivated for several years by squatters (the MacLeay river being beyond the boundaries). This part of the river however has the great drawback of giving ague to those residing there which is not to be wondered at when one considers the immense extent of the surrounding swamps. This disorder was particularly prevalent among the cedar sawyers who led a life compared with which the life of the lumberers or wood-cutters in Canada is civilization itself. These men are generally convicts who have become free by servitude; they live in pairs in the dense dark brushes; their habitation being merely a few sheets of bark temporarily piled together as they are continually moving in search of fresh cedar Here they live exposed to the myriads of noxious insects with which the brush abounds whilst not a breath of air can reach them through the entangled mass of surrounding vegetation.  The cedar dealers furnish them from time to time with salt provisions flour tea and sugar; and every three or four months the sawyers travel down to the cedar dealers who live at the mouths of the rivers for a settlement of their accounts. As these latter individuals are not remarkable for delicate scruples of conscience they generally settle the balance due to the sawyers in a very summary way. They take care to have a good assortment of clothing tobacco &c. in their huts with which they furnish the sawyers at an advance of about three hundred per cent. on the Sydney prices: this with a cask or so of rum and wine to enable the sawyers to have a fortnight's drinking bout generally balances their accounts. The scenes I have witnessed at the MacLeay river on these occasions surpass all description. Men and women (for many of the sawyers have wives) lying day and night on the bare grass in a state of intoxication and only recovering to renew their orgies; casks broken in and the contents passed round in buckets; men fighting; native blacks who have been supplied with liquor yelling and screeching like demons under the influence of alcohol. Such are a few of the accompaniments of the cedar sawyers' drinking bouts. At length when they have drank enough to balance their account they wend their way once more to the brushes with their rations there to remain until the next time of settlement.  The cedar is cut in square logs on which the cedar dealer strikes his initials with a branding hammer; the logs are then launched into the water by the aid of bullocks and afterwards rafted down to the vessels to be conveyed to Sydney. [180]  The cedar is employed in Sydney for every purpose to which deal is generally applied; and is also sited for all kinds of cabinet work as it is of a handsome grain and colour.  There is one feature in colonial society (at least in that of a new colony like Port Phillip) which gives it a life and spirit which you do not find at home except in the capitals of Europe. This arises from the variety of the materials of which it is composed and from the different views the different knowledge and experience of men differently educated whose lives have been passed in different scenes in different professions and in different parts of the globe. If you want to hear the particulars of some Chinese custom probably your next neighbour can inform you; a second illustrates an argument on draught by a description of the mode of harnessing dogs in Greenland; a third has personally inspected the isthmus of Panama and can give you an opinion as to the practicability and expense of cutting it through; while from a fourth you may learn all the details of the Niger expedition. You see a pale and delicate but resolute-looking man - he was the first who made the dangerous experiment of taking cattle overland to Adelaide; he opposite you with a quiet expression and mild blue eye is one of the most determined and adventurous explorers and the best bushman in the country; that other florid and rather effeminate-looking youth has gone through dangers and surmounted difficulties which would appal many a stout heart; and so on of the rest for there are Few who have not had occasions to try them when they had nothing else to depend on for the preservation of their lives but their own courage and perseverance.  The labouring population may be divided into two classes the old hands and emigrants. The old hands are men who having been formerly convicts (or lags as they are generally termed) have become free by the expiration of their sentences. Some of these men came over in charge of the stock originally brought from Van Diemen's Land and Sydney at the first settlement of the colony and many have since followed them. As a body they are a daring energetic hard-working class of men with a considerable fear of infringing the law or at least of the consequences of being made amenable to it but at the same time requiring a strict hand to keep them in order as it is part of their system to impose (or as they term it to try it on) whenever they have a chance of success which of course is most likely with new settlers. If the first encroachment succeeds. they try snottier thus trying it on until if unchecked they establish a system very much calculated for their own comfort and convenience but by no means conducive to their masters' interests. They are generally well acquainted with splitting building fencing and bushwork of all kinds; and from their experience in woodcraft and their knowledge of the resources and expedients of which a man may avail himself or to which he may have recourse in the bush were of the greatest service if not actually indispensable to the first settlers in occupying a new country. [314]  With respect to sheep management there is a great difference between the Sydney and Van Diemen's Land old hands. In Van Diemen's Land the sheep are all reared in enclosed paddocks or fields as in England and the sheep farmers there never attempt the thorough eradication of scab contenting themselves with merely keeping it down as it is called and from the circumstances of the sheep not being enclosed in hurdles at night or fed in flocks during the day it does not spread with the same rapidity or become so formidable a disease as when the contrary is the case. Hence the experience with regard to sheep both of settlers and labourers from thence was of little avail in a country so differently circumstanced as Port Phillip. In Sydney on the contrary the system with regard to both these points was the same as at Port Phillip; and it is from the settlers and old hands of the Sydney district that we have learned most of what we know with respect to the improved management of sheep and the eradication of scab. [315] On the whole the old hands have been of essential service to the country and when kept in order by persons who understand what is their duty and who make them perform it they are useful servants. They are however a disagreeable set of men to deal with; rarely if ever identifying their master's interests with their own but looking upon him as a person to be overreached and imposed on and despising him when he permits them to do so. The person who excites their greatest respect is the man who is alive to their attempts (or as they express it themselves who drops down to their moves) and the highest encomium they can pass on such a one is that there are no flies about him.  They are very fond of change wandering about the country generally in pairs and rarely remaining more than a year in one service. They are to be found more at the distant stations and in newly-settled country where wages are higher and there is more difficulty to contend with than in the more civilized parts where the emigrants have in a great measure superseded them. Still through the whole country the great mass of shearers splitters and even bullock-drivers are old hands. They have a strong esprit de corps which is kept up by their speaking a language so full of cant expressions as to become almost a separate dialect. Their best trait is their liberality towards each other; and indeed when money was more easily made than at present this was carried to a pitch of reckless profusion. When a man was paid his wages or had made a good sum of money by shearing splitting or other job-work he used to go to Melbourne and treat all his friends and frequently keep open house at a public-house for a week or a fortnight together. In this way I have known some of them to have spent upwards of a hundred pounds in that short time; they were of course extensively plundered by the publicans. Now however that money is not so easily earned they are something less lavish but still a large proportion spend all their earnings of several months' or even a year's hard labour in a few weeks' dissipation; and it is a common thing to deposit a sum with the landlord upon the understanding that he is to furnish drink while it lasts. When the money is out they start away in search of new scenes and fresh employment carrying on their backs their heavy packs containing cloths and blankets or kangaroo rug. Two generally travel together who are called mates; they are partners and divide all their earnings.  Though amongst this class of men the standard of morality is very low yet they are not without their rude notions of honour modified however by a kind of public opinion amongst themselves which exercises a considerable influence over their actions. They have a pride in fulfilling their engagements; and when they undertake a piece of job-work they generally adhere faithfully to their contract although it may turn out an unprofitable job. I have known several instances in which money has been lent to them to the amount of two or three pounds and I have never known it not to be repaid; and in general. when a confidence is reposed in them for the performance of any particular service they acquit themselves creditably though as this arises from that pride which urges a man to show himself worthy of being trusted and as it is a feeling which however creditable in itself is inferior to that principle which prompts a man to do his duty irrespectively of all other considerations it might not perhaps be safe to count on a prolonged exertion of this kind. [316] A man guilty of crimes of a mean and unmanly nature is despised by them; and one who robs from his fellows but especially from his mate is regarded as infamous. On the other hand drunkenness and debauchery of any kind are not regarded as crimes indeed to omit an opportunity of getting drunk would be considered a kind of breach of privilege; nor are they very scrupulous on the subject of honesty. if the person injured be not a poor man. Defrauding one not of their own class they seem to regard as a spoiling of the Egyptians. I have always considered the observation of the effects produced on these men by their peculiar position as a most interesting study; and although this effect may be modified by peculiarity of disposition yet I think that I have correctly delineated the leading characteristics of the class.  The emigrants or new hands contrast in some respects very favourably with the class which I have sketched. They are more easily managed have fewer tricks are less fond of change often remaining for a long time in the same situation seeming to become attached to their employers and to take an interest in the property committed to their charge. They are less reckless about money several of them having made considerable savings out of their wages. When they were new in the country the old hands vain of their own knowledge looked down on their inexperience while the emigrants in turn despised them for being convicts: so that it seldom answered to have them on the same station; but now the two classes amalgamate better for the emigrants have had time to gain experience and are able to hold their ground - indeed some of them are in every respect as useful even in those departments which were at first exclusively in possession of the old hands.  THE EXECUTION OF JACKY-JACKY  For his Notorious part in the late Mutiny at NORFOLK ISLAND.  This dreadful mutiny on Norfolk Island occurred on the 1st. of July 1846 and was the result it is believed of the earlier general laxity in administering the law in its full severity and that when this state of affairs was corrected by more efficient officers and constables the greater number of old hands were ripe for mutiny and eyed with scowls the new rules as an infringement on what they considered to be their rights and privileges. The tragedy which therefore had been brewing for some time was enacted under the following circumstances: - On the evening before the fatal day the convicts' billies or tin kettles which were regarded as private property and were used for making their tea (not a Government ration issue it should be mentioned but a hard-to-come-by luxury) were with one fell swoop cleared from the mess-room by the constables acting under orders and placed in the store-room for security.  On the following morning when the doors of the prison were unlocked a strong party of prisoners broke open the door of the store and took possession of the tin kettles but disturbed nothing else although it appeared quite evident that the majority did not intend to stop at this. However everything appeared tranquil until after breakfast when one of the party named William Westwood but better known by the sobriquet of Jacky jacky headed a mob of some twenty prisoners all of whom were armed with staves and bludgeons and having entered the cook house Jacky killed a free overseer named Smith with a single blow of his cudgel on which the gang again returned to the lumber yard and in making their egress through a covered archway leading out to the mechanics' shops where there was a watchman stationed on duty West-wood on passing him spattered his brains against the brickwork near which he had been sitting couched and paralysed with fear.  The next move was in the direction of the lime-kiln huts where some constables were stationed. Westwood having by this time exchanged his brain-spattered bludgeon for an axe entered the hut and clove the skull of one of the constables upon which another constable who happened to be in bed and witnessed the occurrence exclaimed Mind I saw who did that! He had scarcely uttered the sentence however when Westwood struck him down to the earth and afterwards literally cut him to pieces. The party then returned to the lumber yard and within a few minutes Westwood and some others of his gang were taken to the gaol by the military.  While the murderers were at the lime-kiln huts another party headed by a stone-cutter named Thomas Mason entered the overseer's cabin where they abused and ill-treated several of the sub-overseers but murder was not intended the principal object being to find a character known as Dog Brown and who during their search had concealed himself beneath the table which was covered over with bags. [242] Had they found him they would have killed him but he was fortunate enough to elude their search by hiding himself under a bag of potatoes which rested upon his back as he stooped against the edge of the table. After this they returned to the lumber yard.  The men who followed Westwood had not the slightest conception that their leader meditated anything further than the chastisement of a few of the old dogs as they termed the prisoners who were placed over them as flagellators constables and watchmen. But it was not so with Westwood. He contemplated murder from the first although he did not state his intention to his followers who from their being in his company at the time were placed in the same position as the ringleader.  Jacky-Jacky was generally speaking a quiet inoffensive man but he had previously been under arms in the bush in New South Wales for which he had been transported to Van Diemen's Land and while at Glenorchy (a prison depot there) he again took to the bush but was soon apprehended and transported to Norfolk Island for ten years. All his acquaintances believed him to be tired of his life and the terrible circumstances just narrated prove not only that fact but that he had been flogged goaded and tantalised till he was reduced to a lunatic and a savage.  The overseer named Smith who was killed in the cook-house left a wife and family on the Island. Morris who fell at the gate had timely notice given him to get out of the way but it has been currently reported that he became so terrified on hearing of his danger that his legs refused their office. He was a native of Launceston in England and had been a convict overseer at Port Arthur where he rendered himself notorious for his cruelty and treachery to prisoners. His appearance was not very prepossessing - in fact he was a constable all over.  Westwood was now in gaol after committing four murders but at his execution the only thing he expressed any regret for was the killing of the constable in the bed who by his unguarded remark had sealed his own fate. During the next few days there were nearly two hundred men confined to the gaol and boat-house shed on suspicion of being concerned in the murders but they were all subsequently released with the exception of twelve.  Before any account of these dreadful occurrences could reach Hobart Town Mr. Burgess the chief police magistrate arrived for the purpose of adjudicating on several crimes and misdemeanours but he considered the recent case of mutiny was beyond his jurisdiction. The trials therefore had to await the arrival of a fresh commission a period of three months at which time Valentine Fleming Esq (Attorney-General of Her Majesty the Queen) together with Fielding Brown Esq Barrister-at-Law arrived on the Island the latter in the capacity of judge.  The cells of the Island's gaol at this time were very much crowded in consequence of which a young man under twenty who had been Confined for quarrelling with his fellow-prisoner was placed in a cell in company with one of Westwood's party known by the sobriquet of the Donkey an old hand from Port Arthur. However in the evening when the wardsman arrived with supper on the cell door being opened Donkey told the constable to come and take this fellow (meaning his companion) out of the cell as he was gammoning dead. On examination life was found to be extinct he having been strangled by Donkey.  The body was removed to the hospital and buried the next morning the case not being investigated as the charge already preferred against Donkey was considered to be quite sufficient to bring him under the care of Mr. White the executioner who never permitted any of his customers to complain of any remissness in attention on his part. The results of the trial were therefore a foregone conclusion.  The death warrants of the murderers having been read and the morning appointed for their execution the twelve souls were launched into eternity! - eleven of whom were morally innocent of the crimes imputed to them they being only in company with Westwood at the time the murders were committed. Shortly after the execution three bullock drays emerged from the gaol yards each bearing four coffins which were all placed in one grave outside the burial ground as the new Commandant would not permit them to be buried in consecrated ground. The whole of the prisoners on the settlement were kept in the lumber yard on that morning they not being permitted to go to work until the bodies were buried.  The following pathetic letter was addressed to the Chaplain the Revd. Mr. Thomas Rogers by Westwood on the eve of his execution: -   "Sir - The strong ties of earth will soon be terminated and the burning fever will soon be quenched. My grave will be a heaven - a resting place for me Wm. Westwood. Sir out of the bitter cup of misery I have drunk from my sixteenth year - ten long years and the sweetest thought is that which takes away my living death. It is the friend which deceives no man:  all will then be quiet: no tyrant will disturb my repose I hope.  WM. Westwood."  Death of Wilson Bushranger and Capture of his Party.  The career of the notorious bushranger Wilson who has so long infested the northern districts has at length been put an end to.  It appears that a party of mounted police consisting of Sergeant Giles one corporal and four privates were in pursuit of the gang of depredators for a long period when the sergeant resolved to divide his party and send Corporal Worsley and troopers Joyce and Maher to the ranges at the head of the Clarence River while he with the other two troopers proceeded to the Darling Downs where a robbery had been just before committed. The prudence of this step was apparent from the fact that Worsley and his party came up with Wilson and his gang and that in a very sharp affray Wilson was killed and one of his companions wounded and that another of the gang is in custody.  The details of the affray will be gathered from the following letter from the corporal to the commandant of the mounted police showing that the conduct of the police appears to have been exceedingly meritorious for the perseverance with which they pursued the lawless scoundrels.  "Yulgillar 15th of May 1846.  "Sir - I beg to state for your information that on the 7th of May we were informed that the bushranger Wilson and his party of whom we were in pursuit had robbed the station of Mr Bloxsome of Rostion. The next morning we went after them and took an aboriginal black with us to track; we got on it on the morning of the 9th and followed them over mountains and through scrubs so thick that we were obliged to cut our way through them with our knives.  'We fell in with them on the morning of the 12th. at half past eight o'clock; we saw their fire from the ridge where we were on; I dismounted the men as I would have been heard with the horses from the bank of the creek upon which they were being very hard and scrubby.  "As we came up the bank they were prepared; I ordered them to lay down their arms but they refused to do so. The bushranger Delaney whom we captured being behind a tree five yards from the bank with a double-barrelled piece he fired at but missed me; when seeing Wilson with a blunderbuss and spring-bayonet attached presented and a double-barrelled gun at his knee I fired at him but missed when Delaney rushed on me and caught me in his arms round the body; I then ordered trooper Joyce as he was close by to do his duty which he did and shot him through the shoulder-blade; I then seeing trooper Maher in front of Wilson without any covering ran immediately to his assistance when Wilson fired his blunderbuss at Maher and shot him in the fleshy part of the thigh and lodged thirteen buckshot in him as he was making for cover. Maher then fired his piece and put a ball in his left elbow. Wilson then ran with his double-barrelled piece still in his hand Maher followed and knocked him down with the butt of his carbine which broke; he got up again and made an effort to cross the creek; I drew my pistol and shot him through the left side. Trooper Maher not being able to move I went to see after the other two bushrangers that we had not seen as they had got into the scrub when we first challenged. At this time the affray was over having lasted one hour. Wilson was severely wounded but lived to half-past three.  "I then mustered all I could find in the camp consisting of eighteen stand of arms six horses four saddles two pack-horses with a quantity of ammunition and other baggage.  "Having one dead and two wounded men and not knowing where we might find a station I thought it best to remain all night as we should have to go all over the mountains.  "On the morning of the 13th we started and made an out station of Mr Ogilvie's on the Clarence River about twelve miles distance where I left the wounded in charge of trooper Joyce and proceeded to the head station for assistance. Next morning I returned with a dray when Joyce reported that one of the bushrangers who had escaped was lurking in the vicinity where a shepherd brought him some meat to detain him until I should come back. I then rode off and apprehended him in a gully about three-quarters of a mile from the station with a double-barrelled gun in his possession.  "We brought the dead and wounded on the dray to the head station where J. Melton Esq J.P had arrived in the absence of the Commissioner of Crown Lands who had been sent for but was out in pursuit of the party we had taken.  "We could get no medical aid up to the present but I proceed to-morrow to New England for Dr Frail who is the nearest medical gentleman to this place Trooper Maher is not mortally wounded neither is prisoner Delaney but they are not in a fit state to be removed. Mr Melton took down the depositions to-day the 15th when we interred Wilson.  (Signed) Corporal Worsley  Mounted Police."  1400 doubly-convicted prisoners the refuse of both penal colonies (for the worst offenders were sent here from Van Diemen's Land as well as New South Wales) were rigorously coerced all day and cooped up at night in barracks which could not decently accommodate half the number. In every way their feelings were habitually outraged and their self-respect destroyed. They were required to cap each private soldier whom they met and even each empty sentry-box that they passed. [143] If they met a superior they were to take their caps off altogether and stand aside bareheaded in a ditch if necessary and whatever the weather till he passed in most cases without taking the smallest notice of them. For the merest trifles they were flogged ironed or confined in gaol for successive days on bread and water. The offences most severely visited in them were at the same time chiefly conventional those against morals being but little regarded compared with those against an unreasonable discipline. Thus the most horrid devices with acts of brutal violence or of dexterity in theft and robbery were detailed to me by the officers as being exhibited among them with little direct censure and rather as anecdotes calculated to astonish and amuse a new-comer - while the possession of a pipe a newspaper a little tea some article of clothing not furnished by the Government or the omission of some mark of respect or a saucy look or word or even an imputation of sullenness were deemed unpardonable crimes. They were also fed more like hogs than men. Neither knives nor forks nor hardly any other conveniences were allowed at their tables. They tore their food with their fingers and teeth and drank for the most part out of water-buckets. Not more than about two-thirds of them could even enter their mess-shed at a time; and the rest whatever the weather were required to eat as they could in an open shed beside a large privy. The Island had been fifteen years a penal settlement when I landed yet not a single place of worship was erected on it. It had been seven years a settlement before even a clergyman was sent. There were no schools no books; and the men's countenances reflected faithfully this description of treatment. A more demoniacal looking assemblage could not be imagined and nearly the most formidable sight I ever beheld was the sea of faces up-turned to me when I first addressed them.  In the strong language cited by the Rev. Dr. Ullathorne as having been addressed to him by an unhappy victim of the system of the Island itself "When a prisoner was sent to Norfolk Island he lost the heart of a man and got that of a beast instead."  I sought generally by every means to recover the men's self respect to gain their own wills towards their reform to visit moral offences severely but to reduce the number of those that were purely conventional to mitigate the penalties attached to these and thus gradually awaken better and more enlightened feelings among both officers and men. [144] I built two churches [...] . distributed books - gave prizes for assiduity - was unwearied myself in my counsels and exhortations wherever I went - and went everywhere alone and unattended showing confidence and winning it in return. I also gave every man a small garden which was a boon to the industrious but none to the idle: those whom I camped out in the bush I encouraged also to rear pigs and poultry thereby improving their ration and still more infusing into them by the possession of property that instinctive respect for it which makes it safer in a community than any direct preservatives. I thus also interested my police who were all prisoners in the maintenance of order their situations which were much coveted being made to depend on their success. I gave the messes knives forks a few cooking utensils tin pannekins &c. I allowed the overseers police and other first-class men to wear blue jackets and other articles of dress not portions of usual convict clothing; and nothing contributed more than this to raise their spirits revive their self-respect and confirm their good purposes. And on one occasion I gave a glass of rum-punch to all hands to drink the Queen's health and had two plays acted the same evening - one of the wisest and best-considered acts of my whole administration and which has been the most pertinaciously censured.  It appears from the testimony of all the witnesses examined - whether favourable or unfavourable to the maintenance of a high minimum price - and even from the Despatches of Sir George Gipps himself that the sum of £1 does not in any degree represent the exchangeable value of an acre of land in New South Wales. The declaration of Parliament therefore that land shall not be sold till it realize £1 an acre is a declaration that land shall not be sold till it will realize more than it is worth; in other words that except under very particular circumstances land shall not be sold at all. That such has been the practical effect of the measure will be evident from the following table of the sums realized from the sale of land since the year 1837. [259] [269]  It is also the interest of Government to attract capital. In this also it has signally overreached itself. The principle of a uniform fixed price contains in it this objection that that price must be tolerably high Since upon it alone the Government relies to protect its interests but it has the countervailing advantages of certainty of amount and facility of operation. The principle of sale by auction has not these advantages but it offers to the capitalist the attraction of referring not to any arbitrary standard but to fair competition to fix the value. The Government has rejected all that is attractive in each of these systems and retained only what is repulsive. Enough of the fixed price is retained to make the purchaser sure that he will not get the land cheap; enough of the principle of competition to make him uncertain whether he shall get it at all.  The facilities of steam and railway communication are gradually drawing mankind together and countries possessing wild lands for sale are beginning to enter into competition with each other. It is becoming daily more impossible to regard this as an isolated question. In determining the price of land the competition of other countries ought not to be left out of sight. At the Cape of Good Hope land can be obtained for one-tenth in Canada for one-fourth and as it appears recently in the United States for one-fortieth of the Sum demanded for a like quantity here. In utter defiance of the principles of political economy it is expected that persons will give for our poor and inaccessible land four five ten or forty times the price at which nearer and more accessible land may be obtained. It is assumed that one acre of land in Australia equals in value four in Canada five in the United States ten at the Cape of Good Hope and forty in the territory recently ceded to the United States by the Chacktaw Indians. Your Committee apprehend that as regards the greater part of the lands of this Colony it is perfectly immaterial whether the minimum price fixed be £1 or £20 an acre. The former price is shown by reason and experience to be utterly unattainable and the latter is no more.  Your Committee would wish to be understood as by no means undervaluing the great advantages derived by the Colony from pastoral pursuits but they are desirous of expressing their opinion that the Home Government by prohibiting the sale of land has given an undue stimulus to those pursuits and undue discouragement to agriculture and settled industry. The prohibition of the purchase of land has aggravated that tendency to dispersion which it was designed to counteract. The true policy in the opinion of your Committee is neither to stimulate nor check this tendency to dispersion which is the natural precursor of that state of society in which the tendency to concentration arises. Unhappily the Government has not observed this rule. [261] In its anxiety to concentrate the population it has placed a price on land which rendered it impossible for those who occupied it to occupy as purchasers. The occupation has been conceded the proprietorship has been withheld and thus has the industry of the Colony been forced into the channel most consistent with occupation without title and the policy which ambitiously aimed at forcing the Colonists prematurely be become villagers and agriculturists has resulted in compelling them to become shepherds and herdsmen. Had the prohibitory price thus imposed been the result of a sincere though mistaken conviction your Committee while deprecating its impolicy could not have murmured at its injustice. But it is now notorious in the Colony and can be proved by unquestionable evidence that it was not with a view to the welfare of New South Wales but of South Australia that this obnoxious law was passed. Colonel Torrens and his brother Commissioners the founders of the South Australian Colony felt that it would be impossible to obtain £1 an acre for land there while land of the same quality could be obtained at 5s. an acre here. They felt that whatever were the merits of their scheme it would not bear the test of the free trade principle of competition and they sacrificed without remorse or hesitation the present and actual interests of the older Colony to the future and as it has turned out visionary prospects of the younger. Thus it happens that 200000 persons are impoverished that their interests may not stand in the way of the imaginary interests of 25000; and while Colony after Colony has been emancipated from the £1 an acre system New South Wales has been unable to obtain her deliverance precisely because to her that deliverance would be most valuable. Van Diemen's Land is of too small extent - New Zealand is too distant - to impair by their competition the working of the £1 an acre system in South Australia. If the land of New South Wales were rich the continuance of the price would be a matter of indifference; if the land were small in quantity the reduction of the price would be unimportant; it is the great quantity and poor quality of the land - the very causes which render the high price ruinous to New South Wales - that constitute its principal attractions in the eyes of the South Australian Commissioners.  But happy would it have been for the Colony if the ruin of her Land Fund the dispersion of her people the stoppage of Immigration and the dissemination of a spirit of just discontent had been the only results of this high minimum price. The most unforeseen but by far the most serious result of this prohibitory policy is embodied in the Act of the Imperial Parliament 10 Vic ch. 10 and the Land Orders issued under it which have been referred to your Committee by a vote of the Council. [262]  Your Committee have hitherto considered the minimum price of Crown Land as a separate question; they now proceed to regard it in its collateral effects and to show how the terms on which land is sold influence the tenure on which unsold land is occupied. It was in the power of the Imperial Parliament to enact that land should not be sold for less than £1 an acre but there unfortunately its power stops; it could not make the land worth the sum nor declare because it was unsold it should be unoccupied nor prevent those who thus occupied it from drawing the inferences which their situation naturally suggested. Those inferences were only too obvious and too reasonable. The squatters forced to occupy and forbidden to buy - forbidden by the policy of the Government to acquire lands by purchase and allowed to occupy till that impossible event should take place saw that they had obtained through the impossibility of purchase all that a purchase could have given them and that the Law which rendered these lands unsaleable virtually gave them away to their present occupants. Hence arose a party in the Colony unknown before who began to feel that they had a vested interest in maintaining the prohibitory price as a guarantee that their occupation would never be disturbed. The policy of Sir George Gipps who endeavoured to counteract the growing feeling of security entertained by the occupants of Waste Lands not by abrogating the prohibitory law on which it rested but by an arbitrary strain of the powers of the Executive served only to accelerate the crisis which nothing but a repeal of that law could prevent. The result has been that the Home Government has been induced to take another step in advance and by treating the imagination of £1 an acre as a reality and leasing the Crown Lands to their present occupants till sold at £1 an acre has in a manner alienated the land possessions of the British Crown in New South Wales. The most cursory perusal of the Evidence appended to this Report will satisfy any one that this is the opinion of those alike who approve and who disapprove of the Land Orders; nay more that it is this opinion in which they both agree which induces them to approve or disapprove. The settlers object to these Orders because they confiscate the lands of the Colony; the squatters approve of them because they see no limit to the term of their occupation under them. Be it for good or for evil it should clearly be understood that this is the effect unanimously attributed in the Colony to these Land Orders.  Your Committee now proceed to examine these Orders in detail and first they would observe that if the minimum upset price of an acre is to be maintained the lands are substantially divided by these Orders only into two classes - the confiscated and unconfiscated; the former being equivalent to the intermediate and] unsettled the latter to the settled districts. [263 If land is to remain in the possession of its present occupant till sold at £1 an acre it matters not whether he hold a lease for eight or fourteen years - whether it is liable to be put up at auction at the end of every year or at the end of every fourteenth year - or whether he have or have not a right of pre-emption. It is his and his for ever not because his title is good but because no one will be in a condition to avail himself of its defects. The auction will never be demanded the right of pre-emption will never be exercised for no one will be foolish enough to buy that which is his own already without purchase. The efficacy of the minimum price of £1 an acre in confiscating is so complete that the grant of a renewable lease of fourteen years adds little to it. It is only in the event of a reduction in the minimum upset price that any practical difference will arise between the intermediate and unsettled districts. If that reduction be withheld they may both be treated as one district a district containing lands alienated from the Crown as completely as by the most solemn instrument of sale.  Now what species of ownership do these leases confer? That it is an ownership little short of freehold appears abundantly from the evidence of those who expect to be their recipients. It appears therefore that the danger of abuse is exactly equal in the one case and in the other. The next evil of the system of grants mentioned by His Lordship is that Government must either suffer all desirable land to be permanently appropriated or interfere with the free management of private property; In the present instance Government has done both these things; it has appropriated about 180000000 of acres of land to about 1800 persons and that in a country whose population is not 200000 and it has endowed this favored class with land at the rate of 100000 acres per head in a country where there is one inhabitant to every 100000 acres; this certainly has the appearance of being premature. The Government has coupled this premature appropriation with a regulation prohibiting agriculture which cannot be more aptly described than in the Words of the Despatch "as greatly interfering with that free management of their own property by individuals which is so essential to its improvement". The next evil the Despatch mentions is dispersion; and surely a system which allots on an average 100000 acres to a single individual cannot so far as dispersion is concerned be outdone by the wildest abuse of free grants. Government does not leave men to themselves but enforces dispersion while it thinks it is compelling concentration. Cooperation the division of labor religious and secular instruction are all out of the question. Your Committee may here remark that the above enumerated ill effects of the system of grants however much they may have been felt in other Colonies have been little experienced in Australia. [264] Hitherto this colony has not had to complain of the accumulation of landed property in the hands of the few to the exclusion of the many and of the consequent dispersion and stagnation of improvement. It is only since the establishment of the high minimum price that the Colony has been threatened with these evils and it certainly does strike your Committee as strange to find the minimum price thus advocated on the ground of its tendency to prevent those very disorders of which it is the sole and all sufficing cause.  Your Committee cannot acquiesce in the proposition in the Despatch that a high price of land and the squatting system will mutually support each other. It appears to them impossible the two systems can work efficiently together. They never have done so in this Colony. If the price be high the selling part of the system is in abeyance and the squatting part alone in operation and the effect will undoubtedly be that instead of the high price maintaining the squatting system it will convert it into permanent ownership. Nor will the squatting system maintain the high price since it is obvious that the best way to deter men from acquiring a permanent ownership on hard terms is to give them a temporary occupation on easy terms; if the minimum price be low the former will be the case; if high the latter. In no case can the systems of sale and occupation without sale mutually support each other. Sale is the antagonist of temporary occupation and this in turn the antagonist of sale. If sale be brisk it destroys temporary occupation; if temporary occupation be prevalent it deters sale; they are like the scales of a balance one of which must be depressed if the other be elevated.  Chapter X  TRIPS TO THE NOR'ARD  Yahoos - A half-crazy settler - False alarm - Ruin and death of a settler - Destruction of a flock at sheep-washing by a flood - The flood in the brush - Boating on a plank in the night - Expedient for crossing the river - Rafting cedar down on the flood - Self and mate turning dealers - Drinking-scene - Failure of timber and return to the "home" farm - More books bought - A coasting-craft bought - Universality of nicknames - Capital fall of timber - Our mode of life in the brush - Dangers and hardships of the occupation - Bird's-eye view of our hut and work - Death of my mate's mother and return to the "home" farm  SAWYERS are unavoidably a wandering race in new countries. When the lot of timber required by the settler for his buildings is furnished or when the local bush where the contract with a timber merchant is cut becomes exhausted of sound profitable trees the sawyer must shift his camp. Ours was the former predicament: no further order for the sort of stuff it suited us to cut could be obtained just there; and house-stuff we neither of us liked working on.  At this time the cedar-cutting was going on at a great rate to "the Nor'ard" of Sydney on river one of the tributaries of the Hunter. Thither at length we resolved to proceed taking with us by one of the boats that went as far up the stream as it was navigable our own provisions; and so to set in on the best fall of cedar we could find on government ground near the river bank and cut away till our stock of provisions was exhausted; then bring the plank we had got up to Sydney and sell it on our own account. And this after certain leave takings we accordingly did; taking with us moreover a free man whom we knew to be a hard-working chap as a labourer to fall trees with the axe build the pits clear the roads through the brush bring out the plank give us help at heavy lifts and afford us the needful assistance in all those other difficulties which render cedar-cutting too heavy for only a pair of men. We found a good many pair on the river before us: still we got a very good fall of timber; for it was a capital brush: the trees plentiful of the best size of an excellent species for the cabinetmaker and very good cutters. Some kinds of this timber cut so woolly that working in deep cuts is most laborious; the saw clinging in the cut through the woolliness of the inside so that it is impossible to move it up or down with any impetus. [97] As the loss of impetus in the descending stroke renders necessary the application of much more personal strength such timber is quite the dread of sawyers. Ours this time were fine crisp-cutting trees; and our work went off from the first as light and cheerful as it could do.  The river on the banks of which we now were rises and for a long distance winds to and fro among the mountains of the county of Durham: at length it falls into the Hunter not a great way from the mouth of that stream. It is now well settled; but at the time we were there spoiling it of its cedar only here and there amidst the lonely wilderness was there to be found a settler's farm or stockman's hut. The blacks were occasionally but not often troublesome. The stories they used to tell us about the brush thereabouts being haunted by a great tall animal like a man with his feet turned backwards of much greater however than the human stature and covered with hair and perpetually making a frightful noise as he wandered about alone made me sometimes doubt whether they were themselves really terrified or were merely endeavouring to scare us away; but I very strongly incline to the latter opinion. Be it as it may there was no such consequence. We were too well used to that lonely tree-guarded silence broken only by the clink of the rising saw and to the damp unsunned ground with its thick brown covering of thousandfold rotting rustling leaves to have any very important new sensations to acquire hereabouts. Tree after tree went crashing down before our labourer's axe and breaking a broad opening to the sky around its stump; and pile after pile of square red plank arose in welcome transformation on the spot as our saw did its duty; and road after road stretched straight away from the piles of cedar to the river's edge which as yet ran shallow and full of shoals and falls. Our nearest neighbour of the settler genus was a strange eccentric old sea captain. Apparently when he first commenced settler he had plenty of money with part of which he had bought a herd of cattle. Wherever he went his sword was his inseparable companion - he walked about flourishing it at the trees all day long. He had however more reason for guarding himself from his own people than from any one else; for his overseer was all the time branding lots of his young cattle in his own name whilst the old gentleman gave him credit for being one of the most honest trustworthy fellows on the earth. [98]  The finale may be supposed - he was soon without a feather to fly with. On the other side we had an old major of the army who I believe had a family and was very poor. I heard that when he first took possession of his land he was very well off; but had impoverished himself greatly as gentlemen settlers so very often do by expending their capital on everything but that which really wants doing. They wish to make a complete farm at once and spare no cost to do so: consequently great paddocks are fenced in before there is any stock that needs them; large pieces are cleared and next to nothing cropped; cottages with verandahs are built and the barn and the dairy neglected; and even carriage walks are laid out for carriages whose mere existence is among the most improbable of dreams. A more melancholy lesson than that furnished by the abovementioned two gentlemen and their next neighbour down the river could not be formed by imagination itself.  At length we had exhausted all our provisions and were obliged to buy of our better supplied companions whilst we got down to the water's edge whence it was to be rafted all the plank we had cut. But the flood which was necessary to float our raft over the falls and shallows came not: so with no little reluctance we took another month's provisions into the brush and set to again. This time our pit was close to the river's side on a slightly elevated space of perhaps half an acre. For a few days more nothing of any moment occurred until at length the flood came. Those who have not witnessed one of them can form but an inadequate idea of it from description. The Australian rivers often rise twelve twenty and I think I have heard some even thirty feet in a few hours. When this happens in the night a place may be surrounded perhaps with deep water before any one is aware of his danger. A little while before I came to England I heard of a gentleman who had taken up one of the streams beyond Liverpool Plains a large purchase of sheep and setting himself down on a slightly rising ground on the bank got up his buildings and went on for some time quite unconscious of the imminent danger he was in. At length a sudden and heavy flood came on and he was surrounded by the backwater in the hollows before he was aware. Gradually the vast deluge closed in upon him: he got up into a tree whence after passing many hours without food under alternate rain and violent sunshine he was rescued as the waters subsided only to die bereft of reason. These overwhelming floods are looked for annually or half-yearly and in some seasons come even oftener still. [99] Though they do not do so much damage to life as might be expected the injury they do to property is immense. Not long since in the sheep. washing time I witnessed the destruction of a flock of sheep worth full 500£ in this way. They were camped for the night after washing and until they should get dry on the large clean pebbles of a dry part of the bed of the creek where they had been washed. In the night it thundered heavily and the storm burst in the mountains; down came the flood without an instant's warning and was eight or ten feet deep in as many minutes sweeping sheep and hurdles away together and scattering them over the inundated plains below.  Similar in kind though not so deeply disastrous was the adventure that next awaited us in the brush. When we went to bed at night in our little tent hut we left the fire in front cheerfully blazing with the pink lambent flame that so beautifully flickers from the green cedar in combustion. Our tools and cooking utensils lay strewed as usual within and just without the hut or hung on the lower branches of the saplings close about the fire. Our bed if indeed a sawyer's accommodations in that respect can be called a bed extended across the inner end of the hut on four or five of our outside slabs laid on a cross head log and another foot log each about six inches thick; where by the bye it may not be quite inappropriate to remark that they used to get so damp or more correctly wet from the moisture of the perfectly soddened ground not 10 inches off that if held to the fire they would steam like a copper for a good half hour. I always imagined that after an attempt to dry them at the fire they felt thrice as wet as otherwise. Every thing was just as usual when we went to bed; the book I had been reading by the light of the fire after I had lain down I had deposited on the edge of the planks at my side; I went to sleep with my eyes fixed on the fire to a lullaby I had got pretty well used to - R-'s composed bass snore. The day had been sunny and the night was temperate and still; there was in short no indication whatever where we were of falling weather. Some such however there must have been somewhere for about an hour after midnight I was disturbed by R- shaking me and felt on the instant of waking a most unforgetable sensation - I felt as if I were lying stretched on a cold dungheap. Wide awake in a moment I could see by the light of a small flame that was still playing about an elevated part of the wood at the fire water in the hut and out of the hut. [100] Before I could take a second look my mate jumped over me and was in it nearly knee-deep and wading out of the hut. No sooner was he there than he put his head in again shouting "Be alive mate; it's coming down as hard as it can come; it'll be over our heads in half an hour." Out I sprang; my shoes were gone; I had left them at the front of the hut and probably they had floated off among the very first things my straw hat also bearing them company. My clothes were safe for I had put them under my head - they are the bushman's pillow; but they were so wet that putting them on was like getting in among the clothes in a washing tub. By this time our little remnant of fire was nearly gone: R-  who was more used to such adventures than I had floated up to the hut a very large flat plank of cedar which green as it may be always swims well; and on it he placed the little live charcoal that remained freshening and feeding it with some dry stuff from the roof of the hut. By his direction I waded across to the pit and drawing the saw which the torrent was already sweeping against and bending out of the cut I hung it up and the cross-cut saw with it as high in a tree as I could reach to be fetched at our leisure. Our remaining provisions being on the ground were all spoiled we knew; but the blankets we got out; the bed we left for it was of wool and wet as it was would have sunk us. Drawing our plank up to a tree we got on it sitting with the fire between us; the current was so strong even amidst the thick brush where we were that it was all we could do together to hold on to a sapling apiece and to keep our plank from being swept away. Where we were no dead timber of any size could be swept against us; but we could hear it striking together and grinding and crashing in the' river a few yards off. The little light we had dazzled our eyes so that the sky seemed a vast dark void. The rats swam boldly up and got on the plank with us and numbers of spiders and centipedes guided no doubt by the fire were crawling in all directions over both us and it. In this state we had to continue at least three good hours; then day began to dawn. We knew we were rising by getting more and more near the branches but we had no notion how deep the water had become around us. Our fire was out for want of fuel; and as the deep obscurity of the brush began to be dissolved by the dawn we could discern no vestige of our hut; and presently when the light so far increased that we could see as far as the pit we discovered that the water was up to the bottom of the log that was on so that there was about 6.5 feet depth. [101] Although it was now light we were nearly as bad off as ever. The sounds of such a deluge in the night in the midst of the brush are certainly cowing to the spirits; but one knows so well that the danger except from actual drowning is next to nothing and there are such plentiful means for escaping by getting up the trees that after all it makes no very serious impression. The loneliness and fear of starving were what most affected me: we could not tell but it might last for many days; and as long as it lasted there seemed no hope of getting across the river. On this side we were so surrounded by brush that any attempt to get our plank through to the high ground was out of the question and it was much too deep to wade. The raw chilly air of the morning and the water together made me shiver until I was quite sick and my mate was not much better. We both of us felt that to continue exposed thus without food would soon wear us out so that we should not be able to make an effort to save ourselves by swimming the river. In this undecided and helpless state we passed the time until nearly noon the water rising higher and higher. A thought struck me at last that the overhanging boughs of the trees on opposite sides of the river meeting in the middle we might by holding on to them prevent ourselves from being swept away whilst we floated our plank across; and then about 100 yards would bring us across the flat on the other side which was of forest timber not brush to the foot of the range. This as my mate suggested was all very well until we came to be across the river but then we should be worse than ever. The stream was so strong on the forest land and the trees so far apart that we should neither be able to paddle across nor pull ourselves on by hand from tree to tree. All this was clearly but too true; what to do we knew not; but we concluded the chance was better on the other side than where we were so as far as we could we put our plan into execution which was a matter of very little difficulty. What followed has been a memento to me ever since never to despair. The inundated flat at the part where we reached it was several hundred feet wide but we immediately noticed that about a quarter of a mile farther down there was a creek with trees all along it running from a gap in the range to the river. Letting ourselves down the edge of the river from tree to tree we then made our way up the creek in the same manner and reached the high land as heartily pleased with our escape as men could be; but so tired of the uneasy saddle on which we had now been for many hours and our legs so be-numbed that we actually could not stand on them but crawled up the range to the high road on our knees. [102] I was not well for years afterwards; indeed I attribute to the wet and cold of this night an illness I had long subsequently. If I were to say I have never been entirely well since I should not misstate the fact and I know of no other cause which I could suppose to have brought about so suddenly this change for the worse in a constitution hitherto uninjured.  As soon as we got to rights we set off down the river to where our cedar was stacked for rafting. In the brush we knew all was flooded away but the saws and the iron tools which would not swim. But we had no apprehensions of any further loss. To our great vexation we found that the man who had drawn the plank had stacked it so that nearly one-half of it was carried away. A few planks only which had got jammed close at hand we recovered; these with what remained at the stack we got down into the water as soon as it was sufficiently abated and forming it into a raft sent it down the stream to the boat by a good hand at the work who lost only a single plank by the way. Knowing nobody would meddle with our saws and having nothing else of value in the brush we did not go back to the pit but proceeded to Sydney with our stuff. We could only take about a third part by the first boat but gave authority to the skippers of two other crafts to bring the rest. The whole arrived in Port Jackson about a fortnight after ourselves. Our total gain was a little over 301. a-piece.  With that elasticity of spirit which attends a labouring life we soon forgot our loss; and nothing else more profitable offering we prepared for our return. It is no rare thing for a sawyer to abandon his tools under such circumstances as ours were if some more advantageous job presents itself to him whilst away. Our "spell" meantime was spent very pleasantly with our friends at - . It was now as much my home as R-'s and I have often thought since we were if possible even more like brothers than we have been since. Whilst I was at -  M-'s eldest brother came down the country with cattle; and although nearly twenty years older than my mate and therefore much older than myself I liked him very well. There are very few Australians that one can dislike. A general manly spirit and fairness of feeling characterize all except a few bullies of the very lowest class and a few pampered half idiots of the very highest. [103] In my new and increasingly esteemed friend M - a great and evident improvement had taken place; and it is but fair and reasonable to suppose a similar improvement would take place under similar circumstances in the whole body of the Australian females. She had read all the books I left behind to such purpose that there was no part of any of them that I happened to mention on reading them subsequently but she immediately recollected. In a country where no letters pass to and fro at least in the rank of life in which we were such a change in a friend's mind and general character is very observable. I must say I felt a little mortified to find myself so much less benefited. Certainly I had had less leisure and that which I had had was generally in hours of weariness and exhaustion. Among the incomplete volumes was a small 12mo. book of Algebra. This had greatly excited my curiosity - perhaps I should give the feeling some more respectable name. It was not merely the desire to know what the book was about but to know that about which the book treated. A gentleman settler near had a schoolmaster for his children who had the reputation of being a very good scholar. He was a prisoner moreover. To him I applied and for a little remuneration the poor fellow came every evening and gave me instruction in the science in question. He took so much pains with me and explained everything initiatory so clearly that by the time we set off to the nor'ard again I was advanced sufficiently to go on by myself. Not to forestall my narrative in any other respect I cannot but remark that I found it a never-failing field for the most exalted exercise of the mind. It also gave me habits of steady attention self-possession in thought and voluntary consciousness that have been of great service to me since in surmounting difficulties in business as well as in steadily adhering to the line of the necessary and useful in carrying out my purposes at large.  Matters of this kind will interest the reader of course but little in comparison with the transactions and manners of Australian life. I therefore return to my history. R- and I resolved to take on this second trip a large quantity of provisions beyond what we anticipated using ourselves and exchange them with the sawyers near us for plank. I think our invoice from Messrs. and Co to whom we gave the order was some little over 100£. Our stock consisted of rum tobacco tea sugar various kinds of ready-made clothing and clothing material unmade together with a few files knives razors &c.; we got them all in safety by water and by land to the brush; and after one of those wretched senseless jollifications at the edge of the brush which sawyers will have whenever they can get rum we moved into the brush collected our tools and the wreck of our cooking utensils built a fresh and better hut of cedar slabs stowed our goods and went to work again. [104] Our goods sold very well and we again fell upon very fair cluster of trees. The work went on as usual and we this time got the whole of the plank safe to Sydney. We made 69£ odd a-piece by the lot of cedar and cleared about 40£ a-piece by the goods. All this was in about five months which we considered very good work. One incident only of a much more unpleasant than unusual character marks this period: a lot of sawyers from various pits had met at the old sea captain's farm where a large cask of brandy had arrived. After letting them drink very freely he took it into his head not to let them have any more. This at first they would not submit to; but the old gentleman who by the bye was not at all behindhand with them in their own way showed such very strong symptoms of using his sword and pistols that they thought best to decamp. A council of war was then held and some one suggesting that I and my mate had a lot of rum still left down they came in a body to the amount of about twelve or fifteen. At first we did not much heed the shouting and shrieking in every tone and dialect from that of cockneyism to that of the Irish province which is commonly said to be a mile beyond his Satanic majesty's residence; but it came nearer and nearer and nearer. At last it crossed the river and came up our road through the brush; and by the time we were out at the fire in our shirts the whole corps debouched before us: some wore check shirts some wore woollen; some were in red ones and some in blue and some in none at all; some had straw hats some Scotch caps some old working skull-caps some nothing but their own shock heads of hair; some had sticks in their hands some the ration-bags they had been to get filled some the axe they had been sharpening at the grindstone and some three or four ribs of salted beef for tomorrow's dinner; some sung some yelled some said nothing but the one unanimous demand was the remainder of our stock of rum. All my remonstrances were ineffectual. I was told at last that if I did not give it they would take it and put me on the fire for a back-log. Of course further parley was useless; I brought it out and they set to at it with all the panikins they could muster. [105] R-  whose habituation to such emergencies from his infancy rendered him much more a match for them than I was employed himself in getting hold of every vessel full that he could and pouring it out unobserved on the ground; and as they were filling only pint and quart pots this proceeding soon lowered their stock; and by sunrise it was all gone. They then gradually began to disperse: a couple however took possession of our bed and slept all day; and after having their supper with us at night went home. Such affairs are pretty well understood to be only jokes and no ill will is allowed to be borne about them afterwards. We took nothing for the liquor though several offered to pay their "whack". I could not reconcile it to my conscience to take any payment for it for it would not do to tell them how it had been disposed of; and unless we had let them pay for what they had not had that seemed unavoidable. There was likewise another reason of a more serious and painful character. One of the topmen was a sad brutal fellow when intoxicated; and in going home he quarrelled with his pitman and gave him a blow from which he never recovered. The poor fellow had first to leave off work then to go to the settlement and put himself under the doctor's hands and at last after lingering a few weeks died. I almost felt as if his blood was on my head and from that day forth have never either sold or given to anybody spirituous liquors of any kind. My own consolation was that they had taken it by force; and that they had done so while in a state in which I would never have furnished them with it of my own free will. Such unhappy events will happen to the most guarded. If when they do occur we take them up heartily as cautions we do all that it can fairly be said we could do.  As long as the trees continued tolerably plentiful in this brush we continued in it sending freights to Sydney and getting back goods of various sorts for sale; but when good timber began to grow scarce and we found ourselves obliged to make a fresh pit to almost each tree we cut and even these few were very small we resolved to shift at once. Many of the more restless spirits were off before us to the Manning river still farther north and fresh accounts came daily to those who remained of the richness of the brushes in that part of the country. Stray hands wandering back were already dropping in every now and then at some of our pits for a few days' "bange" (rest) on their way to Sydney or back again from Sydney to the Manning brushes after selling their loads and spending their money. [106] During the period that had elapsed from our return to the brush and our leaving it finally we Cleared about 60£ a-piece by the sale of goods after paying freight and allowing for losses and as may be supposed bad debts - not scarce among such customers any more than in other parts of this our habitable globe. Several ran away without paying us: from most we had to take cedar in payment. But this latter circumstance was advantageous rather than otherwise as we made a timber-merchant's profit on the cedar also. Barter properly conducted is always the most beneficial species of commerce as you get a gain both on the article you sell originally and a second in the commodity you have received in payment. Besides our gain in these transactions we cleared about 40£ a-piece by our second lot of timber. This was very little comparatively with what it would have been but for the increasing scarcity of trees for the last three months of the time. I heard of one pair of sawyers in this brush during its best days who cut 35£ worth of plank in a fortnight - this was nearly 91. a-week each man. But they were both first-rate workmen and very strong; one an Irishman and the other of American negro descent; and I believe there was a sort of rivalry of strength and hardihood between them and they were trying which could knock up the other: these feats are the chief ambition of sawyers. A few miles below us on the river were a great many little settlers: we used to stop at their farms in going to Sydney or Maitland; and strange as our habits in the brush were some of theirs I used to think were stranger still. At least we had neither wife nor children to care for; but they not unfrequently had large families. Several times I have known a dealing boat come up to a farm on the bank of the stream just after the new wheat was threshed out and before it left have the whole on board in exchange for rum. I have sometimes seen attempts to represent the majority of the small settlers of New South Wales as of this character. Such however is decidedly the reverse of the truth and must have been the representation of either some superficial tourist or of one of those individuals (a much larger number than is usually supposed) who have published accounts of this colony to subserve the designs of their party on public and legislative opinion in England.  We were not long in Sydney before we were again out of it on our way to . Our friends received us joyfully; but my mate's father and mother were evidently both of them breaking fast. [107] The old man still worked on the ground but Mrs. was become quite bedridden and nearly blind. M - attended her with a ceaseless quiet watchfulness. It was as if the mother and child had changed places: the parent was all unconsciousness weakness want; the daughter vigilance activity and love. I have often thought that I perceived that the roughest men have the gentlest hearts: my mate furnished me with another fact. When R-  who by the bye was the favourite being the youngest saw what his sister was become to his mother he seemed for some time unable to comprehend it; but at last after some time he quite understood it and in singular variation of his usual custom he took her in his arms and hugged her. The power of love is very wonderful. Here was a man nearly six feet high and as strong as a young ox with the tears running down his cheeks over an old woman and a girl. If a little while before as he went through the town of -  any acquaintance had proposed it to him by way of recreation he would have pulled off his jacket and fought for a couple of hours. Goodness has certainly more tendency to beautify the countenance than we give it credit for in our daily scheme of cause and effect. Though I do not easily go in ecstasies I could not help loving M - more than ever. The books too seemed to have done wonders for her; so I resolved after we had been at home a few days to go to Sydney and buy a good collection. My former purchase I had read till I knew them almost by heart. It never struck me however at this time that there was any one course in acquiring knowledge better than another so that my selection could not be expected to be a very wise one. My notion was simply this: for myself more books of history sufficient to give me a clear and connected view of the progress of mankind from the earliest period; a treatise on the more advanced branches of algebra; a new Euclid my first being among the books lost in the flood at the brush; and Watts's Logic of which a few leaves only had come into my possession among the fragments in the former lot: for M -  chiefly poetry; it seemed to me her favourite reading; and probably I was not much wrong in considering that the actualities of life are so forced on women in new countries that they acquire inevitably from them their education in matters of common sense and so may properly enough indulge in book studies of an almost exclusively imaginative cast. It turned out however that I became relieved from the responsibility of the selection. [108] She got a friend to take charge of her mother for a day and went to Sydney with me and chose quite a different lot from what I should have chosen for her and fewer by far. I bought just what I had laid it down to myself that I would buy and additionally about fifteen numbers of the Edinburgh Review. This latter part of my selection was from this time for some years forward my favourite reading; I find it to be the authority which directed more or less my views on most subjects.  After spending between five and six weeks at home R- and I went to work; it was the last job we cut together making our third year. A friend of R-'s proposed to him to take a share in a coasting craft and run it in the cedar trade. R- again proposed that I should be taken into the concern dividing it into three shares. I had my misgivings; but the profits were very tempting. We joined in the boat and in a lot of provisions and other goods for sale. Our first trip happened at a very opportune juncture. The whole of the parties cutting on the river had run short of flour tobacco and tea three most profitable articles. We bought our tea at 2s. 6d. and sold it at 6s.; our tobacco (good Hawkesbury) at 1s. and sold it at 5s.; our flour we made about sixty per cent. on. As there are always idle men about these brushes where sawing is going on either sawyers without mates or bullock-drivers out of work or labourers we soon succeeded in getting a good fall of timber pointed out to us. We had however to give our guide 3£ for his information and take him on as our faller; but we found him such an unsettled fellow that we were glad after a couple of weeks to give him 2£ beside his wages of 1£ a week to go away. Being paid by the piece men acquire a habit of working so eagerly that a great proportion are either working on day after day in the utmost suffering if they are what are called "good men"; or else they give in every second or third day and stroll about till the covetous fit comes on again. Of this last class was our lad. He was called I - the Liar. Descriptive titles of a similar kind are very common indeed almost universal.  The fall of timber that J - the Liar (I am delicate about giving the baptismal name of the individual in full. The fact is there are several sawyers who enjoy the latter part of this graceful appellative but their individual names differ. I should be sorry to wound the feelings of my former friends or of such of them as may be yet alive by too pointed a description); the fall of timber that The Liar (it is quite a common and inoffensive abbreviation dear reader among ourselves) showed us turned out a capital one. [109] Numbers of the trees were 60 feet in the barrel without a limb and so thick that as they lay on the hill side after they were down I could barely lay my hand on the top of them at 10 and 15 feet from the butt. They were very generally sound and many of them as round as stone pillars and they lay for the most part on the hill sides so that rolling them to the pit was effected by merely slackening chocks away from them in front instead of heaving them along by handspikes and levers as is done on level ground; though be it observed letting logs down hill in this way is much the most dangerous work; lastly they lay so grouped that numbers of logs came to the same pit. There was one drawback however which to civilised ears may seem a serious one; we had to make most of the pits in creeks and if it came on to rain ever so little the brush ground already saturated turned off the whole of the falling water into the creeks; thus my mate often had to work up to his knees in water for several days together. We kept to one hut all the time having fixed ourselves deep down the descent of one of the hill points in a sort of basin where five creeks met so as to be near the water and the work. It was a lonely place where you heard nothing but the perpetual plashing of the creeks and once or twice a day the thunder of a falling tree or sometimes in the still warm noon the startling note of the coachman-bird or the no less wonderful mimicry of the mocking-bird imitating the shrill grating of our files in sharpening the saw so exactly that we often could not believe but that some other pair had come and set in close to us. Countless and motionless and gigantic stood the forest army up and down all the hill sides around us; in strong contrast to this stood the great red piles of plank squared with mathematical exactness which spoke of man and labour. How simple the lesson that contrast read and yet how gravel This toil-bearer must have a motive; he must want Something that he has not; - he must be unhappy.  In this wilderness we passed more than twelve months and before this time my mate too had become a great reader; so between the work and the obstacles to be overcome in getting the plank dragged out of such a hole (which had to be done by spare-chaining it along the ground a plank at a time) and the books we got through the twelve months pretty well. Near us we found another little group of trees which we should probably have stayed to cut but that a messenger came to tell my mate (there being no post) that his mother had died at last rather suddenly. [110] As I could see though he could not himself that he had but little design of coming back I took care after shipping the last of our cedar to accompany it with all our tools and other possessions. Our trip to Sydney was a pleasant one; and our cedar sold better than any lot we had had: and nothing but the sorrowful cause of our sudden journey to Sydney impaired the cheerfulness of our feelings and of our prospects. [111]    Chapter XI  A LUCKY HIT  Projects - Ruin of a little family - Every man has got his price - Anecdote - Another - A bullock-driver's courtesy - History of Mrs. D- and her husband - A good bargain - Wild journey through the mountains - Skeletons of men lost in the bush and starved - The stock-station - A night's bivouac - Stock-horses - Completion of a bargain - Rencontre with the police  Some months glided away and found me still at - . Mrs. - was gone but not forgotten. In the solitary bush she had never had to drill her children into the many unnatural habits of old societies and they had loved her all the more. Her companion too through many years and various fortunes walked about among us like an absent man. He was more affectionate to his children and more friendly to me; yet there was something in his manner like that of a man among strangers. As I expected my mate had no inclination to go back to the Manning; and no longer there to look after our interests in the cedar-boat we considered it best to part with our shares. For some time we employed ourselves in helping the old man through the heaviest of the farm business; afterwards we went all round the farm mending the fences. Then I went up the country with R-  to look at a piece of land he had had offered him for purchase by another native. And lastly after several weeks of idleness I went to Sydney and ripped cedar plank into boards in a timber merchant's yard. At this I made very poor wages and was far from contented. Our last year's work in the Manning River brush had yielded us about 2£ each a-week all through. The profit on the goods we disposed of was about 70£ each; and the net gain by freights and by the cedar we took in exchange and in payment for freight was rather above 100£ each. The utmost I could clear by cedar ripping for the timber merchants was about 1 l. a-week after paying rations and lodging and wear and tear and all those innumerable gills of rum that a sawyer is called upon for in Sydney when he is known to be pretty well off by his less thrifty brethren. So circumstanced I was beginning to plan no less a thing than the purchase of a piece of land in the township of ---; to cut some stuff in the adjacent bush and run up two or three snug little weather-boarded cottages and rent them out. [112]  I often wonder whether others observe it but I certainly have that whenever I have concocted some well-promising plan and even when everything has been finally determined in my mind some circumstance either unforeseen or under estimated has presented itself and rendered advisable the relinquishment of my laboured scheme and the adoption of another at an hour's notice. This was the case now.  As I proceed more minutely to describe the circumstances which thus suddenly changed my plans it will readily be conjectured that similar events are by no means uncommon in a great stock country like New South Wales. Cattle were at this period the staple article of internal traffic; and that traffic proceeded under all forms and between all parties and in every place where men meet. Sometimes it was simple barter; sometimes a sale; sometimes it was in the regular course of business; at others a mere capricious chaffer; sometimes it was with due inspection of the beasts in the yard or on the run; and occasionally even on bare description or to use the common phrase "unsight unseen". But the chief of this dealing went on as may be supposed among the stockmen or those whose particular business is the herding and driving of cattle. Great numbers of these men at the time I speak of though more particularly in still earlier times held cattle; many indeed became large stock-masters. Sometimes for years they took their wages in cattle; every odd pound they could muster was laid by to add to the little herd thus accumulating by some good bargain for cash: and I do think it was by no means an uncommon occurrence for some kindly beast to stray of a dark night into the little herd without any such common-place reasons as rank under the head of exchange and never find his way out again. Poor men do many things by the example of their betters; it would not always be easy to say which they are. Nor does the question now remain one of much importance: legislation has well-nigh done its work; almost every facility for such a process is done away. Where once twenty poor men rose gradually into substance I should think scarce one rises now. At the time referred to however almost every third person in the enjoyment of freedom had a few head of cattle; and the perpetual system of exchange I have referred to was its grand concomitant. Of course in such a country and under such circumstances plenty of sales were effected that jeopardized alike the seller and the buyer. Doubtless in many instances the buyer was fully aware of the illegal character of the transaction; but in hundreds more he fell into the snare merely through a blind cupidity or even was led into it by the unsuspecting uprightness of his own nature. [113] In the instance more particularly in hand I believe there was a commixture of the two cases. The victim was a hard-striving and perhaps greedy man; but in him along with this worse were mingled (no rare case) the better inclinations of a strong and unequivocal uprightness of natural character. With these premises the reader will be fully prepared to understand what I am now to give - the history of such a case.  A messenger came to me in Sydney and called me off the pit and told me I was particularly and instantly wanted at -  and a note from M - accompanied the message urging me not to lose a minute. I washed and telling the man I was working with to get a mate and go on till I came back I hired a horse and was at - within a couple of hours. There I found M -  amusing a fine little boy eighteen months old and with her was a very pretty young woman its mother. The night before as they were going to supper she came up to the house door and asked for M -  who knew her immediately as an old schoolfellow. She and the baby were wet through to the skin for she had travelled from - in a settler's cart without a tilt and it had been raining almost the whole afternoon. As soon as she could communicate with M -  she told her that her husband whom I had often heard of by the name of Tom -  was to meet her in the bush at the corner of our paddock that night; that there was a warrant out against him from the bench nearest which they lived; that was between 100 and 150 miles from Sydney; and that he had only had just time to escape before the constables reached their hut to execute it. He had sent her word by a man he could trust to meet him here on this evening at eleven o'clock; and it was the utmost she could do through an unexpected hindrance to arrive by the time. It appeared they had but one child and were very fond of one another. He had possessed himself of a good herd of cattle by his economy and industry but one false step had ruined all; and now no chance remained of retaining his liberty and family but getting away unknown from the colony. He had come to the corner of the fence according to appointment the night before and was now "in plant" (hiding) in the creek till night again. His journey down the country had been a sore one as he had had to keep off the road all day and only take it by night. [114]  Mrs. D. - was the only child of a small settler and had had cattle worth about 150£ left her by her father. Her husband who had been for many years a stockman at one of the far out stations after he became free married her when he was about thirty-three only three years before possessed of about 2001. worth of stock of his own of various kinds. This which was a very good beginning he had improved considerably. From all I could learn of his character I am sure D- had not the most distant design of a dishonest deal in the purchase of the beast which he was now charged with buying knowing it to be stolen. One of the Government hands of a large and influential settler close to where D- had settled had been allowed by his master to accumulate a lot of cattle and depasture them on his run; and when his sentence was expired not having any other place to take them to and his master ordering him to take them off his run he asked D- to buy them. D- for a long time refused and when at last he did buy them it was because the man could not get them in off the run for want of a horse; and of course only somebody who already knew them in the bush would buy them there. Buying them under these circumstances D- gave only about two-thirds of their market price for them; considering that he did the man a favour to buy them at all. Among them was a cow which D- knew the man had been in possession of for above two years and which he had no more reason for suspecting to be a stolen beast than any of the others. As soon as the money was paid the man left that part of the country and D- heard no more of him till a stockman from quite a distant county in passing through the run in search of strayed horses claimed the cow as belonging to his master; and D- then on inquiry found the seller was gone out of the country leaving him to "stand the racket".  This man's master had long wanted D- 's run which separated his own from a fine tract in the mountains that was never likely to be bought by anybody on account of its being deficient in water; and according to all I heard upon the subject afterwards he now did all he could to get the owner of the beast to prosecute D-  that by getting him out of the way he might have his run and secure the free run on government ground attached to it. I am sorry to say that it is too common a thing for the great settlers in New South Wales to endeavour to get rid of the small settlers near them for similar reasons by any means that offer themselves. [115]  If I recollect right the jury that tried the criminal cases at - sessions at this time was constituted of military officers chosen for the occasion from the regiments in the colony; and these gentlemen dining with D- 's neighbour the magistrate whose government man had sold the cow would naturally hear of the cause beforehand and prejudiced by Mr. ---'s account of D-  would come to the court fully prepared to look at the evidence against him in a very serious light. In short he had no reasonable ground for hoping for an acquittal.  M - 's object in sending for me from Sydney was twofold: she knew the cattle would be a great bargain as they must be sold for ready money; and she also knew that I had enough in the - bank for the whole purchase; and was looking for some mode of laying it out. She also wished me to undertake the negotiation for - 's passage away from the colony and to see him off.  - 's offer when I saw him which was not till after dark in the evening was a very good one. He offered me four capital brood mares two of which had foals at their sides for 100£ and the whole of his cattle large and small at 2£ a-head. I closed with the offer directly provided both horses and horned cattle turned out on inspection as he had represented them.  Purchasing his stock was far from an entire removal of all the poor fellow's difficulties and dangers. He had still to go up the country to the very place where it was most dangerous for him to muster the cattle and deliver them to me. His wife's being here again was almost sure to become known to the police; and then he would be watched for here. But the greatest difficulty was that of getting clear out of the colony; for accounts are sent to the Sydney police-office of defaulters from all parts of the colony and the constables search every ship that goes out of the Heads.  As we were to start the very next morning up the country. this was perhaps the last time he might see his wife and child for many months even if successful in escaping. After she had put her child to sleep nothing could keep the poor trembling wife away from her husband. I carried them two large sheets of bark into the thick scrub beside the creek where - was concealed; for about midnight it began to rain quite fast. One sheet of bark was leaned against a tree on the windward side to turn the rain; the other made a sort of dry flooring for them to sit on. They could not have any fire on account of the danger of its attracting notice. But provided them with some blankets and a large overcoat and then sat up all night taking care of her friend's child. [116] Its plaintive cries were most heart-moving as it waked at times through the long hours and missed its customary nurse.  Directly it was light - and I started leaving - to arrange whilst we were absent for a passage by a vessel that was to sail in about twelve days. The poor fellow seemed as if he could never drag himself away from his wife and child. When we did set off it rained as if it would blind us; no comfortable commencement of such a trip. But it had one good consequence - it kept the people indoors; so that we arrived at the Hawkesbury punt almost without meeting an individual. Once over the river we considered ourselves safe for we immediately struck off into the Curryjong Mountains a vast pile of hills heaped on hills and covered with forests and brushes so thickly that you walk beneath and amidst them in perpetual shadow and can only get along in some places by main force. Here we were past the police of the thickly settled districts and off the track they take from the large interior settlements to Sydney. The Curryjong mountains have the appearance rather of a multitude of hills piled confusedly together than of what is more strictly considered mountain. At this time a few very poor settlers had opened just on one little patch of country the faces of the hills and their fields of yellow grain were bending and in some places were already quite flattened by the torrents of rain that kept pouring down. Here and there a boy minding some pigs on the road side and with the utmost difficulty keeping them out of the corn; and once or twice a settler driving a cow home for the eve-fling milking; and the old miller with his arms folded and his shoulder against the door-post standing looking out of the door of the water-mill that clacks and rumbles on in the dark hollow were all the human life we saw. I knew my guide was a good bushman and also what reasons he had for doing his part well or I should not have followed him very readily. We went on on on up the slippery hill (for the soil is of the finest description) till it seemed as if we were getting above the world. Below us on every side was a vast rolling ocean of vapour. On us still poured the ceaseless rain till we had not a dry thread about us. At length we came to an abrupt fall of the ground down the precipitous declivity of which our descent was effected with great caution and labour. Here we stood at the commencement of a long thicket of brushwood through which the track was in some places so intricate and bewildering and so toilsome to travel that on hearing its character from - I coincided in his opinion that it would be best for us to camp for the night in one of the ghibber-gunyahs. [117] These are the hollows under overhanging rocks and afford a most welcome shelter where they are met with in wet weather. Their aspect is at first rather terrific: of course no rain penetrates through their roof; but a space equal sometimes to the area of a very large room is offered to the drenched traveller to kindle his fire and shelter himself for the night. My fellow-traveller who well knew the bush hereabouts soon led the way to a capacious and snug retreat of this kind; and lighting a fire and betaking ourselves to our provisions we soon felt ourselves quite snug for the night. The rest of the evening was fully occupied in talking over our business and in consulting that ever faithful counsellor the pipe. At length outworn by travel and the previous night's watching we slept. The next morning the rising sun was slanting in upon us when we awoke. After a hearty breakfast on we went again. To tell what thickets tangled thorny endless (as it seemed) we went through that day what damp and sombre chasms we crossed what wet and mossy crags we climbed and what leaf-strewn solitary woods we made our way through might weary the reader but could give him no adequate notion of the scenes themselves. - acquaintance with the bush here arose from his having been employed under a surveyor in the Curryjong and adjacent country before he was assigned to private service. He pointed out to me one creek accompanied with this tale: - "I found two dead men's bones on that creek when I was here with the surveyor; he sent me and another man to run that creek up as far as we could to see what it led to; and after we had gone about seven miles we came to a lot of bones scattered about on a little flat. On looking at them we found they were the bones of two men. They were quite bare and the native dogs had dragged them limb from limb except the ribs which were still fast to the backbone. Bits of their woollen garments were still about but nothing more except their irons. One man's irons were still on one of his leg bones but the other pair of irons were lying apart. The bones were as white as chalk with the sun and rain. It was the most shocking sight I ever saw. They were no doubt two poor fellows who had run away from a gang lost themselves and had Wandered about till they were starved." Much like this was our travelling for four whole days. [118] Once only we emerged on to the regular mountain road at a public house; and after a little variation of our fare by a single meal of fresh pork and a couple of glasses of rum took to the bush again.  On the afternoon of the fifth day we drew near our journey's end. It was a pleasant sunny day till toward night when the weather again grew stormy and wild. We came into the creek on which D-'s hut was situated several miles below it. Following the channel up among the hills we turned at length an elbow whence we obtained an uninterrupted view up a reach of about half a mile at the end of which was the hut and stockyard. These were built on a little flat back from the steep edge of the creek; and the only thing belonging to the station that we could descry was a very small tent hut on the brink of the lofty bank on the opposite side or rather at the end of the vista where the creek again swept suddenly round to the right. This was the man's hut who looked after the cattle and had been built there for the sake of seeing a long way down the creek so as to have the milking cattle in his eye as much as possible. It was now a matter of some concern whether any unwelcome visitor was staying at the large hut which D- and his wife usually occupied or whether any such was lurking on the watch in the surrounding bush. To ascertain this I went on alone D- keeping out of sight among the wattles of the creek: if the stockman told me all was right I was to float my pocket handkerchief in the wind standing on the edge of the creek; otherwise I was merely to stand there without doing so. With beating heart I made my way up to the station; for I had found D-  though rather too fond of himself in matters of business such a free-hearted manly fellow as a companion that I felt the greatest interest in his success. On reaching the stockman's hut I found it empty of inhabitants: but there was a newly baked cake indeed not yet cold; the fire also was not covered over with ashes which is the usual way of keeping wood smouldering a long time without burning out. It was therefore clear that the stockman had lately been here and would not be long away. I was therefore obliged to give D- the signal to remain where he was for the present. In an hour or so Jerry the stockman came back; and after cautiously effecting an understanding with him and ascertaining that all was safe I told him where his master was and he "cooeed" for him and gave the signal for him to come on. All was certainly safe enough; for one or other of the - police came every day or two pretending to be passing from the settlement to some station farther out; and one had called "to light his pipe" only an hour before and Jerry had walked with him a couple of miles to show him a short cut which was the reason of his absence when we arrived. [119] As there was no fear of any further intrusion that night we congratulated ourselves on our good fortune and with more easy minds than we had had for some hours took our supper. There was a lot of capital dogs kangaroo bull mastiff terrier and mongrel. These when I reached the but were along with Jerry or I should not have made my entrance as I did; for when they came back a little in advance of him and found me sitting in the tent hut they ranged themselves across the entrance and growled most surlily and seemed well inclined to come in and pull me out. But now they did us good service rushing off every now and then especially as the night became darker and darker in the direction of the slightest noise. Late in the evening a light mizzling rain came on again; but we still kept to the little tent hut for the sake of D- 's readier escape should escape become necessary. The large hut was surrounded by a level flat cleared of timber and might have been easily surrounded; but the tent hut being on the brink of the creek afforded a certain means of flight down the bank. D- tied a couple of his sharpest dogs one about two hundred yards up the channel of the creek from the hut and the other about two hundred yards down. If any one approached up or down the creek the dogs that were tied would give notice before they were within a quarter of a mile of us; if any one drew near in the bush on the level of the hut on either bank the dogs at the fire would be sure to hear or see or scent them a long way off and give the alarm. Thus there was always a safe point to fly to where the dogs were quiet. If any thing could have made our arrangements ineffectual it was the complete gale into which the wind blew itself by about eleven o'clock. These high winds of the colony always produced in me a state of nervous excitement almost like slight intoxication. I believe it is the case also with many persons of highly nervous temperament. During the time they prevail the blacks consider they can approach and spear the kangaroo or catch them with their dogs much more easily than at other times. They seem to have a bewildering effect on the animal. I thus felt no inclination to sleep: D- also was more restless to-night than I had yet seen him. [120] The man finding he could do no good turned in and was soon fast asleep. Hour after hour we sat by the fire and smoked and listened and made tea; then walked about and stood and strained our eyes to pierce the darkness and our ears to collect every sound. The small rain fell spraylike cool refreshing and with the open breast and bare neck habitual to the working class in the colony this is quite a luxury when the skin is fevered with over-exertion. The sky was starless black and still. The bush kept up that long indefinite sound that it makes beneath the passage of a mighty wind; something between a roar and a deep hiss mingled strangely and one could fancy awfully with sudden passing intonations like a fitful music. The gale ruffled and howled and swept away from the fire far across the grass a long train of sparks which viewed from the distance as we walked to and fro looked like the tail of some monstrous comet that had fallen and lay blazing away amidst the darkness on the side of the great slope of country down which the creek coursed.  At length day dawned as it seemed down in a world below us; for the descent of the country was great. But it soon spread up over the whole sky. The man was up with the first sensible light; but instead of going for the milkers D- despatched him for the two stockhorses. These are generally good hardy geldings; and the performances of some of them are really surprising. Never stabled or stall-fed they seem capable of much more exertion than most horses that are. It is no uncommon thing for instance for a stock-man to ride his horse fifty or sixty miles a day for several days together; the only food the animal gets all the time being the native grass and his only bed the same. D- 's two stockhorses however were old ones As he let me have them as cheap as I could have procured them anywhere else and as I was sure to need at least one whatever I concluded to do with the herd I bought them giving 171. for the two bridles saddles &c. &c. in. While the man was looking for them in the bush we had some breakfast preparatory to beginning to run the herd in Meantime it struck me that seeing them in the bush would be fully as satisfactory provided we took his stock book (a book which every stockholder keeps with a full and minute description of every head of horned cattle he possesses entered in it) and ticked them off as we saw them. Certainly some would be almost sure not to be found the first or even second day. But I was to have them at a price that would allow of the loss of one in every five or six at least; and it seemed cruel to keep the poor fellow here any longer than was actually inevitable. [121] Moreover as the man suggested the cattle being in the yard would lead to suspicion that his master was there; and in that case he would be likely to be taken and so our whole engagement come to nought. Beside it seemed to me that having kept this stock book without any view of using it for such a purpose it was very good evidence what cattle there were. I could trace head after head from muster to muster along with the calves of each succeeding season. My only uncertainty was whether any had been sold lately. At length it was settled that we should ride round the outside of the run and the man in the mean time drive down whatever he could find on the run into the creek. By six o'clock in the evening we had seen the four mares the two foals and every head but nineteen of the horned cattle; and many of these were beasts which were the most unlikely of all to have been made away with heifer calves old bullocks and cows whose calves we had. I had no further hesitation in taking them as they were: and we concluded our bargain in due form; D- delivering up to me the brands and stockbook &c. &c and I giving him a check payable to R- or bearer.  Without waiting for a night's rest D- set off by the same dreary road we had come; what few things he thought it worth while to take he packed up before he started; paid the man a few shillings of wages that were coming to him (he had already given him a cow and calf) and told me to consider everything else mine. The land he had no further claim to having merely occupied it temporarily.  As soon as he was gone I took possession of the big hut lit my fire and endeavoured to get some rest. R- was to present D- 's check for him and see him off and Mrs. D- was to remain for a couple of months to prevent suspicion of her husband's departure till he was in safety. R- meantime as soon as he had executed his part of the undertaking was to come up the country to me. All this while it never struck me that I should be honoured by a visit from the constables as soon as they found me in possession of D- 's hut; for hitherto they had been led by the man to expect D- 's return every day. About noon (the constables' usual time of visiting in New South Wales at any station where they think they may get a dinner) probably from some information that had reached the - police-office that D- had been seen in the neighbourhood no less a personage than the chief constable of the district himself rode up to the door and hanging his horse's bridle on the nail walked in. [122] The dogs were all away with Jerry in the bush or he would have been obliged to use a little more ceremony. One of the very greatest annoyances of New South Wales is the freedom with which the police and military walk into one's dwelling-house. The worthy functionary had a pair of handcuffs slung on his belt and a horse pistol in his hand but he seemed rather surprised as I threw myself off the settle and confronted him. From the description I had heard of him I immediately guessed who he was. After stammering out some sort of apology and saying he was the chief constable he pointed to the yard into which about a dozen head had been driven that morning and our dialogue went on as follows: - "What cattle are those?" - "Mine"  "What brand is that?" pointing to the brand that had been D- 's and which hung up in the hut. - "Mine."  "How long has it been yours?" - "Ever since I paid for it."  "How long is that?" - "Am I paid to tell you or you to find it out?"  "Humph. You mean to say these cattle are yours?" - "I do."  "Well I shall see that." - "I've no doubt you will and a little plainer than you expect."  "Those cattle belong to the man I've got a warrant for; I shall turn them into the bush." - Bullee bullee bullee go and lie down at the yard gate old man." Up jumped my old grey-coated friend and follower nearly ever since I had been in the colony and without an instant's delay there he lay crouching under the bottom bar of the stockyard-gate with his hind quarters in and his great square head on the ground between his forepaws without. As soon as things had got thus far I began to feel rather "jerran" as the blacks say (i.e. timorous). Not being anything of a lawyer I began to have misgivings that I might in some point or other have committed myself for among the least of the threats with which my baffled new acquaintance assailed me was that of indictment for impeding him in the execution of his duty. However he took himself off; and when I came to recollect that I neither had done anything illegal nor had he even evidence of anything I had done I was convinced his "bounce" could come to nothing. I thought it best however till I could take legal advice in Sydney to hide both the brand and stockbook; and having warned Jerry to answer no questions I knew it would cost these busy and mischievous people some trouble to prove whether I bought the cattle the day before or the year before and previously to the date of the warrant against D- . [123] Still I felt that I had been very incautious in not taking advice before the purchase when being near Sydney I might have done it so easily. Knowing the tyrannical modes of procedure of the upcountry benches and their very frequent mistakes of the law when even they intend to administer it aright I thought it safest on reflection to write to R- without an hour's delay to take advice. Jerry found me a man in about three hours and I sent him off on one of the stock horses directly. After some days' delay in Sydney from the horse being knocked up he returned bringing me a letter intimating that D- was off; and that the lawyer who had been consulted said I was in no danger either personally or of the loss of my purchase. When I got this news I felt like a man that had a patent of immunity from all care for the rest of his days. [124]     Chapter XII  LOOKING FOR A STATION  Equipment - The heat - Dray capsized - Bathurst township - Crossing the country without roads - How to get rid of fleas - A miserable station - Aborigines killed in fight - Natural scenery - A dairy-station - Scene at a public-house - Animosity between settlers and convicts - Wild cattle - Men lost in the Shoalhaven gullies and starved - Accounts of others lost and starved in various other parts - Black's camp in the wilderness - A rainy day at a stock-station at the outskirts of the colony - A dealer and his dray encamped - Manna-trees - Bush horsemanship - A female convict going to the Factory - A station heard of  On preparing to write this chapter it struck me that the best form in which to cast it would be that of a journal. I cannot indeed remember the dates but the course of incident as occurring on the first day or second day or third day I recollect with the utmost precision. Remembering our stages and the period we stopped at the various stations I can of course refer each circumstance to the particular day of our journey on which it occurred. By laying before the reader the train of facts themselves which came under my notice as we traversed a very extensive portion of the territory he will form a much more accurate and faithful notion of the natural aspects of the country and of the various features of society than he would be furnished by a mere general account of my own impressions and deductions.  The journey I am to describe took place on the arrival of R- from Sydney. Our object in taking it was to find a good run to which we could send the whole of our cattle his and mine; employing a stockman of our own to look after them Besides what I had just bought my former purchases and their increase were now about eighty head after deduction of thirds for the grazing. R- also had a snug little herd which had been accumulating for years. His father had about seventy head of his own and M - had a few; so that altogether there were upwards of 500 head plenty to form a herd beside four mares of mine and one of R-'s.  The reader will suppose us leaving the creek-hut on horseback with our blankets strapped on the saddle before us in long rolls like dragoons' cloaks; our saddle bags well supplied with tea sugar and tobacco and quart pot tomahawks and tinder-box constituting the remainder of our equipment; not forgetting however our horses' hobbles and a couple of kangaroo dogs of R-'s and my old Bullee who insisted upon keeping us company. [125]  First day. - Roasting hot; almost intolerable in fact after about eleven AM until four P.M. Rode right across into the settlement of Bathurst; the latter part of the way along the high road from Bathurst to Sydney. The roads excessively dusty and all the water-holes where the bullocks usually drink dried up. Many of the poor animals that we passed in teams of 4 6 and 8 yoked in pairs were panting and hanging their tongues out in a manner most painful to behold whilst their drivers flogged and shouted and swore unremittingly. One wretch we passed had stuffed up with grass the nostrils of a bullock which had lain down and then kindled a wisp of dry stringy bark which blazes like flax under his belly. The beast's hide was cut through in all directions with the green-hide lash of the heavy bullock whip as if by a knife. The dexterity with which some of these men use the whip is quite astonishing; the report when it strikes is like a rifle's crack and the macerated hair and flesh fly up from the spot in a little white cloud like spray. In another place a whole team had started off the road into the bush among the trees smashed off the dray-wheel against a tree and scattered the load in all directions. Here were the remains of a case of liqueurs; there a tea-chest crushed and disgorging a heap of tea among the grass; here a sugar mat burst open and what should have been a hat-box and new beaver hat forced in among the sugar; here were a lot of ladies' dresses coming out of the broken end of a large slate-coloured trunk; and meeting them from the mouth of the bullock driver's harness cask a lot of salt junk in a flood of pickle. We dismounted and helped to release the shaft bullock who was partly jammed under the load and then went on. The bullock driver was bewailing his hard fortune most bitterly; he said he had only about seven months more to serve before he was due for a ticket of leave (to work for himself) but his master had promised to do all he could to keep him from obtaining it and this would be just the very chance he wanted. He was a transport for life. I could not discover that he was to blame for the accident; it seemed to have originated solely in the viciousness of a young bullock running his horn into the one he was yoked to. Very likely this man would become desperate through the loss of his ticket take the bush be driven by hunger to depredations on the roads and be finally hanged - this has been the course of thousands since the formation of the colony as a penal settlement. [126] The settlement of Bathurst stands in the midst of wide levels or plains totally untimbered; this causes it to have a dreary sterile aspect though in reality it is not so. A stream sometimes small sometimes quite a deluge holds its course along beside the township and on its banks are some noble tracts of cultivable ground. The houses are very good in the township; those in the fields are mostly turf huts for here in winter there are heavy frosts and snow and the wind is so cutting across this bare and elevated tract that it is important to stop up every chink and cranny where it can enter. We stopped for the night at Mr. ---'s stock-station and were kindly entertained; R- being acquainted with the stock-keeper wanted to ask him if he knew of a run but he knew of none suitable.  Second day. - Rode on to a sheep-station a few miles south of the township and on the direct track to what is called the New Country: i.e. the interior SW. of Sydney. Our way lay chiefly through open level country very scantily watered. Here and there however there was a splendid water-hole like a little lake amidst the arid waste We had heard of a piece of unoccupied ground some distance off the road to the eastward and rode across to examine it. Our directions to it (there being no roads across the country except the two or three great ones to the principal points) were up a certain hollow through a gap in the range and then across to a mountain on the distant horizon by riding over which at the easiest acclivity we could find a creek would be reached and this creek followed down would lead to the run. Travellers in England would probably think such directions as these poor guidance for a distance of many miles; however we were successful- in our search Practice in bush travelling gives great address in tracing such natural land-marks. A good hand at making his way in the bush is called a good bushman; as is also a good workman in timber. A man is not entitled to this appellation until he has acquired a sort of tact of going right instinctively. The infallible accuracy with which some men will hit a point several miles off in a dark night and all the way through thick forest is quite astonishing.  The station we reached for the night was merely an enclosure of branches of trees just to keep the sheep together. There was but one flock and the hut was only a few sheets of bark set up round an area of about 6 feet square with a roof of the same through which the stars shone down upon us as we lay wrapped in our blankets on the floor. [127] But we were not many minutes down before we were obliged to rise and take the ground outside some way off for our pallet for the rest of the night. The sandy hut floor was literally alive with fleas. After a martyr's sufferings as soon as the sun rose I went to the water to wash and when I took my shirt off these terrible persecutors covered it as if scattered by the hand as the gardener sows seed. One of the men was hut-keeper the other shepherd; the shepherd tends the sheep by day and the hut-keeper has charge of them by night. Where there are good paling yards or strong hurdles the hut-keepers generally venture to sleep depending on their dogs of which there are generally half a dozen of one sort or another about a station for keeping off the warregal or bush dog an animal very much resembling the fox but much more ravenous. The hut-keeper at this station was obliged to watch all night for his yard would in many places have suffered the dog to crawl through; and if one does get in he bites and worries sometimes thirty or forty sheep before he is discovered. When the shepherd turned out his flock in the morning the hut-keeper having first cleared the floor of the hut he drove them in a mass up to it and they soon crowded in and filled it. On my asking them why they did this they told me that by doing so the fleas all got into the sheep and were carried away into the bush and that they often cleared the hut-thus.  Third day. - This day we had the track for the New Country all day under our horses' feet and made a good journey; but our fortune at night was not so good. We stopped at a half-starved station; it was a cattle station and the stockman being out only the hut-keeper was there. He seemed to make lying on his berth his sole Occupation. He was a great low-lived looking ruffian not long "lagged" (transported); he had been too lazy even to wash his wheat which was smutty before he ground it at the steel handmill with which most of these huts are supplied and it was as black as the back of the chimney. After a supper of bread without beef and tea without sugar we smoked our pipes and went to bed. After we were all laid down the lazy scoundrel told us all on a sudden that there were a couple of good milkers down the creek and if we liked to drive them up with our horses in the morning we might milk them for breakfast; but he did not care for milk himself and so never milked them except when the stockman was at home. In short he was just that one man in twenty that one finds among prisoners whom you may be sure will eventually be sent to a penal settlement for life if not hanged; "too lazy" to use a common phrase 'to live"; incorrigibly idle until everybody's hand is against him and then rather than amend and work turning his hand against everybody; not to be roused except by severity and then only into crime. [128] Happily there are few such.  Our night's quarters were rendered still more memorable and comfortless by the blacks having had a battle here that afternoon. Three dead bodies were lying on the flat with the ghastly grin of those who have died the hater's death. Two of them had been killed by body wounds with jagged spears that had torn their way out frightfully; the other's was a head-wound with a tomahawk. The weapon had gone right through his mat of woolly black hair into the brain; very little blood had flowed but the "gins" (black women) told us he died almost instantly. As I came in from looking after my horse I passed them as they lay cold and prone in the thin misty moonlight each on the spot where he had fallen. The wife of one of them a fine but small Hercules-like figure sat or rather reclined by him sobbing as if her heart would break. Another was quite a lad and the other an old grey-bearded man who had been a great warrior in his day. Nobody was near either of them. The reflection struck me very strongly how strange an instinct is war! And yet may it not be necessary for the good and even the safety of the peaceful that the fierce and bloodthirsty should be thus attracted toward each other; the mutual destruction of the destructive leaving the peaceful to their peace?  Fourth day. - Got to a stock station this evening where the plenty was as remarkable as the dearth where we stopped last night. It was Sunday but nobody here keeps the day as anything more than a holiday. Men wash their shirts and grind their week's wheat and visit where the huts are not too far apart. Here however this last occupation was pretty well precluded as the stations are miles asunder and there is seldom above one hut on each station. At the same time it is a saying as common as possible that no work done on the sabbath-day prospers. I never travel on this day if I can help it; but in this case it was almost unavoidable for we had got the night before into the very den of hunger and sloth. The country we passed through to-day was a very fine stock-country beautiful flats of open meadow on river banks and fine gentle grassy hills. [129]  Perhaps it was a little too thickly timbered. We met with a very welcome reception and the people wanted us to stop a day or two with them for a rest but we did not.  There is a pleasant ride along the shore from Fremantle to a little bay about seven miles distant one side of which covered with lofty trees runs far into the sea and is called Woodman's Point. The sea in this part appears to be only a few miles broad; Garden-island forming the opposite shore the southern extremity of which seems almost to join Cape Perron and thus presents the appearance of a vast bay. Not long ago the blackened remains of a small house or hovel were to be seen on the verge of the wood facing towards Cape Perron. Around it might be distinguished the traces of a garden of considerable extent; a few stunted vines still continued annually to put forth the appearance of verdure which served only to tempt the appetite of the stray cattle that wandered down to this solitary spot. A large bed of geraniums had extended itself across the path which used to lead to the door of the house; and their varied and beautiful flowers rejoicing in this congenial climate gave additional melancholy to the scene. It was evident those plants had been reared and tended and prized for their beauty; they had once been carefully cultured pruned and watered - now they were left to bloom or to die as accident permitted. Near to this bed of geraniums but apart and solitary untouched even by weeds of which there were only few in that sandy soil grew an English rose-tree. Its long unpruned boughs straggled wildly on the ground. It looked the picture of desolation and despair. A few imperfect flowers occasionally peeped forth but knew only a short and precarious existence for the shrub being no longer sheltered behind the house was now exposed to the daily violence of the sea-breeze.  This widowed rose deprived of the hand which had tended it so carefully and of the heart which its beauty had gladdened seemed now in its careless desolation awaiting the hour when it should die. [21]  It really looked with its drooping boughs its torn blossoms and its brown leaves rustling and sighing to the breeze like a sentient being mourning without hope. Those who have never lived in exile from their native land can have no idea of the feelings with which a lonely colonist long separated from all the associations of home would regard a solitary plant which so peculiarly calls up home memories. Pardon us good reader this appearance of sentiment; you who will read these lines in Old England - that land which we must ever think of with pardonable emotion - will evince but little sympathy with us who necessarily feel some fond regard for the Mother from whom we are parted and are naturally drawn towards the inanimate things by which we are reminded of her. There is in this colony of Western Australia a single daisy root; and never was the most costly hot-house plant in England so highly prized as this humble little exile. The fortunate possessor pays it far more attention than he bestows upon any of the gorgeous flowers that bloom about it; and those who visit his garden of rare plants find nothing there that fills them with so profound a feeling of interest as the meek and lowly flower which recalls to their memories the pleasant pastures of Old England.  But to return to the ruins of Woodman's Point. This plot of land now so neglected and forlorn was once the blooming garden of a very singular old man who owed his support to the vegetables which it produced and to the fish that he caught from the little cobble which danced at anchor in the bay whenever the weather permitted the fisherman to exercise his art. No one knew his history but his conversation and deportment told you that he was of gentle birth and had been well educated. His manners were particularly amiable and retiring and every one who visited the solitary old man came away impressed with a melancholy interest in his fate.  He always welcomed a visitor with gentle pleasure and seemed glad of the opportunity of showing his crops of vegetables and the flowers in which he delighted.  The rose-tree never failed to arrest his steps for a moment. He had brought it himself from England as a cutting and there was evidently some history attached to it; but he never shared his confidence with any one; and the history of the rose-tree like his own was never revealed.  There was only one point on which he betrayed any feeling of pride - and that was his name. No one else would perhaps have been so proud of it but he himself ever seemed to regard it with veneration.  He called himself Anthony Elisha Simson; and never failed to make you observe that his patronymic was spelt without a "p."  Nothing irritated him so much as to receive a note addressed "A. E. Simpson Esq."  The Simsons he would assure you were an old family in the northern counties of England and traced back their genealogy to the Conquest; whereas the Simpsons were of quite a different and doubtless inferior origin. [22] Nothing more than this did he ever relate concerning his family or his personal history.  He arrived in the colony a few years after its foundation without any other effects than what were contained in a portmanteau and carpet-bag and with only a few sovereigns in his purse. Without associating himself with any one he early fixed upon the spot where he afterwards built his house and established his permanent abode. Here he began to make his garden and did not disdain to earn a few shillings occasionally by cutting firewood for a man who supplied Fremantle with that necessary article. It was this occupation that caused the settlers who knew nothing more of him to give him the title of "The Woodman" - a name which soon attached to the locality.  After he had been some time in the colony Mr Simson began to express great impatience for the arrival of letters from England. Whenever a vessel arrived at the port he would put on his old shooting-coat and walk along the shore to Fremantle where after having inquired in vain at the post-office he would purchase a pound of tea and then return home again.  Years went by. Every time that a vessel arrived poor Simson would hurry to Fremantle. He would watch with eyes of ill-repressed eagerness the mail carried to the post-office in boxes and large sacks. Surely amid that multitude of letters there must be one for him! Patiently would he wait for hours at the window whilst the postmaster and his assistants sorted the letters; and when he had received the usual answer to his inquiry he would return to his abode with down-cast looks.  As time passed on he grew more fretful and impatient. Receiving no intelligence from England he seemed to be anxious to return thither. He would drop expressions which led his visitors (generally government officers who called upon him in their rides) to believe he would depart from the colony were he rich enough to pay his passage or were he not restrained by some other powerful motive.  His mind ran altogether upon the Old Country and it was with reluctance that he planted the vegetables and cured the fish which were essential to his support.  For many hours during the day he used to be seen standing fixed as a sentinel on the low rock which formed the extremity of the ridge called after himself - the Woodman's Point - and looking homewards.  Doubtless thought was busy within him - the thought of all he had left or acted there. None had written to him; none remembered or perhaps wished to remember him. But home was in his heart even whilst he felt there was no longer a home for him. A restless anxiety preyed upon his mind and he grew thin and feeble; but still whenever a sail was seen coming round the north end of Rottnest and approaching the port he would seize his staff and set out upon his long journey to Fremantle to inquire if there were at last a letter awaiting him. [23]  May we imagine the growing despair in the heart of this poor old exile as life seemed ebbing away and yet there came no news no hope to him from home? Frequently he wrote himself but always to the same address - that of a broker it was supposed in Throgmorton-street. But no answer was ever returned. Had he no children - no friends?  Naturally weak-minded he had now grown almost imbecile; but his manners were still so gentle and every thing about him seemed to betoken so amiable and so resigned a spirit that those who visited him could scarcely part again without tears. As he grew more feeble in body he became more anxious to receive a letter from home; he expected that every one who approached his dwelling was the bearer of the intelligence so long hoped for in vain; and he would hasten to greet him at the gate with eager looks and flushed cheeks - again only to be disappointed.  At length it was with difficulty that he tottered to the Point to look for a vessel which might bring him news. Although no ship had arrived since he last sent to the post-office he would urge his visitor though with hesitating earnestness to be so good as to call there on his return and ascertain if by chance a letter were not awaiting him. He said he felt that his hour was approaching but he could not bear to think of setting out on that long journey without having once heard from home. Sometimes he muttered as it were to himself that treachery had been practised against him and he would go and expose it; but he never allowed himself to indulge long in this strain. Sometimes he would try to raise money enough by drawing bills to pay his passage but no one would advance anything upon them.  Daily he became more feeble and men began to talk of sending him a nurse. The last visitor who beheld him alive found him seated in the chair which he had himself constructed and appearing less depressed than usual. He said he expected soon to receive news from home and smiled with child-like glee. His friend helped him to walk as far as the rose-tree which was then putting forth its buds. "Promise" said the old man laying his trembling hand upon the other's arm "promise that when I am gone you will come and see them in full blow? Promise! you will make me happy." .  The next day they sent a lad from Fremantle to attend upon him. The boy found him seated in his chair. He was dead. A mound of earth at the foot of a mahogany-tree still marks the spot where he was buried. Those friends at home who neglected or repulsed him when living may by chance meet with this record from the hand of a stranger - but it will not move them; nor need it now.  At all periods during the progress of the colony and up to the present time single men could obtain wives on application from amongst the female convicts at the chief depot in Paramatta.  The form is a strange one and well worth relating. A man desiring a wife and being unable to suit himself elsewhere proceeds to the female factory at Paramatta and presents himself to the matron and master of that institution. The certificate of a clergyman or magistrate is produced setting forth that the applicant is a proper person to have a wife given to him from the many under charge of the matron. The applicant is then introduced into a room of the building whilst the matron proceeds to the first class department that contains the best behaved of the female convicts. Notice is here given that a wife is required and such as are willing to be married step forward and are marshalled in batches into the presence of the would- be Benedict. On they pass the man speaking to individuals as they attract his attention inquiring their age capabilities &c till some one is met with who pleases his taste and possesses the required perfections. [132] The inquiries then become mutual; the lover wishes to know if the fair one has ever been married; the question is reiterated by the female who also desires to learn how many head of cattle or sheep or what land or houses her lover is possessed of. Mutual explanations take place and if satisfactory on both sides the matron is acquainted with the fact and a day named for the marriage.  All the time this lady is present and has frequently to witness strange and ludicrous scenes; scores of females passing for review between whose personal and other claims the applicant balances his mind sometimes leaving it to the matron to decide whom he shall take. When this knotty point is settled the authorities are informed of the fact; the clergyman of the place publishes the bans and if no impediment intervenes on the appointed day the parties are married; the woman leaving the factory and returning to a state of freedom in the colony during good conduct. These marriages are of frequent occurrence thousands having thus obtained wives.  The life of a squatter is generally calm and unvaried presenting little of the ills and few of the cares of life if he act with common prudence. If not dwelling at the most distant out-stations there is but little fear of molestation from the Aborigines as these unfortunates are becoming few in number and depressed in spirit. Once or twice a year the squatter visits Melbourne Geelong or Portland to dispose of his wool pay his licence dues and procure tea sugar slops and-such other stores as are required at his station. When at home he is engaged in seeing that his shepherds and other servants perform their duty; and in riding about his run looking after his cattle and taking care that none of them stray. A gallop after a native dog a kangaroo or emu sometimes diversifies the sameness of this life. The majority of the squatters are single men; and this fact is generally apparent on approaching a station by the neglect evident around. [193] Although timber in abundance is at hand yet the squatter often contents himself for years with a bark hut or the roughest possible slab one through which wind and weather penetrate; the richest land may be at hand yet the mere trouble of cultivating a few potatoes or vegetables is but seldom taken although they would form a great improvement to the general bush fare - meat and damper. Rough huts for the men and a detached one for the master generally stand on the banks of some river creek or in the vicinity of water holes the hurdle and folds for the sheep being at a short distance. It may be occasionally that a patch of wheat or barley is in sight for the use of the station but this even is only the case when it is the head station. The absence of women and scarcity of labour in the bush is inimical to comfort there; but this is little considered as the climate is so dry and healthy that constant exposure to the weather is attended with no bad results.  But although the abodes of the squatters are generally indicative of neglect and carelessness such is not always the case: domestic comfort is sought after by some and brick stone or comfortable wooden houses erected around which are gathered in some instances not only many of the comforts of life but a happy family to enjoy them.   In the large grazing districts where the boundaries of the land over which each stockowner exercises his right of pasture are not clearly defined by means of fences or hedges as in more civilized countries disputes are naturally of frequent occurrence. When a station changes hands it is usual for the purchaser to ride round the outside of it accompanied by the neighbouring settlers so that the limits may be mutually agreed upon. But in spite of every precaution misunderstandings will arise; in process of time some hill or gully which had originally constituted the landmark becomes forgotten or mistaken for another and the result is that the right of pasture is claimed by both parties. Remonstrances succeed each other but in vain; each claimant is resolved to trust to his own memory rather than to that of his neighbour. Matters remain in this unsatisfactory state for a time until some fine morning one of the disputants seeing a large flock of sheep not his own upon the contested ground loses all patience and starts off on the very first horse he can catch to the commissioner of crown lands for the district; and by him after he has told the usual story about encroachment damage done to his run representing himself as the sole legitimate owner of the contested spot and a most ill-used individual he is informed that his neighbour whose forbearance also appears to have been exhausted much about the same time has been to the commissioner upon the very day before and has lodged. mutatis mutandis the same complaint. Things having come to this pass the decision is left wholly to the commissioner who seeing no prospect of an amicable arrangement appoints a day for his requested visit to the scene of controversy usually within a month or so from the period of the appeal to his judgment; during which the disputed pasture is occupied by both parties and consequently soon becomes as bare and nearly as well polished as a mahogany table.  The court of inquiry is usually held at the head station of one of the claimants and thither the commissioner arrives on the day appointed where he meets both the proprietors each with a host of witnesses. The first occupant or he who purchased his right of pasture from the first occupant is the lawful owner and the point at issue consequently is the fact of prior occupation.  On the witnesses being called first comes the shepherd of the plaintiff A who affirms that he has been several years in his master's employ and has fed his flock upon the disputed land ever since he can remember. Next appears the stockkeeper of B who declares on the other hand that his master's cattle occupied the place before any sheep were brought into the neighbourhood and offers in corroboration of his testimony to point out the marks of their old 'rendezvous'. [202] But A. also produces his stockman who states his conviction that the said rendezvous was not made by B's cattle at all but by a herd belonging to a former owner of his master's station.   B. again calls up a witness of longer standing in that part of the country and the scale of testimony is once more evenly balanced; and thus each party goes back a step beyond the other and the subject of contention like a Welsh pedigree bids fair to be lost in the clouds while the unhappy commissioner amidst such conflicting evidence is gradually taking leave of his wits. In addition to the usual causes of his perplexity he loses much time from the difficulty in arriving at the real names of some of the attesting parties for in the bush of Australia aliases are frequently as prevalent among the labouring classes as in the English collieries. Some of these are ludicrous enough: a neighbour of ours had a stockman who often used to be sent to our assistance at 'gathering' times and was only known probably from his rough-riding feats by the title of 'Go by 'em'; and I remember that on another occasion when it was necessary to discover the real name of a man in our district for the purpose of taking out a warrant against him for having aided and abetted a party of bushrangers then in the vicinity we could get no further for some time than the sobriquet of 'Terrible Tommy'.  However to return to our trial. A. now brings forth his reserve a man who by his own account is of so long standing in the neighbourhood as to have been what is called in the colony a 'first fleeter'. He declares that he has been originally in the service of the actual explorer and earliest occupant of the run part of which is now in dispute from whom it gradually changed hands until it fell into those of its present owner. Now as this man is the oldest of the party and can therefore claim the longest memory and as moreover he takes care to interlard his testimony with remarks upon the 'first sight of the district' wild blacks and flocks of kangaroos in quiet possession of the plains all the other witnesses are put to silence and listen in admiration to their more enterprising companion.  The matter now seems brought to a conclusion and A. and his party are already congratulating themselves on the result; but just as the commissioner is on the point of deciding the contest in their favour a sudden idea crosses his mind: he remembers that this primaeval settler though acknowledged to have been the first occupant omitted on one occasion to pay his annual assessment for stock which has not been subsequently made good; this completely alters the state of affairs; A's claim arising from his prior occupancy is lost and his opponent whose predecessors have been more punctual in their payments to the crown is installed in possession of the disputed pasture.  Beyond the undulating plains which formed our district lay a vast expanse of broken country consisting of dry creeks gullies wooded hills and grassy flats jumbled confusedly together so as to produce the most remarkable scenery and fit for nothing but to afford a secure retreat for hundreds of wild cattle of which mention has been previously made as being wholly irreclaimable and perfectly distinct in their habits from the half-wild herds. In these almost inaccessible regions they have long bred and never voluntarily venture out on the open ground. There they remain unmolested except when any of the branded or domesticated cattle having strayed from the level country and joined them in their haunts attract thither the settler and his men in their pursuit; for if they are not speedily sought and reclaimed they soon become as intractable as the rest and eventually past all recovery. [204] An occurrence of this sort which usually takes place soon after the winter the time when cattle are most apt to stray would occasion a note something like the following:   'Dear -   'Some of our cattle have been seen among the wild ones in the gullies at the back of our station and I am going to take a turn at them tomorrow. They have been missed several months and it is high time that they were taught the way out again. Will you join us? I dare say there are some of your own astray too. Come over in the evening and bring a stock-keeper with you. We can then arrange plans with "Amos". who will meet us here and make one of the party.'  In a case of this sort it is not neighbourly to refuse assistance; so on the occasions in question as soon as we could catch our horses we jogged down in the afternoon to answer the invitation in person.  Our arrangements were soon completed. It was decided that the most judicious or as Amos called it the most 'judgematical' plan was to go into the gullies that very evening and encamp there during the night so as to have the whole of the following day for our work. Our party consisted of five horsemen most of them well qualified for the expedition; and my friend the author of the note as he threw open his enclosures at starting felt confident that we should require the use of them on our return.  But our most powerful ally our sheet-anchor was 'Amos' a short description of whom as a man 'sui generis' will serve to beguile the way as we ride onward to the gullies. He was a native-born white and had been a stockowner all his life. His parents had given him a few cows and brood-mares at his birth and he was now by dint of time and industry the owner of many thousands of cattle. But though fully possessed of the means he had no wish to alter his style of living for the better or to rest in any way from his hard and laborious employment. He was in fact a man who could not be wholly domesticated; his slab hut was all that he required at night and his home was abroad in the saddle an article which seldom lasted him more than a year. Sparing of his speech and possessed of little curiosity upon any extraneous subject it was his maxim - a most excellent one - always to mind his own business; and though he was ever most ready to assist he never interfered with his neighbours. His whole ambition seemed to be what he was an oracle upon all subjects connected with his own peculiar occupation and the most fearless rider in the district one who let the animals pursued go where they might had never yet failed to 'lead them' or refused to follow them down anything 'short of a precipice'. Every inch of plain forest and gully was known to him for miles round and for months together he would pursue the same daily routine of life mounting his horse at an early hour amid sallying Forth to all parts. of his 'run'; while his 'hut-keeper' had one reply to all inquiries- 'his master was out after stock'. [...] [205]  After about an hour's search during which we had scarcely ever removed our eyes from the ground or raised our bodies from a sloping position a track was discovered on the side of a hill but the long wiry grass made it very indistinct and we proceeded but slowly for some time until in a dry creek we stumbled upon several other more 'likely' footprints making for the low grounds and probably for the water where we expected to meet with cattle; but no such thing. At last a flat in the vicinity of a narrow rill rising out of some rich dark soil known in Australia as a 'black spring' showed us innumerable footprints crossing and recrossing each other in every direction. Farther on we came to a spot which had recently been the scene of an encounter so frequent in the wild state between two of the bulls; for the earth was torn up and the grass levelled around it but how long ago was the question for the birds were flown.  'They were down here before daybreak this morning' said Amos; 'that track's as fresh as paint. The best thing we can do now is to separate and ride round the spring on every side until one of us hits it off again.'  Wild cattle I may mention usually come to water by night and not during the heat of midday as is the habit of those herds which are in a more domesticated state.  After a delay of about ten minutes' duration the track led us away down a gully so narrow that two horsemen could not ride abreast; so we jogged on in single file expecting every moment to come upon the chase with a feeling of subdued excitement that was very invigorating. At length we stopped again.  'We are close upon them now' said our leader; 'they were here not five minutes ago: one of them was basking there' (I looked at the place to which he pointed but could see no difference between it and the adjacent spot); and if they've not heard us and made off the other way we shall be up with them in the crack of a stockwhip.  He had scarcely said the words when we heard a deep tramping sound close to us and caught a momentary glimpse of a number of cattle stealing rapidly away on the other aide of the ridge above which their hacks and the tips of their horns alone were visible and in an instant we were after them helter-skelter.  Unpractised as I then was - for it was my first attempt at 'gully-raking' as it is called - I soon found myself completely thrown out; so leaving my stock-keeper to do his master's share of the work as well as his own I contented myself with keeping within a moderate distance of the scene of action while I took a general view of the chase.  Cattle when pursued invariably make for falling ground for which their formation peculiarly fits them; so much so that although an animal should be nearly exhausted on ascending a hill yet if he can only just manage to surmount it the weight of his own body carries him down on the other sides speedily as ever.  Down hill therefore went titan and beast. At the foot of the range there was a dry creek in which at a little distance on the left the bases of two precipitous hills nearly meeting each other from opposite quarters formed a narrow pass; for this knowing it to be their nearest outlet the wild cattle some fifty in number shaped their course: unluckily it happened to lead in the wrong direction and the race was therefore whether pursuers or pursued would get first to the gap. [206]  The range grew steeper and steeper towards the bottom and it was very exciting to see the whole party going down it together rattling the loose stones from under their horses' feet plunging into it and as suddenly emerging again from the patches of scrub scrambling over the fallen timber and lowering their heads with great precision to avoid being swept from their saddles by the projecting branches that occasionally crossed their way; while the action of the stock-horses owing to the declivity was at times more like that of a kangaroo than anything else: somebody thought I must surely be damaged before long; but I was quite a stranger to this sort of thing and had not then learnt what I was assured of on my return home that 'it was only the way of the country'.  It seemed that there was a sort of rivalry between my friend's stock-keeper and our invaluable partisan 'Amos' and this was a fair field for their exertions. The open country was too easy for them. To get along fast in broken and falling ground is the criterion of horsemanship; so from this emulation the riding was perhaps rather more energetic than usual.  The tide of fortune hitherto seemed evenly balanced; but just as the wild herd neared the creek a black bull evidently no stranger to the locality singled out and far ahead of the rest made straight for the gap. He was a very noble beast without a brand of any kind upon him and his eye full and round as a gazelle's seemed to flash fire as he pursued his mad career dashing the foam from his lips. It was absolutely necessary to stop him at all hazards; for wheresoever one animal leads the way the rest are sure to follow: but he had already gained a great deal of ground and was now to near the gap that his escape seemed inevitable.  One chance remained: a ledge of loose stones so precipitous that the bull excited as he was had turned aside from it in his course opened a shorter cut. To this two men pushed their horses abreast but one alone went down it the other stopped and looked after him. The next minute a horseman stood in the gap; the black bull was seen making off in a contrary direction and the report of a stockwhip reverberating through the hills warned the cattle that 'Amos' (for he it was) had reached the goal before them  This was the grand event of the day and our success had in a great measure hinged upon it. Thenceforth our work was comparatively easy. The cattle were 'steadied' for a minute upon a hillside and as soon as the stragglers of which we were in pursuit had been clearly distinguished among them the whole were hunted or rather guided homewards for they wanted no driving being apparently bent upon running as long as their legs would carry them; while our business was to keep them together and always to be beforehand with them in reaching any creek or gully that branched off from the right direction. Now and then an animal would become exhausted and standing at bay threaten death to any one who approached it; or being nearly blinded with hard running would take a line of its own and refuse to go any other; but with these few exceptions we succeeded in driving the whole herd before us. [207]  'It's lucky we got them' said Amos; 'there were "no flies" about that black bull.'  THAT 'ACT OF COUNCIL' or colonial law most objectionable is the 'Bushranging Act'. It gives power to any constable policeman or executor of the law to take into custody the body of any person whom they may meet with unless the party can produce some official document or convincing proof that he is a free man. To a stranger to New South Wales and one at a distance but a vague idea can be conveyed of the annoyance and abuse that this law subjects all persons in the colony to. It places vast power in the hands of the police who are in general either ticket-of-leave men or emancipated convicts; and these men are but too frequently happy at the opportunity it gives them to molest free persons or vent their revenge for some real or imaginary insult or injury that may have been inflicted on themselves or their 'pals'. From the operation of the Bushranging Act - originally passed to aid the arrest of convicts illegally at large - the very class of persons on whose account it was brought into existence are those best protected.  Every ticket-of-leave man expiree or emancipated convict on obtaining his partial or total freedom receives from the convict departmens an official document bearing testimony to the fact. On demand the production of this frees them from further molestation on the part of the police; but the free immigrant has nothing of the kind to produce if required by any prying constable to 'show his freedom'; the consequence is generally that unless the functionary of the law thinks fit to be satisfied with the exhibition of letters or similar matters the unfortunate free man whose only fault seems his not having been 'lagged' is dragged to the nearest police station and forwarded from lock-up to lock-up till he reaches Sydney for 'identification' occupying not unfrequently weeks on the road. This long period is spent among felons and the scum of the colony in rough unwholesome lock-ups or temporary jails on the coarsest fare. On reaching Sydney the victim is first brought to the police office and from thence sent to Hyde Park barracks the chief convict depot. There an examination has to be undergone of the marks and peculiarities of the body and a comparison with a register of the convict population when at length not being recognized as a convict he is discharged and allowed to return from whence he came as soon as he thinks fit. [245] No redress no recompense is afforded for long imprisonment and deep injury although but too frequently caused by wilful malevolence. It may be imagined that it would be easy to procure such a document as would ensure the holder from molestation. But such is not the fact; there is no one authority recognized as capable of granting such. A protection might be obtained with difficulty from the Colonial Secretary; but this is entirely out of the reach of the lower class of immigrants. It maybe thought also that none but the labouring portion of the free population are likely to meet with interruption in their journeys; certainly they are the chief sufferers but all classes are liable and are but too frequently made aware that they are in a land where no man is really free.  Some of the principal persons in New South Wales have been subjected to the operation of the 'Bushranging Act'. Ex-Chief-Justice Sir James Forbes was once stopped by an officious policeman who met him no very great distance from his own abode and not being able to produce such proof of his freedom as the constable required he was actually handcuffed and marched down to Sydney a distance of near forty miles for 'identification'. Magistrates also have been thus arrested and in some instances forwarded to the very police station where they themselves presided on the way to Sydney. It would be supposed now that the convict population forms such a small portion of the inhabitants of New South Wales that such a restriction on the liberty of the subject would be abolished but no such thing: it still continues in full force.  The author was some years since in the early days of Port Phillip proceeding thither from Sydney He had crossed the Murray and was rather better than half way on his journey when he was overtaken by a corporal and three privates of the mounted police. The corporal immediately required the production of the accustomed 'freedom'. The answer was that the author had no such thing but that the corporal was at liberty to inspect some letters and papers which would soon satisfy him. This was declined; how was the corporal to know that the papers were really the property of their then possessor as there were many escaped convicts making their way overland to South Australia of whom it was possible the writer might be one. It was therefore absolutely necessary that he should proceed in custody of the corporal back to Yasa the nearest town in New South Wales and thence be forwarded to Sydney for identification.  From the place where this rencontre occurred Yam was distant upwards of two hundred and fifty miles; whilst Melbourne the destination of the writer was little more than one hundred and fifty. On the day of the occurrence the Ovens River had been crossed and thither were the steps of the party retraced: and by dark the small bush hut that afforded temporary accommodation to the traveller on its banks- was reached. Here the night was to be spent: in vain representations were made to the corporal and every description of document but the 'legal one' produced to prove the freedom of the writer: he would not even inspect them much less acknowledge that he had seen his prisoner twice on previous journeys between Sydney and Port Phillip and must therefore be in his own mind satisfied of his respectability and freedom. [246]  In disgust the author threw himself on the sheet of bark and a few blankets that had been spread for his bed mentally anathematizing the laws that gave power and opportunity for so much wrong. As he lay the conviction that the corporal had some especial reason for his conduct towards him became impressed on his mind; he therefore determined to feign sleep and watch narrowly the conversation of the police party who were seated in conviviality round a bottle of rum for the sale of which at that period the house was not licensed but which the police knew well how to procure as it was sold on the 'sly'. Time passed on the prisoner feigned to be in a sound sleep whilst the police as they imbibed became more communicative; at length considering from his breathing that he was incapable of hearing them they laughed outright at the trick they had played him for the purpose of affording the corporal an opportunity of leaving his post and proceeding to Yass for no other object than to visit his sweetheart an innkeeper's daughter who dwelt there. It appeared the corporal had applied to his superior for leave of absence but this having been refused he determined to obtain his object at the author's expense.  So indignant did the discovery make the prisoner that he sprung from his recumbent position and at once stated what he had heard; but after the first start he was only laughed at the conversation denied and the host called to witness that none such took place - which he was obliged to affirm being in the power of the police as a 'sly grog seller'; the prisoner was then assured if he made any more disturbance that a pair of handcuffs would be resorted to as a quietus. Discretion was the better part of valour so the author betook himself to sleep after revolving in his mind the possibility of escape from such an unpleasant position.  Morning came; with it all were astir and having despatched a bush breakfast mutton damper and tea the horses were brought forth and every preparation made to cross the Ovens River which ran close beneath the hut.  At the time the river was swollen with rains and the passage was no easy matter. It was effected by means of a small punt made fast to and traversing on a cable which was attached to a tree on either bank. One by one each rider entered the punt - navigated by the host of the last night's abode - and leading his horse swam him across with the punt supporting his head by a collar above the water.  All had crossed but the corporal one private and the prisoner; the corporal had led his horse into the river and entered the punt with its manager when the thought occurred to the author that he might escape from durance vile. His horse was now the only one that had not crossed and but one constable or policeman remained with him as a guard. The decision come to it was soon carried into effect. Producing a colonial pound note the writer urged his guard to run up to the hut and procure a couple of bottles of rum to cheer the party on their way. [247] The hut being but fifty yards distant up a slope no thought of escape entered the head of the policeman as the saddle arms and travelling bags of his prisoner were on the other side; and nought remained but the horse with a bridle on; so he at once cheerfully complied with the request. His own arms and horse had been conveyed over with the corporal who was by this time in the middle of the stream gradually progressing towards the other side as the punt was pulled over by the rope A case-knife was produced; unnoticed the rope - which secured the communication - was severed and punt corporal horse host and all swept away down with the stream. There was no time to wait to see what would become of them; at one bound the powerful and swift mare the author rode was mounted and whilst the guard was yet in the hut he dashed up the hill and swept into the forest. A couple of shots from the far side of the river were fired but ineffectually on account of the distance and the author disappeared from the sight and power of his late captors.  Well aware that there was no horse at the hut and that it would take some hours if not days before a communication could be effected with the far side of the stream no anxiety of immediate or effectual pursuit was entertained as the speed and bottom of the author's horse would soon render such ineffectual. The only question was how to obtain a saddle before any other police were fallen in with; for there was a station at the Broken River which must be passed as it was the place where the punt was kept for crossing the stream. This difficulty was settled by the author's knowledge of the country and he was enabled to obtain a loan of a saddle on the deposit of its value and on explaining the circumstances at a cattle station a short distance off the track.  Passing the Broken River police station a note was there written and left for the disappointed corporal directing him to forward the writer's saddle and traps to Melbourne by the first opportunity; otherwise an immediate and urgent representation of the circumstances would be made to Major Ryan in Sydney who was at the period in command of the mounted police of the colony. Three days after the writer arrived in Melbourne and before the lapse of ten more he was in possession of his saddle arms and traps which the corporal duly forwarded with an humble expression of regret at having been so mistaken in the character of his late prisoner of whose respectability he had become satisfied. There the matter dropped; as the writer considered a severe ducking with a narrow escape of drowning and the loss of some of his accoutrements a sufficient punishment for the corporal without representing his conduct to his superiors.  Such is one instance among many that could be related by any one who knows New South Wales of the abuse of the power entrusted to the police by the 'Bushranging Act'; and when men of station are subjected to such treatment what at times must be the position of the labouring friendless immigrant? For it will scarcely be believed that one arrest-journey to Sydney and subsequent discharge does not obtain for the victim any protection against the immediate recurrence of the same injury and suffering. [248]  If after he is discharged from custody he makes application at the police office to obtain a protection against future arrest the answer received is that the police office has no power to grant it; that it is not a part of the duty of the officials there. In like manner from post to pillar and office to office is the unfortunate immigrant or free person bandied till at length he discovers that he must reconcile himself to an evil which he cannot guard against.  This liability of arrest and curtailment of the liberty of the subject is one of the chief objections to New South Wales as the seat of extensive emigration; but the period cannot be far distant when the Legislative Assembly will recognize the evil and take speedy and effectual steps to abolish it.  THUS IN 1842 Sydney became a city with its Mayor Aldermen and Town Councillors. Much party spirit and bad political feeling were displayed during the first election for municipal officers. Bad as home election riots used to be they were fully equalled if not exceeded by the scenes in Sydney when the residents of that place were first called upon to exercise their franchise. Thousands of pounds were spent on that occasion in canvassing and the wholesale distribution of drink.  Some curious scenes took place in the vicinity of a polling booth. One of the police magistrates was endeavouring to preserve order; the drunken infuriated mob drove him into an enclosure surrounded with high palings some five feet from the ground where they pelted him with bricks stones and large pieces of the paling. Fortunately for him he was well mounted and although he had but one leg by a daring jump he cleared the fence and escaped.  In another part the writer saw a still worse scene enacted. Near the signal station at the north end of the town there had been erected a polling booth: during the excitement the tent which partly composed it had been pulled down and one of the candidates a shipowner of the colony had been maltreated and several others hurt. [277] Without applying to the authorities the shipowner proceeded to the bay where he had several whalers lying and arming some scores of their crews with harpoons whaling knives and other such formidable weapons returned with them to the place of polling and with cold steel swept mob and electors from the place but not without a desperate resistance in which several persons were severely injured. This was rather a novel way of carrying an election; the gentleman -- as he was called in the colony - was afterwards tried for severely stabbing a person with a cane sword on the occasion and escaped conviction with difficulty.  In the constitution of its society South Australia has been especially favoured; among her original colonists were a large number of men previously occupying most respectable positions in England - men of intellect talent and perseverance; and even her emigrants were originally chosen with a care seldom exercised in the case of other colonies. Among the agricultural class are a considerable body of Germans who driven from their native country by religious feeling have sought at the antipodes a resting-place and a home where under the protection and laws of Great Britain they may worship their Maker after their own ideas. Temperate honest industrious persevering and submissive the Germans have proved of great service to the colony and are found especially valuable from their knowledge of the cultivation of the vine and other plants unknown to the agricultural classes of England. Fond of combination and collective exertion the Germans assembled around and under the jurisdiction of beloved pastors have formed particular locations of their own and the benefit of the system is observable in the high cultivation of their lands and their generally improved condition. Superior in education and general knowledge to the poor of this country the Germans in South Australia have by their unvarying good conduct made themselves respected and regarded by the settlers who generally prefer them to any other labourers. But in the latter condition they seldom continue long; the high wages payable in the colony soon enable them to establish themselves on their own account as they are a saving race and find in music in which many of them are proficient the amusement and relaxation which the British emigrant labourer unfortunately too often seeks at the public-house. [301]  Notwithstanding that South Australia abuts on New South Wales yet the settled and convict portion of that colony is removed to such a vast distance that comparatively few persons who have been convicts have crossed to this colony. They have generally engaged themselves as stockmen or shepherds to the different overland parties who penetrated through the interior and they form such a small proportion of the entire population that they have little if any bad effect on society. No doubt many old liberated convicts have been introduced into the colony by sea but yet these again coming amongst a free and moral population generally endeavour to sink their former character in a newly-acquired one of honesty probity and industry; they lose the swagger the bold coarse front and drunken habits general in New South Wales and seek to identify themselves with those around them; but the indelible stamp that years of punishment suffering and crime has marked upon their countenance remains impressed there and the bronzed parched careworn face tells for ever of former guilt of chain-gangs and of penal settlements. [302]  In Adelaide itself and its vicinity where agriculture is carried on there is much good society to be met with; ladies - bright fair educated and accomplished and gentlemen who would not suffer by a comparison with any other colonists in the world. In the country districts where pastoral pursuits are the chief occupation the stations are generally too far apart for much society; the inhabitants lead the lives of squatters with their servants already described in the first volume of this work; with this improvement that in South Australia the female sex are more frequently present at these places the adult female of South Australia bearing a larger proportion to the males than in any other of the Australian colonies. At the mines the large wages earned by the men generally promote intoxication and indeed all over the colony there are to be found not a few thirsty souls from whom the public-houses derive a considerable revenue the trade of a licensed victualler being one of the most profitable occupations in the colony.  Adelaide boasts of a theatre at which considerable audiences frequently assemble and endeavour to find as much amusement in the performances of third class professionals as they would in the best display at Drury Lane or Covent Garden. A savings' bank for the lower classes has lately been established at the capital and there is a public subscription library supported by the more respectable inhabitants. There are three or four ledges of freemasons half a dozen of the odd fellows and an abstinence society. Heretofore the voluntary system for the support of religion has prevented the bitter acrimony and party religious feeling which prevail in the other Australian colonies; and it is much to be desired that the same good feeling and forbearance will continue even if State support be afforded to the different religious denominations. This however must chiefly rest with the clergy; and it is well for the colony that at the head of the two creeds of the Church of England and Romanian there are two such urbane and educated men as the present Protestant and Roman Catholic bishops of Adelaide. The latter from having been many years in Sydney must have experienced largely the evils resulting from the religious animosities prevalent in New South Wales; and being an enlightened gentleman it is to be hoped and expected that he will profit by his experience and prevent by every means in his power those differences which mainly tend to retard the advancement of a colony and diffuse discomfort and discord where all should be union for the general welfare and the advancement of their adopted land.  A fight FOR £20 a-side came off yesterday soon after daylight near the Flagstaff Inn on the Sturt between John White and a native-born Sydney youth of 19 named Bellamy. White seemed labouring under the effects of recent dissipation but presented when peeled a very fine appearance and displayed more muscle and arm and a smarter make than his opponent who however though less elegant in shape seemed exceedingly powerful; he was in splendid condition and weighed ten pounds more than White. The friends of either party were very sweet upon their man. Six to five were freely given and taken in large sums on White; but after the first round even bets were liberally exchanged. There is a kind of nationality among the natives of the different colonies that shews itself on occasions such as these. We doubt if a Sydney man would have wagered against the Sydney champion.  White fought in drawers and loose Blucher boots; Bellamy in loose trousers and without shoes. Both came up with pluck and with every appearance of confidence. The fight was one of the best disputed which can possibly be imagined. For the first four or five rounds the Sydney man had the best of it and displayed superior strength White having several heavy falls. In the third the first blow was drawn from Bellamy and in the fourth the first knock-down blow was given to White who also bled in the sixth. At this time White commenced fighting 'points' as it is termed and 'dropping'. In the thirty-fourth he was panting for breath and Bellamy was perfectly fresh but in the thirty-seventh the latter staggered and seemed to fall weakly. In the fifty-first White was thrown by a blow protested against as foul but it was justified by the umpires. The longest round was the fifty-seventh which occupied two minutes the rest ranging from three quarters of a minute to a minute: it ended by White's being thrown and his head coming violently on the ground. In the next there was a terrific rally and White went down again. The heaviest fall in the fight was endured by the same person in the sixty-first round and every one was surprised to see him come to time again. From the sixty-third to the sixty fifth round both men appeared very weak and Bellamy was almost blind: but when the sixty-fifth was called bets were still equal and no idea was entertained that the fight was at an end. [309] It was so however; White who had all along 'butted' as opportunity offered caught Bellamy with his head between the chin and the chest who sprang slightly from the ground and fell completely overpowered.  Thus ended one of the sharpest and best-contested fights which the lovers of the ring remember to have seen. It occupied one hour and thirty-five minutes: half-minute time. [310] Both men were dreadfully knocked about but it is agreed on all hands that the whole was fair. It could not be denied that though the Sydney man was beaten he proved himself a fine fellow. A collection amounting to £10 was made for him on the ground. From a hundred to a hundred and fifty persons were present and much more than at the rate of a pound a-head is said to have changed hands. The whole went off in perfect quietness and good humour. In the sixty-six rounds White was down fifty-three times Bellamy seven and both men six. This is sufficient to show the different style of the two men's fighting.  It was in the year 1839 that the author was first induced to visit South Australia. At that time stock of every kind fetched an extremely high price in the new colony; the supply being scanty and the demand great. The length of the voyage by sea from Van Dieman's [sic] Land presented an insuperable bar to large importations from that quarter; so that from New South Wales alone could the demand be supplied. Although the intervening country was all but unknown and the distance was so immense between the two colonies yet several enterprising parties had succeeded in effecting the journey with large herds and flocks. But the losses on the road had materially curtailed profits and many lives had been sacrificed in collisions with the aborigines. Yet the prospect of large gains was too much for the human heart to resist; and the author joined two friends in the speculation of purchasing a large herd of cattle and driving them overland to South Australia for sale. One of the partners was not to accompany the expedition but in his stead a youth of sixteen his son was to join the party.  Shortly after our agreement had been concluded a herd of cattle and about fifty working bullocks were purchased besides a number of useful horses.  The party rendezvoused in the neighbourhood of Yass Plains and on mustering there turned out 973 head of horned cattle including calves besides 53 working bullocks four drays and nineteen horses. The men numbered sixteen exclusive of the author his friend and the youth who had joined the party. [320]  A plentiful store of flour tea sugar salt pork and sundries had been provided with a good stock of firearms and ammunition; and on one of the drays a square punt was lodged to aid in crossing rivers and creeks otherwise impassable.  The men were chiefly old hands many having been convicts long inured to every description of hardship and caring little whether they lay down to rest within the hollow of a monster gum-tree or the walls of a human habitation. Several years previously two of the number had dwell for some time amongst the aborigines and were most experienced bushmen.  No road or track marked out the way we were to take. Our course was along the banks of the River Murrumbidgee until it fell into the Murray and then down she latter until it entered South Australia and emptied its waters into Lake Alexandrina.  Of personal baggage none of the party possessed much; a couple of suits of rough clothes and half a dozen coloured shirts was the wardrobe of each: and only one small tent had been brought for the accommodation of the leaders of the party.  In the depth of the Australian winter we first formed our encampment on Yass Plains that period being the most propitious for our enterprise as it held out the best chance of water and pasture for the stock. A single day was enough to set everything in order and assign each his station and on the following morning we made a start first proceeding along the track for Port Phillip. in order to reach that part of the Murrumbidgee where the crossing-place towards Australia Felix was situated. The distance to the river was about sixty-five miles and as the cattle were very wild and restive we were rather more than a week reaching it at a place called Gundagai. There we found an inn the house being composed of slabs covered with bark but the customers were bosh numerous and uproarious for there were no less than five parties 'camped' on the banks of the river on their way with cattle and sheep to the rich and newly-discovered regions of Australia Felix.  Gundagai is about 250 miles from Sydney and stands on the utmost limits of location in New South Wales. At this place there was usually a large punt. for the purpose of crossing the river communication being effected by means of a cable attached to a tree on either bank. Before our arrival owing to the rains having flooded the river this cable had been broken when the punt was in the act of being hauled across and once at liberty down the stream floated the boat until it grounded on a point three miles below. Being large and heavy it had remained there as it was found impossible to drag it up against the freshes. Thus all communication between either bank was interrupted and many were delayed on their journey.  But whoever suffered the landlord of the inn was not amongst the number for he drove a rattling trade among the wayfarers; and in all directions about the hut were to be seen men in parties of five or six doing their utmost to get drunk One knot particularly attracted my attention; they were stretched on a pile of split timber with a large bucket of rum in the centre out of which they were drinking with tin pint pots urging all that came near them to partake of their refreshment. [321]  Our men of course could not resist temptation and the greater part of them in spite of all our entreaties joined the topers. and soon became intoxicated. That night we had great difficulty in preventing the cattle from straying and getting mixed with others only four men remaining to assist us. Next day twelve out of the sixteen men were uproariously drunk and loudly expressed their determination not to proceed one step further on their journey without an advance of £2 per man and time to spend it at the inn with some old companions they had fallen in with. This was at first resisted but ultimately acceded to by us for we knew that there were no other hands to be obtained and ascertained that the distance to a police station and a magistrate was considerable; Yass being the nearest township.  At the end of three days the money was all spent and an order on a Sydney merchant was given to the landlord for the amount; travellers in the interior seldom carrying ready money with them but always paying by means of orders on Sydney. It was only on our oft-repeated determination not to be further accountable for what he would furnish and a threat that in case of his supplying our men with more spirits we would report him to the Commissioner of Crown Lands that the landlord was induced to stop his tap so far as regarded our men. Still it was not until we left our camping place and had moved down the river ten miles that the last of them rejoined us.  The prevalence of intoxication is hardly less universal [than swearing]; a drunkard in the interior of New South Wales cannot like those among the labouring classes in England spend his wages in daily or weekly visits to the ale-house but after the manner of a buccaneer of old or a sailor at the end of a long cruise having been debarred by circumstances from his favourite dissipation he makes amends by plunging deeper into it when he has it within his reach. After living perhaps at a distance of many days' journey from the possibility of indulgence in this vice he finds himself at the expiration of six or twelve months master of a good sum of money perhaps (with the exception of a trifle spent upon clothes) the whole of his yearly wages; after receiving which he repairs alone or with one or two congenial spirits to the nearest public house or 'grog-shop' where in the course of a few days he often dissipates the whole earnings of the past year.  Many of these men have a custom of placing their whole stock of money in the publican's hands from the very commencement of their visit with the intention of drinking as much as they think sufficient and receiving the balance. They are apt to consider this a highly prudent plan as it prevents the possibility of their pockets being rifled by their companions while they are in a happy state of unconsciousness; they too often find that they have only fallen from Scylla into Charybdis and literally 'reckoned without their host' whose hands which readily closed upon their money cannot easily be induced to relax their grasp.  Some of these road-side 'grog-shops' are the curse of the neighbourhood and are particularly dreaded by the sheep-owners whose stations are adjacent and who are obliged to be constantly on the alert to prevent the neglect and loss of their flocks from the effects of tippling among their shepherds. The proprietors of these houses are frequently men of very indifferent character whose sole object is so make money and decamp as soon at possible; and not contented with getting the unfortunate labouring man's money in the proper or rather improper course of business they have been detected in making great additions so his account while he is in a state of insensibility trusting that when he recovers he will be entirely unable to dispute the items. [323]  A strong instance of absolute slavery to this habit was afforded by a man in our neighbourhood who had repeatedly started for the purpose of visiting his relations in the vicinity of Sydney but who had not succeeded in reaching them during a space of several years being unable to guard his pockets against the Siren influence of the roadside inns from one of which he would constantly retrace his steps with exhausted means to toil again like a modem Sisyphus for an end that he was never to attain.  I was once riding alone through the bush on my way to Sydney and as I approached one of these roadside inns I became sensible of an indescribable sort of scuffling sound which gradually increased as I came to the entrance where like Petruchio I found 'no attendance no regard no duty'; but as both man and horse were hungry I walked in and soon penetrated the mystery. In an inner apartment some eight or ten men the whole of the visible inmates of the house were deeply engaged in a pugilistic melee apparently without there being any private quarrel in the case for each individual without any invidious distinction was in sporting phraseology 'pitching into' his nearest neighbour. The owner of the house upon seeing me extricated himself from the fray and tried to accomplish an apology; but I saw that there was little prospect of the restoration of order for sometime so I resumed my journey speculating whether returning sobriety or the total extinction of the combatants would first occur to bring matters to a conclusion.  However slight and even ludicrous an impression such scenes as these may make at the time they must painfully recur to the mind in moments of reflection and cause us to fear that if proper steps are not taken by those who have the power by Government as far as it can act and by individuals each in his own sphere to check the progress of vice in an infant colony retribution may one day fall heavily on those who have been guilty of this neglect. If upon the approach of the white man these majestic forests are to echo to the uncontrolled sound of riot and debauchery it would have been better that their deep silence had remained unbroken for ever.  In one of the southern districts a fine soda spring was discovered and on the strength of this a bush inn had been erected in its vicinity its owner speculating on the probability of its bringing him a quick sale of spirits by admixture of its water with acid and alcohol. In this he was not disappointed for it soon became a favourite beverage among his customers until the following characteristic incident took place. It entered the heads of a party of carousers at the inn that a great deal of time and trouble would be saved by converting the whole well into one large effervescing draught and for this purpose they collected a great quantity of spirit sugar and acid and having showered them down into the water and stirred it about with a pole they awaited the mighty result: this the story goes on to say proved unsatisfactory: little besides mud came to the top and the spring never recovered the outrage. [324]  At these inns in the interior little else is drunk but raw spirits for a mixture with water is commonly considered equivalent to spoiling both. It is terrible to see the state to which a man is sometimes reduced who in a warm climate like that of Australia has been drinking new and bad liquor for several days during which he has eaten little or nothing. He suddenly awakes out of a drunken sleep and finds that his money is all gone and with it his best means of recovery which in such cases is to take smaller quantities of liquor diminishing them by degrees till he recovers his strength: as he is unable to do this his nerves are suddenly relaxed and he is attacked by delirium tremens the severe penalty of his excesses.  At a township on the eastern coast of Australia I saw a most salutary method put into practice for keeping order among a set of these hard drinkers: there was a large empty room at one end of the inn into which its owner who was a very powerful man used to thrust his customers as soon as ever they grew noisy; and thus one might see them 'quoited down' by couples and locked in until soberness again dawned upon them.  There is no arguing with men confirmed in this habit. I have frequently done so and cannot boast of ever having made a convert even to the theory of temperance. The conversation on such occasions was pretty much as follows:  'Now my man you've worked hard during the last twelve months and let me recommend you to give up your old practices and lay by your money.' 'Well so I would Sir if it was a good round sum but where's the use of hoarding up a few pounds? it's better to "be happy" while it lasts.' 'But what will you do when you grow old and can't work if you go on in this way?' 'Oh! I don't know Sir; if it comes to the worst I must get some one to knock me on the head.' It was useless to remonstrate with such an arguer: he would sooner die in poverty than deny himself the gratification of 'drinking his wages'.  This prevailing habit is in fact the chief cause that prevents servants such as stock-keepers and persons of that description from speedily realizing a sum sufficient to enable them to become stockowners on their own account. Thus were the habits of the working classes more temperate labour would be far dearer and scarcer than it is for no steady or sober man need pass many years of his life as a servant.  It is satisfactory to know that prevalent as this vice still is it has certainly decreased in the interior since the pecuniary difficulties under which the colony laboured a few years ago and from which it is now but just recovering taught all classes a severe practical lesson.  In order to check the vices of which we are speaking among the labouring population and to raise the general tone of morality in the far inland districts we can only look to a wider and more effectual dissemination of religious instruction. But unhappily the extensive dispersion of the population opposes the most serious impediment to the establishment of churches and schools. Nor can this impediment be removed as long as the country is occupied for pastoral purposes (for which it offers every advantage and none as far as we now see for any other) and as long as the inhabitants pursue their present mode of life imposed on them as it is by the necessity of the case. The population has no tendency to concentrate itself; each man for the safety and welfare of his own property is desirous to keep his neighbour at the greatest possible distance; and as his own property increases and his household multiplies he must seek for them some distant establishment. Many clever and well-meaning persona not understanding the state and nature of a pastoral country have given advice which however well intended can only have the effect of lowering their authority with the colonists and of misleading the public at home. They have recommended as a primary step to improvement that the population should be concentrated not considering that concentration is impossible for to a pastoral population the condition of existence is dispersion.  Under these circumstances no plan has been proposed that holds out a better prospect of success than to establish a sufficient number of clergymen who at stated periods may visit the whole of the districts entrusted to their charge; and thus endeavour to revive the spark of religion which the cares of the world under the most favourable circumstances are only too powerful to smother; and how burdensome how overwhelming are those cares to the settler struggling for existence in the bush of Australia!  Some difficulty no doubt would arise from the want of unanimity in religious opinions among the settlers. But under the peculiar circumstances in the absence of all other religious aid it may be hoped that most men would be inclined to consider rather the much in which they agree than the little in which they differ; and zeal aided by charity could not fail to do much.  Among the lower orders especially very great obstacles to improvement exist. Even the more respectable those who are not hardened by the habitual practice of gross vices have long been disused to religious services have grown up in religious ignorance and are but little susceptible of religious impressions.  The clergyman would have an arduous and often a repulsive task before him. The habits of constant change of service and residence would be at first a great obstacle to his making any lasting impression; but these difficulties would gradually become less and this love of change evidently arises in some measure from bad habits which it is his first object to reform. [326]  He will need much patience much forbearance much Christian love and the charity that 'hopeth all things' that hopeth when there seems every reason to despair. He must proceed like the Vicar of Wakefield in his prison fortified by hope alone. There is always room for hope; the profligate ruffian is often nearest relenting when he seems most brutal; he is then it may be only endeavouring to harden himself against what he considers a rising weakness and a little more perseverance another word in season may complete the conquest in spite of the struggles of his worse nature.  27. - Under this head your Committee proceed to consider the expenditure of the funds of this Colony for the purposes of immigration. The practice of the expenditure of the land fund for this purpose has hitherto been to expend the whole of the funds at the disposal of the Government for the introduction of labor to contract a large debt for the same purpose and then to desist from immigration altogether until the debt is paid off and the land fund has again a considerable sum at its credit and then to recommence the same process. No attempt has been hitherto made to supply the Colony with a continuous stream of immigration; we have had a succession of floods each succeeded by its corresponding drought. The resumption of immigration is a cause of panic to the laboring classes; its discontinuance to the employers of labor. Immigration comes to be looked upon as an occasional incident rather than a necessary part of Colonial administration. As the tendency in the Colonial labor market is invariably in favor of the laborer the cessation of immigration is attended with the most disastrous results to the employer of labor; it is not merely that his laborers raise their demands but his power over them is seriously diminished. If it were only for the sake of the moral effect that it produces it is desirable that immigration should be continuous and that whatever reduction is necessary to be made in its quantity in order to secure its continuity should be made. The time also seems to have arrived when the public mind in England has become sufficiently alive to the importance of emigration to recognize the unquestionable right of the Colony to an efficient assistance from the Mother Country in removing her surplus population to a land where they not only obtain remunerative employment but become immediately the largest consumers of English manufactures. [196]  It appears by the evidence of the Immigration Agent that not only is the land fund exhausted but a debt of £75000 is also contracted while the demand for rural labor remains unabated. Under these circumstances your Committee cannot but regard with apprehension the prospect of a total cessation of immigration. These considerations lead your Committee to the conclusion that the time has arrived when the importation of immigrants to New South Wales entirely at the expense of the Colony ought to cease. Your Committee recommend that no Colonial funds be advanced for the purpose of bringing out immigrants unless they both satisfy the regulations at present in force with regard to persons brought out at the expense of the Colony and are also able to contribute something towards the expense of their passage. What that sum should be your Committee cannot pretend to suggest but would leave it to the discretion of the Commissioners being well aware from painful experience how impossible it is to regulate on one side of the world the details of business to be carried on at the other. Your Committee would however remark that it might he judicious in the first instance to require but a small sum and when the practice has been established gradually to increase it. Great as is the inconvenience which the Colony must undergo in checking the immediate supply of labor which notwithstanding the importation of 18000 persons she still so urgently needs it is better to make a firm stand at once and not to go on indulging the ridiculous hope that while the Colony is willing to pay the whole of the expense of bringing out labor any one will be so quixotic as to share it with her. It is moreover absolutely necessary that the advantage of emigration to this Colony should be kept constantly before the British public and this can never be if the subject is suffered to go to sleep while funds are accumulating for the resumption of emigration.  This age has witnessed the misery and destruction arising from giving political power to men unfit to exercise it. From these considerations we may derive an instructive lesson. The present circumstances of this country point to some form of government in which the aristocratic element should form a large ingredient - and Some such form it would no doubt assume were it an independent state. The investment of the capital of the country in pastoral pursuits the physical necessities which have led to that result and the mode in which these pursuits are carried on - this system being also the consequence of physical aptitudes - all these lead to this conclusion. The pastoral proprietor - a man of education and leisure the possessor of large capital the employer of much labour habituated to the daily control of his numerous dependents influencing by his example a large circle of acquaintances - naturally occupies a position of social and political importance. The merchant carrying on extensive operations having much capital invested from the very nature of his occupation necessarily a man of education and acquainted with the commercial and political relations of the different parts of the earth - forms a fitting associate. To these may be added the more respectable inhabitants of the towns including the men eminent in the different professions. When we remember that these classes are placed amongst a population of mixed character a large portion of whom are without any fixed habitation wandering from Station to station as they find employment without having any natural ties to restrain them or giving to society any security for the stability of their character - that amongst these are to be found many emancipated felons fresh from the pollution of the hulks or the hypocrisy of the penitentiary - taking this into consideration it is to be hoped that the form of our new constitution will give a political expression to the natural weight which these classes must undoubtedly possess. [438]  First GREAT PROTEST MEETING  (Held Monday 11th June 1849.)  It is well known that the Hashemy had been unexpectedly delayed in her voyage from Port Phillip but during Saturday and Sunday previous to her arrival very considerable excitement prevailed throughout the city. The public demonstration against the arrival of this convict ship took place at 11 A.M. Monday at the Circular Wharf. The day was very wet and the meeting was very orderly.  Mr. Robert Campbell was unanimously called upon to preside. He said no doubt there were those in the colony who hailed the advent of the convicts amongst them as a boon. Convicts had been a source of wealth to many; many hoped again to amass riches from their services; but Australia wanted them not. They could do without the introduction of British crime and its attendant - British Misery.  Mr. Lamb then came forward proposed the form of Protest and Mr. Lowe seconded the adoption of the Protest. He said that the stately presence of their city the beautiful waters of their harbour were this day again polluted with the presence of a floating hell - a convict ship. (Immense cheers.) In their port they beheld a ship freighted not with the comforts of life not with the luxuries of civilised nations not with commodities of commerce in exchange for produce but with the picked and selected criminals of Great Britain.  Mr. Henry Parkes said he belonged to the largest class of men in the colony - the working class. Let him ask did the 1400 emigrants now afloat on the waters of Port Jackson believe that when they left England that they would find a convict ship in the midst of the vessels that conveyed them hither?  A deputation of twenty-three gentlemen went immediately to Government-house but only six were admitted. These were informed by the Private Secretary that it would be necessary to forward a copy of the protest to the Governor who would appoint a time to receive the deputation.  SECOND GREAT PROTEST MEETING  (Held Monday 18th June 1849.)  This Public Meeting was held to petition the Queen to remove Earl Grey from office and to pray that responsible government may be granted to the colony. It was attended by a large mass of people numbering more than five thousand and from all ranks and classes in society.  Mr. Robert Campbell was again called to the Chair Dr. Aaron now rose to move the first resolution petitioning her Majesty to remove Earl Grey from office. He spoke at some length. The resolution was seconded by Mr. Grant saying that the resolution had his hearty concurrence. Besides censuring Earl Grey they ought to condemn the whole system of governing colonies through the intervention of the Colonial Office They ought to ask for the total abolition of the Colonial Office. It only existed to see that colonial legislation did not pass laws repugnant to Great Britain (Hear Hear.) He perceived that there was some talk of adding another link to the Colonial Office shackles by creating colonial titles. If he had any voice in the measure of this kind his first step would be to create William Charles Wentworth Duke of Lash and the Triangle. (Cheers and Laughter).  Mr. Lowe who was received with enthusiastic cheering then spoke. He was not disposed to say anything harsh against the present Governor of the colony. He did believe that gentleman to entertain a kind of languid and sickly sympathy with the colonists. He did believe that so long as he received his £100 a week of the colonists' money that he was willing to accord with the opinions of the colonists so long as by so doing he did not risk his reputation with his masters in Downing-street.  It should be remembered that the Governor had rescued Port Phillip from the infamy he was prepared to inflict on the people of Sydney - when he decreed that they should receive the convicts which had been sent by the home government. When the colonists assembled on Monday last in quiet orderly and peaceable demeanour what took place? The gates of His Excellency's palace were closed a double military guard - the cavalry of the colony - the mounted police were quartered in the stables and the kitchen of the house filled with soldiers. Did Sir Charles FitzRoy take them all to be robbers and murderers? He could say if he wanted to look for such characters better to seek them on board the convict ship in the harbour. (Immense Cheering.) There was another ground why he must say that great disrespect had been shown to the people and it was this that out of a deputation of 23 gentlemen sent to Government-house by the meeting held last Monday only six were admitted. What was the reason was the Governor afraid of his silver spoons or did he think the deputation would proceed to drink all the claret in the cellar?  The treatment of the women has long been deemed by the colonists a violation of reason and justice in direct opposition to the interests of the community. The depot into which they are received when discharged from their services is a scene of feasting complete idleness and vicious indulgence. The women are occasionally let into the town and have free communication with their associates. When they bring forth illegitimate children they are received into a nursery where they live on the same abundant fare and with nothing to do but nurse their infants; as soon as the children are of proper age they are sent to the Orphan School which should be called the school for illegitimate children of the convicts and the mothers are dismissed to repeat the same expensive course of conduct. [120]  It is perfectly notorious and indubitable that the common practise of the convict women is to get into service in order to obtain money by theft or prostitution and return to the depot to spend it with their associates. The natural consequence is that they are utterly insubordinate and lead most flagitious lives refusing to stop in any place where a restraint is put on their vices plainly telling their masters that they infinitely prefer the depôt - the scene of jollity and every evil communication.  That while a return to Transportation would not only be revolting to the feelings of the existing population of New South Wales it would from its tendency to destroy the attraction of the Colony as a field for emigration ultimately greatly diminish that very supply of labor which forms the chief recommendation of the measure to its advocates in the Colony while in regard to Great Britain the enormous revenues hitherto wasted in the maintenance of her unemployed population and in the detection imprisonment trial and transportation of offenders provide ample means for establishing when more judiciously applied a vast system of national Colonization which would relieve the Mother Country from far more of her misery and crime than she has hitherto succeeded in discharging by means of Transportation upon her Colonies since it would remove by anticipation the very causes of these evils and transmute them into the seeds of the greatest blessings supplying the Colony with all the labour required to develope its resources and yielding to Great Britain in return an incalculable increase of national influence and commercial prosperity.  I myself was suffering severely at one time from a most excruciating deep-seated whitlow on one of my fingers and had to suffer from it for a week before he (i.e. the doctor) could attend me; but just before his arrival relief was afforded me by a friendly chemist a visitor for the night who lanced the finger for me; but a joint was lost through the delay. On another occasion I was thrown from my horse about two miles from home and dislocated an elbow and both wrists and sprained an ankle. In this state I crawled home where I lay for three days before the doctor could reach me but the dislocations were reduced in a few minutes when he did come; but all cases were not of so urgent or painful a character as these. 