 On January Governor Phillip having sufficiently explored Port Jackson and found it in all respects highly calculated to receive such a settlement as he was appointed to establish returned to Botany Bay. On his arrival there the reports made to him both of the ground which the people were clearing and of the upper parts of the Bay which in this interval had been more particularly examined were in the greatest degree unfavourable. It was impossible after this to hesitate concerning the choice of a situation; and orders were accordingly issued for the removal of the whole fleet to Port Jackson.  That Botany Bay should have appeared to Captain Cook in a more advantageous light than to Governor Phillip is not by any means extraordinary. Their objects were very different; the one required only shelter and refreshment for a small vessel and during but a short time: the other had great numbers to provide for and was necessitated to find a place wherein ships of very considerable burthen might approach the shore with ease and lie at all times in perfect security. The appearance of the place is picturesque and pleasing and the ample harvest it afforded of botanical acquisitions made it interesting to the philosophical gentlemen engaged in that expedition; but something more essential than beauty of appearance and more necessary than philosophical riches must be sought in a place where the permanent residence of multitudes is to be established. [16]   Preparations for a general removal were now made with all convenient expedition: but on the morning of the 24th the greatest astonishment was spread throughout the fleet by the appearance of two ships under French colours. In this remote region visitors from Europe were very little expected and their arrival while the cause of it remained unknown produced in some minds a temporary apprehension accompanied by a multiplicity of conjectures many of them sufficiently ridiculous. Governor Phillip was the first to recollect that two ships had been sent out some time before from France for the purpose of discovery and rightly concluded these to be the same. But as the opposition of the wind and a strong current prevented them at present from working into the harbour and even drove them out of sight again to the south he did not think proper to delay his departure for the sake of making further enquiry.  On January 25 therefore seven days after the arrival of the Supply. Governor Phillip quitted Botany Bay in the same ship and sailed to Port Jackson. The rest of the fleet under convoy of the Sirius was ordered to follow as soon as the abatement of the wind which then blew a strong gale should facilitate its working out of the Bay. The Supply was scarcely out of sight when the French ships again appeared off the mouth of the harbour and a boat was immediately sent to them with offers of every kind of information and assistance their situation could require. It was now learnt that these were as the Governor had supposed the Boussole and the Astrolabe on a voyage of discovery under the conduct of Monsieur La Perouse.  On the 26th the transports and store ships attended by the Sirius finally evacuated Botany Bay; and in a very short time they were all assembled in Sydney Cove the place now destined for their port and for the reception of the new settlement. [...].  This debarkation was now made at Sydney Cove. and the work of clearing the ground for the encampment as well as fair the storehouses and other buildings was begun without loss of time. But the labour which attended this necessary operation was greater than can easily be imagined by those who were not spectators of it. The coast as well as the neighbouring country in general is covered with wood; and though in this spot the trees stood more apart and were less incumbered with underwood than in many other places yet their magnitude was such as to render not only the felling but the removal of them afterwards a task of no small difficulty. By the habitual indolence of the convicts and the want of proper overseers to keep them to their duty their labour was rendered less efficient than it might have been.  In the evening of the 26th the colours were displayed on shore and the Governor with several of his principal officers and others assembled round the flagstaff drank the king's health and success to the settlement with all that display of form which on such occasions is esteemed propitious because it enlivens the spirits and fills the imagination with pleasing presages. From this time to the end of the first week in February all was hurry and exertion. [17] They who gave orders and they who received them were equally occupied; nor is it easy to conceive a busier scene than this part of the coast exhibited during the continuance of these first efforts towards establishment.  The plan of the encampment was quickly formed and places were marked out for every different purpose so as to introduce as much as possible strict order and regularity. The materials and framework to construct a slight temporary habitations for the Governor had been brought out from England ready formed:  these were landed and put together with as much expedition as the circumstances would allow. Hospital tents were also without delay erected for which there was soon but too much occasion. In the passage from the Cape there had been but little sickness nor had many died even among the convicts; but soon after landing a dysentery prevailed which in several instances proved fatal and the scurvy began to rage with a virulence which kept the hospital tents generally supplied with patients. For those afflicted with this disorder the advantage of fish or other fresh provisions could but rarely he procured; nor were esculent vegetables often obtained in sufficient plenty to produce any material alleviation of the complaint. In the dysentery the red gum of the tree which principally abounds on this coast was found a very powerful remedy. The yellow gum has been discovered to possess the same property but in an inferior degree. [...]   7 February 1788 was the memorable day which established a regular form of Government on the coast of New South Wales. For obvious reasons all possible solemnity was given to the proceedings necessary on this occasion. On a space previously cleared the whole colony was assembled; the military drawn up and under arms; the convicts stationed apart; and near the person of the Governor those who were to hold the principal offices under him. The Royal Commission was then read by Mr. D. Collins the Judge Advocate. By this instrument Arthur Phillip was constituted and appointed Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over the territory called New South Wales; extending from the northern cape or extremity of the coast called Cape York in the latitude of ten degrees thirty-seven minutes south to the southern extremity of the said territory of New South Wales or South Cape in the latitude of forty-three degrees thirty-nine minutes south and of all the country inland to the westward as far as the one hundred and thirty-fifth degree of cast longitude reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich including all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitudes aforesaid of 10 d. 37 m. south and 43 d. 39 m. south and of all towns garrisons castles forts and all other fortifications or other military works which may be hereafter erected upon the said territory or any of the said islands.  The act of Parliament establishing the courts of judicature was next read; and lastly the patents under the great seal empowering the proper persons to convene and hold those courts whenever the exigency should require. The Office of Lieutenant Governor was conferred on Major Roan of the Marines. A triple discharge of musquetry concluded this part of the ceremony; after which Governor Phillip advanced and addressing first the private soldiers thanked them for their steady good conduct on every occasion: an honour which was repeated to them in the next general orders. [18]   He then turned to the convicts and distinctly explained to them the nature of their present situation. The greater part he bade them recollect had already forfeited their lives to the justice of their country: yet by the lenity of its laws they were now so placed that by industry and good behaviour they might in time regain the advantages and estimation in society of which they had deprived themselves. They not only had every encouragement to make that effort but were removed almost entirely from every temptation to guilt. There was little in this infant community which one man could plunder from another and any dishonest attempts in so small a society would almost infallibly be discovered. To persons detected in such crimes he could not promise any mercy; nor indeed to any who under their circumstances should presume to offend against the peace and good order of the settlement. What mercy could do for them they had already experienced; nor could any good be now expected from those whom neither past warnings nor the peculiarities of their present situation could preserve from guilt. Against offenders therefore the rigour of the law would certainly be put in force: while they whose behaviour should in any degree promise reformation might always depend upon encouragement fully proportioned to their deserts.  He particularly noticed the illegal intercourse between the sexes as an offence which encouraged a general profligacy of manners and was in several ways injurious to society. To prevent this he strongly recommended marriage and promised every kind of countenance and assistance to those who by entering into that state should manifest their willingness to conform to the laws of morality and religion. Governor Phillip concluded his address by declaring his earnest desire so promote the happiness of all who were under his government and to render the settlement in New. South Wales advantageous and honourable to his country.  This speech which was received with universal acclamations terminated the ceremonial peculiar to the day. Nor was it altogether without its proper effect:  for we are informed that in the course of the ensuing week fourteen marriages took place among the convicts. The assembly was now dispersed and the Governor proceeded to review the troops on the ground cleared for a parade:  afterwhich he gave a dinner to the officers and the first evening of his government was concluded propitiously in good order and innocent festivity amidst the repetition of wishes for its prosperity.  These people seemed at a loss to know (probably from our want of beards) of what sex we were which having understood they burst into the most immoderate fits of laughter talking to each other at the same time with such rapidity and vociferation as I had never before heard. After nearly an hour's conversation by signs and gestures they repeated several times the word whurra which signifies begone and walked away from us to the head of the Bay.   [57] The natives being departed we set out to observe the country which on inspection rather disappointed our hopes being invariably sandy and unpromising for the purposes of cultivation though the trees and grass flourish in great luxuriancy. Close to us was the spring at which Mr. Cook watered but we did not think the water very excellent nor did it run freely. In the evening we returned on board not greatly pleased with the latter part of our discoveries as it indicated an increase of those difficulties which before seemed sufficiently numerous.   Between this and our departure we had several more interviews with the natives which ended in so friendly a manner that we began to entertain strong hopes of bringing about a connection with them. Our first object was to win their affections and our next to convince them of the superiority we possessed: for without the latter the former we knew would be of little importance. An officer one day prevailed on one of them to place a target made of bark against a tree which he fired at with a pistol at the distance of some paces. The Indians though terrified at the report did not run away but their astonishment exceeded their alarm on looking at the shield which the ball had perforated. As this produced a little shyness the officer to dissipate their fears and remove their jealousy whistled the air of Malbrooke which they appeared highly charmed with and imitated him with equal pleasure and readiness. I cannot help remarking here what I was afterwards told by Monsieur De Perrouse that the natives of California and throughout all the islands of the Pacific Ocean and in short wherever he had been seemed equally touched and delighted with this little plaintive air. [58]     [59] CHAPTER IX.  The taking Possession of Port Jackson. With the Disembarkation of the Marines and Convicts.  January 1788.  Our passage to Port Jackson took up but few hours and those were spent far from unpleasantly. The evening was bright and the prospect before us such as might justify sanguine expectation. Having passed between the capes which form its entrance we found ourselves in a port superior in extent and excellency to all we had seen before. We continued to run up the harbour about four miles in a westerly direction enjoying the luxuriant prospect of its shores covered with trees to the water's edge among which many of the Indians were frequently seen till we arrived at a small snug cove on the southern side on whose banks the plan of our operations was destined to commence. [60]   The landing of a part of the marines and convicts took place the next day and on the following the remainder was disembarked. Business now sat on every brow and the scene to an indifferent spectator at leisure to contemplate it would have been highly picturesque and amusing. In one place a party cutting down the woods; a second setting up a blacksmith's forge; a third dragging along a load of stones or provisions; here an officer pitching his marquee with a detachment of troops parading on one side of him and a cook's fire blazing up on the other. Through the unwearied diligence of those at the head of the different departments regularity was however soon introduced and as far as the unsettled state of matters would allow confusion gave place to system.   Into the head of the cove on which our establishment is fixed runs a small stream of fresh water which serves to divide the adjacent country to a little distance in the direction of north and south. On the eastern side of this rivulet the Governor fixed his place of residence with a large body of convicts encamped near him; and on the western side was disposed the remaining part of these people near the marine encampment. From this last two guards consisting of two subalterns as many serjeants four corporals two drummers and forty- two private men under the orders of a Captain of the day to whom all reports were made daily mounted for the public security with such directions to use force in case of necessity as left no room for those who were the object of the order but to remain peaceable or perish by the bayonet. [61]   As the straggling of the convicts was not only a desertion from the public labour but might be attended with ill consequences to the settlement in case of their meeting the natives every care was taken to prevent it. The Provost Martial with his men was ordered to patrole the country around and the convicts informed that the severest punishment would be inflicted on transgressors. In spite however of all our precautions they soon found the road to Botany Bay in visits to the French who would gladly have dispensed with their company. [62]   But as severity alone was known to be inadequate at once to chastize and reform no opportunity was omitted to assure the convicts that by their good behaviour and submissive deportment every claim to present distinction and future favour was to be earned. That this caution was not attended with all the good effects which were hoped from it I have only to lament; that it operated in some cases is indisputable; nor will a candid and humane mind fail to consider and allow for the situation these unfortunate beings so peculiarly stood in. While they were on board ship the two sexes had been kept most rigorously apart; but when landed their separation became impracticable and would have been perhaps wrong. Licentiousness was the unavoidable consequence and their old habits of depravity were beginning to recur. What was to be attempted? To prevent their intercourse was impossible; and to palliate its evils only remained. Marriage was recommended and such advantages held out to those who aimed at reformation as have greatly contributed to the tranquillity of the settlement. [63]   On the Sunday after our landing divine service was performed under a great tree by the Rev. Mr. Johnson Chaplain of the Settlement in the presence of the troops and convicts whose behaviour on the occasion was equally regular and attentive. In the course of our passage this had been repeated every Sunday while the ships were in port; and in addition to it Mr. Johnson had furnished them with books at once tending to promote instruction and piety.   The Indians for a little while after our arrival paid us frequent visits but in a few days they were observed to be more shy of our company. From what cause their distaste: arose we never could trace as we had made it our study on these occasions to treat them with kindness and load them with presents. [64] No quarrel had happened and we had flattered ourselves from Governor Phillip's first reception among them that such a connection might be established as would tend to the interest of both parties. It seems that on that occasion they not only received our people with great cordiality but so far acknowledged their authority as to submit that a boundary during their first interview might be drawn on the sand which they attempted not to infringe and appeared to be satisfied with.     [65] CHAPTER X.  The reading of the Commissions and taking Possession of the Settlement in form. With an Account of the Courts of Law and Mode of administering Public Justice in this Country.  February1788.  Owing to the multiplicity of pressing business necessary to be performed immediately after landing it was found impossible to read the public commissions and take possession of the colony in form until the 7th of February. On that day all the officers of guard took post in the marine battalion which was drawn up and marched off the parade with music playing and colours flying to an adjoining ground which had been cleared for the occasion whereon the convicts were assembled to hear His Majesty's commission read appointing his Excellency Arthur Phillip Esq. Governor and Captain General in and over the territory of New South Wales and its dependencies; together with the Act of Parliament for establishing trials by law within the same; and the patents under the Great Seal of Great Britain for holding the civil and criminal courts of judicature by which all cases of life and death as well as matters of property were to be decided. When the Judge Advocate had finished reading his Excellency addressed himself to the convicts in a pointed and judicious speech informing them of his future intentions which were invariably to cherish and render happy those who shewed a disposition to amendment; and to let the rigour of the law take its course against such as might dare to transgress the bounds prescribed. At the close three vollies were fired in honour of the occasion and the battalion marched back to their parade where they were reviewed by the Governor who was received with all the honours due to his rank. His Excellency was afterwards pleased to thank them in public orders for their behaviour from the time of their embarkation; and to ask the officers to partake of a cold collation atwhich it is scarce necessary to observe that many loyal and public toasts were drank in commemoration of the day. [66] [67]   In the Governor's commission the extent of this authority is defined to reach from the latitude of 43° 49' south to the latitude of 10° 37' south being the northern and southern extremities of the continent of New Holland. It commences again at 135th degree of longitude east of Greenwich and proceeding in an easterly direction includes all islands within the limits of the above specified latitudes in the Pacific Ocean. By this partition it may be fairly presumed that every source of future litigation between the Dutch and us will be for ever cut off as the discoveries of English navigators alone are comprized in this territory.   Nor have Government been more backward in arming Mr. Phillip with plenitude of power than extent of dominion. No mention is made of a Council to be appointed so that he is left to act entirely from his own judgment. And as no stated time of assembling the Courts of justice is pointed out similar to the assizes and gaol deliveries of England the duration of imprisonment is altogether in his hands. The power of summoning General Courts Martial to meet he is also invested with. but the insertion in the marine mutiny act of a smaller number of officers than thirteen being able to compose such a tribunal has been neglected: so that a Military court should detachments be made from headquarters or sickness prevail may not always be found practicable to be obtained unless the number of officers at present in the Settlement shall be increased. [68]   Should the Governor see cause he is enabled to grant pardons to offenders convicted "in all cases whatever treason and wilful murder excepted" and even in these has authority to stay the execution of the law until the King's pleasure shall be signified. In case of the Governor's death the Lieutenant Governor takes his place; and on his demise the senior officer on the spot is authorised to assume the reins of power.   [69] Notwithstanding the promises made on one side and the forbearance shewn on the other joined to the impending rod of justice it was with infinite regret that every one saw in four days afterwards the necessity of assembling a Criminal Court which was accordingly convened by warrant from the Governor and consisted of the judge Advocate who presided three naval and three marine officers.   As the constitution of this court is altogether new in the British annals I hope my reader will not think me prolix in the description I am about to give of it. The number of members including the judge Advocate is limited by Act of Parliament to seven who are expressly ordered to be officers either of His Majesty's sea or land forces. The court being met completely arrayed and armed as at a military tribunal the Judge Advocate proceeds to administer the usual oaths taken by jurymen in England to each member; one of whom afterwards swears him in a like manner. This ceremony being adjusted the crime laid to the prisoner's charge is read to him and the question of Guilty or Not guilty put. No law officer on the side of the crown being appointed (for I presume the head of the court ought hardly to consider himself in that light notwithstanding the title he bears) to prosecute the criminal is left entirely to the party at whose suit he is tried. All the witnesses are examined on oath and the decision is directed to be given according to the laws of England "or as nearly as may be allowing for the circumstances and situation of the settlement" by a majority of votes beginning with the youngest member and ending with the president of the court. In cases however of a capital nature no verdict can be given unless five at least of the seven members present concur therein. The evidence on both sides being finished and the prisoner's defence heard the court is cleared and on the judgement being settled is thrown open again and sentence pronounced. During the time the court sits the place in which it is assembled is directed to be surrounded by a guard under arms and admission to every one who may choose to enter it granted. Of late however our colonists are supposed to be in such a train of subordination as to make the presence of so large a military force unnecessary; and two centinels in addition to the Provost Martial are considered as sufficient. [70] [71]   It would be as needless as impertinent to anticipate the reflections which will arise in reading the above account wherein a regard to accuracy only has been consulted. By comparing it with the mode of administering justice in the English courts of law it will be found to differ in many points very essentially. And if we turn our eyes to the usage of military tribunals it no less departs from the customs observed in them. Let not the novelty of it however prejudice any one so far as to dispute its efficacy and the necessity of the case which gave it birth.   The court whose meeting is already spoken of proceeded to the trial of three convicts one of whom was convicted of having struck a marine with a cooper's adze and otherwise behaving in a very riotous and scandalous manner for which he was sentenced to receive one hundred and fifty lashes being a smaller punishment than a soldier in a like case would have suffered from the judgement of a court martial. A second for having committed a petty theft was sent to a small barren island and kept there on bread and water only for a week. And the third was sentenced to receive fifty lashes but was recommended by the court to the Governor and forgiven. [72]   Hitherto however [February] nothing of a very atrocious nature had appeared. But the day was at hand on which the violation of public security could no longer be restrained by the infliction of temporary punishment. A set of desperate and hardened villains leagued themselves for the purposes of depredation and as it generally happens had art enough to persuade some others less deeply versed in iniquity to be the instruments for carrying it on. Fortunately the progress of these miscreants was not of long duration. They were detected in stealing a large quantity of provisions at the time of issuing them. And on being apprehended one of the tools of the superiors impeached the rest and disclosed the scheme. The trial came on the 28th of the month and of four who were arraigned for the offence three were condemned to die and the fourth to receive a very severe corporal punishment. In hopes that his lenity would not be abused his Excellency was however pleased to order one only for execution which took place a little before sun-set the same day. The name of the unhappy wretch was Thomas Barret an old and desperate offender who died with that hardy spirit which too often is found in the worst and most abandoned class of men. During the execution the battalion of marines was under arms and the whole of the convicts obliged to be present. The two associates of the sufferer were ordered to be kept close prisoners until an eligible place to banish them to could be fixed on; as were also two more who on the following day were condemned to die for a similar offence. [73]   [74] Besides the Criminal court there is an inferior one composed of the Judge Advocate and one or more justices of the peace for the trial of small misdemeanours. This court is likewise empowered to decide all law suits and its verdict is final except where the sum in dispute amounts to more than three hundred pounds in which case an appeal to England can be made from its decree. Should necessity warrant it an Admiralty court of which Lieutenant Governor Ross is judge can also be summoned for the trial of offences committed on the high seas.   From being unwilling to break the thread of my narrative I omitted to note in its proper place the sailing of the Supply Lieut. Ball on the 15th of the month for Norfolk Island which the Governor had instructions from the ministry to take possession of. Lieut. King of the Sirius was sent as superintendant and commandant of this place and carried with him a surgeon a midshipman a sawyer a weaver two marines and sixteen convicts of whom six were women. He was also supplied with a certain number of live animals to stock the island besides garden seeds grain and other requisites. [75]     [76] CHAPTER XI  A Description of the Natives of New South Wales and our Transactions with them.  I doubt not my readers will be as glad as I feel myself to conclude the dull detail of the last chapter. If they please they may turn from the subtle intricacies of the law to contemplate the simple undisguised workings of nature in her most artless colouring.   I have already said we had been but very few days at Port Jackson when an alteration in the behaviour of the natives was perceptible; and I wish I could add that a longer residence in their neighbourhood had introduced a greater degree of cordiality and intermixture between the old and new lords of the soil than at the day on which this publication is dated subsists.   [77] From their easy reception of us in the beginning many were induced to call in question the accounts which Mr. Cook had given of this people. That celebrated navigator we were willing believe had somehow by his conduct offended them which prevented the intercourse that would otherwise have taken place. The result however of our repeated endeavours to induce them to come among us has been such as to confirm me in an opinion that they either fear or despise us too much to be anxious for a closer connection. And I beg leave at once to apprize the reader that all I can here or in any future part of this work relate with fidelity of the natives of New South Wales must be made up of detached observations taken at different times and not from a regular series of knowledge of the customs and manners of a people with whom opportunities of communication are so scarce as to have been seldom obtained.   In their persons they are far from being a stout race of men though nimble sprightly and vigorous. The deficiency of one of the fore teeth of the upper jaw mentioned by Dampier we have seen in almost the whole of the men; but their organs of sight so far from being defective as that author mentions those of the inhabitants of the western side of the continent to be are remarkably quick and piercing. Their colour Mr. Cook is inclined to think rather a deep chocolate than an absolute black though he confesses they have the appearance of the latter which he attributes to the greasy filth their skins are loaded with. Of their want of cleanliness we have had sufficient proofs but I am of opinion all the washing in the world would not render them two degrees less black than an African negro. At some of our first interviews we had several droll instances of their mistaking the Africans we brought with us for their own countrymen. [78]   Notwithstanding the disregard they have invariably shewn for all the finery we could deck them with they are fond of adorning themselves with scars which increase their natural hideousness. It is hardly possible to see any thing in human shape more ugly than one of these savages thus scarified and farther ornamented with a fish bone struck through the gristle of the nose. The custom of daubing themselves with white earth is also frequent among both sexes: but unlike the inhabitants of the Islands in the Pacific Ocean they reject the beautiful feathers which the birds of their country afford. [79]   Exclusive of their weapons of offence and a few stone hatchets very rudely fashioned their ingenuity is confined to manufacturing small nets in which they put the fish they catch and to fish-hooks made of bone neither of which are unskilfully executed. On many of the rocks are also to be found delineations of the figures of men and birds very poorly cut.   Of the use or benefit of cloathing these people appear to have no comprehension though their sufferings from the climate they live in strongly point out the necessity of a covering from the rigour of the seasons. [80] Both sexes and those of all ages are invariably found naked. But it must not be inferred from this that custom so inures them to the changes of the elements as to make them bear with indifference the extremes of heat and cold; for we have had visible and repeated proofs that the latter affects them severely when they are seen shivering and huddling themselves up in heaps in their huts or the caverns of the rocks until a fire can be kindled.   Than these huts nothing more rude in construction or deficient in conveniency can be imagined. They consist only of pieces of bark laid together in the form of an oven open at one end and very low though long enough for a man to lie at full length There is reason however to believe that they depend less on them for shelter than on the caverns with which the rocks abound.   To cultivation of the ground they are utter strangers and wholly depend for food on the few fruits they gather; the roots they dig up in the swamps; and the fish they pick up along shore or contrive to strike from their canoes with spears. Fishing indeed seems to engross nearly the whole of their time probably from its forming the chief part of a subsistence which observation has convinced us nothing short of the most painful labour and unwearied assiduity can procure. When fish are scarce which frequently happens they often watch the moment of our hauling the seine and have more than once been known to plunder its contents in spite of the opposition of those on the spot to guard it: and this even after having received a part of what had been caught. The only resource at these times is to shew a musquet and if the bare sight is not sufficient to fire it over their heads which has seldom failed of dispersing them hitherto but how long the terror which it excite may continue is doubtful. [81]   The canoes in which they fish are as despicable as their huts being nothing more than a large piece of bark tied up at both ends with vines. Their dexterous management of them added to the swiftness with which they paddle and the boldness that leads them several miles in the open sea are nevertheless highly deserving of admiration. A canoe is seldom seen without a fire in it to dress the fish by as soon as caught: fire they procure by attrition. [82]   From their manner of disposing of those who die which will be mentioned hereafter as well as from every other observation there seems no reason to suppose these people cannibals; nor do they ever eat animal substances in a raw state unless pressed by extreme hunger but indiscriminately broil them and their vegetables on a fire which renders these last an innocent food though in their raw state many of them are of a poisonous quality: as a poor convict who unguardedly eat of them experienced by falling a sacrifice in twenty- four hours afterwards. If bread be given to the Indians they chew and spit it out again seldom choosing to swallow it. Salt beef and pork they like rather better but spirits they never could be brought to taste a second time.   [83] The only domestic animal they have is the dog which in their language is called Dingo and a good deal resembles the fox dog of England. These animals are equally shy of us and attached to the natives. One of them is now in the possession of the Governor and tolerably well reconciled to his new master. As the Indians see the dislike of the dogs to us they are sometimes mischievous enough to set them on single persons whom they chance to meet in the woods. A surly fellow was one day out shooting when the natives attempted to divert themselves in this manner at his expence. The man bore the teazing and gnawing of the dog at his heels for some time but apprehending at length that his patience might embolden them to use still farther liberties he turned round and shot poor Dingo dead on the spot: the owners of him set off with the utmost expedition.   There is no part of the behaviour of these people that has puzzled us more than that which relates to their women. Comparatively speaking we have seen but few of them and those have been sometimes kept back with every symptom of jealous sensibility; and sometimes offered with every appearance of courteous familiarity. Cautious however of alarming the feelings of the men on so tender a point we have constantly made a rule of treating the females with that distance and reserve which we judged most likely to remove any impression they might have received of our intending aught which could give offence on so delicate a subject. And so successful have our endeavours been that a quarrel on this head has in no instance that I know of happened. The tone of voice of the women which is pleasingly soft and feminine forms a striking contrast to the rough guttural pronunciation of the men. Of the other charms of the ladies I shall be silent though justice obliges me to mention that in the opinion of some amongst us they shew a degree of timidity and bashfulness which are perhaps inseparable from the female character in its rudest state. It is not a little singular that the custom of cutting off the two lower joints of the little finger of the left hand observed in the Society Islands is found here among the women who have for the most part undergone this amputation. Hitherto we have not been able to trace out the cause of this usage. At first we supposed it to be peculiar to the married women or those who had borne children; but this conclusion must have been erroneous as we have no right to believe that celibacy prevails in any instance and some of the oldest of the women are without this distinction; and girls of a very tender age are marked by it. [84] [85]   On first setting foot in the country we were inclined to hold the spears of the natives very cheap. Fatal experience has however convinced us that the wound inflicted by this weapon is not a trivial one; and that the skill of the Indians in throwing it is far from despicable. Besides more than a dozen convicts who have unaccountably disappeared we know that two who were employed as rush cutters up the harbour were (from what cause we are yet ignorant) most dreadfully mangled and butchered by the natives. A spear had passed entirely through the thickest part of the body of one of them though a very robust man and the skull of the other was beaten in. Their tools were taken away but some provisions which they had with them at the time of the murder and their cloaths were left untouched. In addition to this misfortune two more convicts who were peaceably engaged in picking of greens on a spot very remote from that where their comrades suffered were unawares attacked by a party of Indians and before they could effect their escape one of them was pierced by a spear in the hip after which they knocked him down and plundered his cloaths. The poor wretch though dreadfully wounded made shift to crawl off but his companion was carried away by these barbarians and his fate doubtful until a soldier a few days afterwards picked up his jacket and hat in a native's hut the latter pierced through by a spear. We have found that these spears are not made invariably alike some of them being barbed like a fish gig and others simply pointed. In repairing them they are no less dexterous than in throwing them. A broken one being given by a gentleman to an Indian he instantly snatched up an oyster-shell and converted it with his teeth into a tool with which he presently fashioned the spear and rendered it fit for use: in performing this operation the sole of his foot served him as a work-board. Nor are their weapons of offence confined to the spear only for they have besides long wooden swords shaped like a sabre capable of inflicting a mortal wound and clubs of an immense size. Small targets made of the bark of trees are likewise now and then to be seen among them. [86] [87]   From circumstances which have been observed we have sometimes been inclined to believe these people at war with each other. They have more than once been seen assembled as if bent on an expedition. An officer one day met fourteen of them marching along in a regular Indian file through the woods each man armed with a spear in his right hand and a large stone in his left: at their head appeared a chief who was distinguished by being painted. Though in the proportion of five to one of our people they passed peaceably on. [88]   That their skill in throwing the spear sometimes enables them to kill the kangaroo we have no right to doubt as a long splinter of this weapon was taken out of the thigh of one of these animals over which the flesh had completely closed; but we have never discovered that they have any method of ensnaring them or that they know any other beasts but the kangaroo and dog. Whatever animal is shewn them a dog excepted they call kangaroo: a strong presumption that the wild animals of the country are very few.   Soon after our arrival at Port Jackson I was walking out near a place where I observed a party of Indians busily employed in looking at some sheep in an inclosure and repeatedly crying out Kangaroo kangaroo! As this seemed to afford them pleasure I was willing to increase it by pointing out the horses and cows which were at no great distance. But unluckily at the moment some female convicts employed near the place made their appearance and all my endeavours to divert their attention from the ladies became fruitless. They attempted not however to offer them the least degree of violence or injury but stood at the distance of several paces expressing very significantly the manner they were attracted. [89]   It would be trespassing on the reader's indulgence were I to impose on him an account of any civil regulations or ordinances which may possibly exist among this people. I declare to him that I know not of any and that excepting a little tributary respect which the younger part appear to pay those more advanced in years I never could observe any degrees of subordination among them. To their religious rites and opinions I am equally a stranger. Had an opportunity offered of seeing the ceremonies observed at disposing of the dead perhaps some insight might have been gained; but all that we at present know with certainty is that they burn the corpse and afterwards heap up the earth around it somewhat in the manner of the small tumuli found in many counties of England. [90]   I have already hinted that the country is more populous than it was generally believed to be in Europe at the time of our sailing. But this remark is not meant to be extended to the interior parts of the continent which there is every reason to conclude from our researches as well as from the manner of living practised by the natives to be uninhabited. It appears as if some of the Indian families confine their society and connections within their own pale: but that this cannot always be the case we know; for on the north-west arm of Botany Bay stands a village which contains more than a dozen houses and perhaps five times that number of people; being the most considerable establishment that we are acquainted with in the country. As a striking proof besides of the numerousness of the natives I beg leave to state that Governor Phillip when on an excursion between the head of this harbour and that of Botany Bay once fell in with a party which consisted of more than three hundred persons two hundred and twelve of whom were men: this happened only on the day following the murder of the two convict rush cutters before noticed and his Excellency was at the very time in search of the murderers on whom could they have been found he intended to inflict a memorable and exemplary punishment. The meeting was unexpected to both parties and considering the critical situation of affairs perhaps not very pleasing to our side which consisted but of twelve persons until the peaceable disposition of the Indians was manifest. After the strictest search the Governor was obliged to return without having gained any information. The laudable perseverance of his Excellency to throw every light on this unhappy and mysterious business did not however stop here for he instituted the most rigorous inquiry to find out if possible whether the convicts had at any time ill treated or killed any of the natives; and farther issued a proclamation offering the most tempting of all rewards a state of freedom to him who should point out the murderer in case such an one existed. [91] [92]   I have thus impartially stated the situation of matters as they stand while I write between the natives and us; that greater progress in attaching them to us has not been made I have only to regret; but that all ranks of men have tried to effect it by every reasonable effort from which success might have been expected I can testify; nor can I omit saying that in the higher stations this has been eminently conspicuous. The public orders of Governor Phillip have invariably tended to promote such a behaviour on our side as was most likely to produce this much wished-for event. To what cause then are we to attribute the distance which the accomplishment of it appears at? I answer to the fickle jealous wavering disposition of the people we have to deal with who like all other savages are either too indolent too indifferent or too fearful to form an attachment on easy terms with those who differ in habits and manners so widely from themselves. Before I close the subject I cannot however omit to relate the following ludicrous adventure which possibly may be of greater use in effecting what we have so much at heart than all our endeavours. [93]   Some young gentlemen belonging to the Sirius one day met a native an old man in the woods; he had a beard of considerable length which his new acquaintance gave him to understand by signals they would rid him of if he pleased; stroaking their chins and shewing him the smoothness of them at the same time; at length the old Indian consented and one of the youngsters taking a penknife from his pocket and making use of the best substitute for lather he could find performed the operation with great success and as it proved much to the liking of the old man who in a few days after reposed a confidence in us of which we had hitherto known no example by paddling along-side the Sirius in his canoe and pointing to his beard. Various arts were ineffectually tried to induce him to enter the ship; but as he continued to decline the invitation a barber was sent down into the boat along-side the canoe from whence leaning over the gunnel he complied with the wish of the old beau to his infinite satisfaction. In addition to the consequences which our sanguine hopes led us to expect from this dawning of cordiality it affords proof that the beard is considered by this people more as an incumbrance than a mark of dignity. [94]     [95] CHAPTER XII.  The Departure of the French from Botany Bay; and the Return of the Supply from Norfolk Island; with a Discovery made by Lieutenant Ball on his Passage to it.  March 1788.  About the middle of the month our good friends the French departed from Botany Bay in prosecution of their voyage. During their stay in that port the officers of the two nations had frequent opportunities of testifying their mutual regard by visits and every interchange of friendship and esteem. These ships sailed from France by order of the King on the 1st of August 1785 under the command of Monsieur De Perrouse an officer whose eminent qualifications we had reason to think entitle him to fill the highest stations. In England particularly he ought long to be remembered with admiration and gratitude for the humanity which marked his conduct when ordered to destroy our settlement at Hudson's Bay in the last war. His second in command was the Chevalier Clonard an officer also of distinguished merit. [96]   In the course of the voyage these ships had been so unfortunate as to lose a boat with many men and officers in her off the west of California; and afterwards met with an accident still more to be regretted at an island in the Pacific Ocean discovered by Monsieur Bougainville in the latitude of 14° 19' south longitude 173° 3' 20" east of Paris. Here they had the misfortune to have no less than thirteen of their crews among whom was the officer at that time second in command cut off by the natives and many more desperately wounded. To what cause this cruel event was to be attributed they knew not as they were about to quit the island after having lived with the Indians in the greatest harmony for several weeks; and exchanged during the time their European commodities for the produce of the place which they describe as filled with a race of people remarkable for beauty and comeliness; and abounding in refreshments of all kinds. [97]   It was no less gratifying to an English ear than honourable to Monsieur De Perrouse to witness the feeling manner in which he always mentioned the name and talents of Captain Cook. That illustrious circumnavigator had he said left nothing to those who might follow in his track to describe or fill up. As I found in the course of conversation that the French ships had touched at the Sandwich Islands I asked M. De Perrouse what reception he had met with there. His answer deserves to be known: "During the whole of our voyage in the South Seas the people of the Sandwich Islands were the only Indians who never gave us cause of complaint. They furnished us liberally with provisions and administered cheerfully to all our wants." It may not be improper to remark that Owhyee was not one of the islands visited by this gentleman.   [98] In the short stay made by these ships at Botany Bay an Abbé one of the naturalists on board died and was buried on the north shore. The French had hardly departed when the natives pulled down a small board which had been placed over the spot where the corpse was interred and defaced every thing around. On being informed of it the Governor sent a party over with orders to affix a plate of copper on a tree near the place with the following inscription on it which is a copy of what was written on the board:   Hic jacet L. R E C E V E U R  E. F. F. minnibus Galliae Sacerdos Physicus in circumnavigatione mundi Duce De La Perrouse.  Obiit die 17° Februarii anno 1788.  This mark of respectful attention was more particularly due from M. De Perrouse having when at Kamschatka paid a similar tribute of gratitude to the memory of Captain Clarke whose tomb was found in nearly as ruinous a state as that of the Abbé. [99]   Like ourselves the French found it necessary more than once to chastise a spirit of rapine and intrusion which prevailed among the Indians around the Bay. The menace of pointing a musquet to them was frequently used; and in one or two instances it was fired off though without being attended with fatal consequences. Indeed the French commandant both from a regard to the orders of his Court as well as to our quiet and security shewed a moderation and forbearance on this head highly becoming.   On the 20th of March the Supply arrived from Norfolk Island after having safely landed Lieutenant King and his little garrison. The pine-trees growing there are described to be of a growth and height superior perhaps to any in the world. But the difficulty of bringing them away will not be easily surmounted from the badness and danger of the landing place. After the most exact search not a single plant of the New Zealand flax could be found though we had been taught to believe it abounded there. [100]   Lieutenant Ball in returning to Port Jackson touched at a small island in latitude 31° 36' south longitude 159° 4' east of Greenwich which he had been fortunate enough to discover on his passage to Norfolk and to which he gave the name of Lord Howe's Island. It is entirely without inhabitants or any traces of any having ever been there. But it happily abounds in what will be infinitely more important to the settlers on New South Wales: green turtle of the finest kind frequent it in the summer season. Of this Mr. Ball gave us some very handsome and acceptable specimens on his return. Besides turtle the island is well stocked with birds many of them so tame as to be knocked down by the seamen with sticks. At the distance of four leagues from Lord Howe Island and in latitude 31° 30' south longitude 159° 8' east stands a remarkable rock of considerable height to which Mr. Ball gave the name of Ball's Pyramid from the shape it bears.   [101] While the Supply was absent Governor Phillip made an excursion to Broken Bay a few leagues to the northward of Port Jackson in order to explore it. As a harbour it almost equals the latter but the adjacent country was found so rocky and bare as to preclude all possibility of turning it to account. Some rivulets of fresh water fall into the head of the Bay forming a very picturesque scene. The Indians who live on its banks are numerous and behaved attentively in a variety of instances while our people remained among them.     [102] CHAPTER XIII.  Transactions at Port Jackson in the Months of April and May.  April 1788.  As winter was fast approaching it became necessary to secure ourselves in quarters which might shield us from the cold we were taught to expect in this hemisphere though in so low a latitude. The erection of barracks for the soldiers was projected and the private men of each company undertook to build for themselves two wooden houses of sixty-eight feet in length and twenty-three in breadth. To forward the design several saw-pits were immediately set to work and four ship carpenters attached to the battalion for the purpose of directing and completing this necessary undertaking. In prosecuting it however so many difficulties occurred that we were fain to circumscribe our original intention; and instead of eight houses content ourselves with four. And even these from the badness of the timber the scarcity of artificers and other impediments are at the day on which I write so little advanced that it will be well if at the close of the year 1788 we shall be established in them. In the meanwhile the married people by proceeding on a more contracted scale were soon under comfortable shelter. Nor were the convicts forgotten; and as leisure was frequently afforded them for the purpose little edifices quickly multiplied on the ground allotted them to build upon. [103]   But as these habitations were intended by Governor Phillip to answer only the exigency of the moment the plan of the town was drawn and the ground on which it is hereafter to stand surveyed and marked out. To proceed on a narrow confined scale in a country of the extensive limits we possess would be unpardonable: extent of empire demands grandeur of design. That this has been our view will be readily believed when I tell the reader that the principal street in our projected city will be when completed agreeable to the plan laid down two hundred feet in breadth and all the rest of a corresponding proportion. How far this will be accompanied with adequate dispatch is another question as the incredulous among us are sometimes hardy enough to declare that ten times our strength would not be able to finish it in as many years. [104]   Invariably intent on exploring a country from which curiosity promises so many gratifications his Excellency about this time undertook an expedition into the interior parts of the continent. His party consisted of eleven persons who after being conveyed by water to the head of the harbour proceeded in a westerly direction to reach a chain of mountains which in clear weather are discernible though at an immense distance from some heights near our encampment. With unwearied industry they continued to penetrate the country for four days; but at the end of that time finding the base of the mountain to be yet at the distance of more than twenty miles and provisions growing scarce it was judged prudent to return without having accomplished the end for which the expedition had been undertaken. To reward their toils our adventurers had however the pleasure of discovering and traversing an extensive tract of ground which they had reason to believe from the observations they were enabled to make capable of producing every thing which a happy soil and genial climate can bring forth. In addition to this flattering appearance the face of the country is such as to promise success whenever it shall be cultivated the trees being at a considerable distance from each other and the intermediate space filled not with underwood but a thick rich grass growing in the utmost luxuriancy. I must not however conceal that in this long march our gentlemen found not a single rivulet but were under a necessity of supplying themselves with water from standing pools which they met with in the vallies supposed to be formed by the rains that fall at particular seasons of the year. Nor had they the good fortune to see any quadrupeds worth notice except a few kangaroos. To their great surprize they observed indisputable tracks of the natives having been lately there though in their whole route none of them were to be seen; nor any means to be traced by which they could procure subsistence so far from the sea shore. [105] [106]   On the 6th of May the Supply sailed for Lord Howe Island to take on board turtle for the settlement; but after waiting there several days was obliged to return without having seen one owing we apprehended to the advanced season of the year. Three of the transports also which were engaged by the East India Company to proceed to China to take on board a lading of tea sailed about this time for Canton.   The unsuccessful return of the Supply cast a general damp on our spirits for by this time fresh provisions were become scarcer than in a blockaded town. The little live stock which with so heavy an expence and through so many difficulties we had brought on shore prudence forbade us to use; and fish which on our arrival and for a short time after had been tolerable plenty were become so scarce as to be rarely seen at the tables of the first among us. Had it not been for a stray kangaroo which fortune now and then threw in our way we should have been utter strangers to the taste of fresh food. [107]   Thus situated the scurvy began its usual ravages and extended its baneful influence more or less through all descriptions of persons. Unfortunately the esculent vegetable productions of the country are neither plentiful nor tend very effectually to remove this disease. And the ground we had turned up and planted with garden seeds either from the nature of the soil or which is more probable the lateness of the season yielded but a scanty and insufficient supply of what we stood so greatly in need of.   During the period I am describing few enormous offences were perpetrated by the convicts. A petty theft was now and then heard of and a spirit of refractory sullenness broke out at times in some individuals: one execution only however took place. The sufferer who was a very young man was convicted of a burglary and met his fate with a hardiness and insensibility which the grossest ignorance and most deplorable want of feeling alone could supply. [108]     [109] CHAPTER XIV.  From the Beginning of June to the Departure of the Ships for Europe.  Hours of festivity which under happier skies pass away unregarded and are soon consigned to oblivion acquire in this forlorn and distant circle a superior degree of acceptable importance.   On the anniversary of the King's birthday all the officers not on duty both of the garrison and his Majesty's ships dined with the Governor. On so joyful an occasion the first too ever celebrated in our new settlement it were needless to say that loyal conviviality dictated every sentiment and inspired every guest. Among other public toasts drank was Prosperity to Sydney Cove in Cumberland county now named so by authority. At day-light in the morning the ships of war had fired twenty-one guns each which was repeated at noon and answered by three vollies from the battalion of marines. [110]   Nor were the officers alone partakers of the general relaxation The four unhappy wretches labouring under sentence of banishment were freed from their fetters to rejoin their former society; and three days given as holidays to every convict in the colony. Hospitality too which ever acquires a double relish by being extended was not forgotten on the 4th of June when each prisoner male and female received an allowance of grog; and every non-commissioned officer and private soldier had the honor of drinking prosperity to his royal master in a pint of porter served out at the flag staff in addition to the customary allowance of spirits. Bonfires concluded the evening and I am happy to say that excepting a single instance which shall be taken notice of hereafter no bad consequence or unpleasant remembrance flowed from an indulgence so amply bestowed.   [111] About this time [June] an accident happened which I record with much regret. The whole of our black cattle consisting of five cows and a bull either from not being properly secured or from the negligence of those appointed to take care of them strayed into the woods and in spite of all the search we have been able to make are not yet found. As a convict of the name of Corbet who was accused of a theft eloped nearly at the same time it was at first believed that he had taken the desperate measure of driving off the cattle in order to subsist on them as long as possible; or perhaps to deliver them to the natives. In this uncertainty parties to search were sent out in different directions; and the fugitive declared an outlaw in case of not returning by a fixed day. After much anxiety and fatigue those who had undertaken the task returned without finding the cattle. But on the 21st of the month Corbet made his appearance near a farm belonging to the Governor and entreated a convict who happened to be on the spot to give him some food as he was perishing for hunger. The man applied to under pretence of fetching what he asked for went away and immediately gave the necessary information in consequence of which a party under arms was sent out and apprehended him. When the poor wretch was brought in he was greatly emaciated and almost famished. But on proper restoratives being administered he was so far recovered by the 24th as to be able to stand his trial when he pleaded Guilty to the robbery with which he stood charged and received sentence of death. In the course of repeated examinations it plainly appeared he was an utter stranger to the place where the cattle might be and was in no shape concerned in having driven them off. [112]   Samuel Peyton convict for having on the evening of the King's birth-day broke open an officer's marquee with an intent to commit robbery of which he was fully convicted had sentence of death passed on him at the same time as Corbet; and on the following day they were both executed confessing the justness of their fate and imploring the forgiveness of those whom they had injured. Peyton at the time of his suffering was but twenty years of age the greatest part of which had been invariably passed in the commission of crimes that at length terminated in his ignominious end. The following letter written by a fellow convict to the sufferer's unhappy mother I shall make no apology for presenting to the reader; it affords a melancholy proof that not the ignorant and untaught only have provoked the justice of their country to banish them to this remote region. [113]   "Sydney Cove Port Jackson   New South Wales 24th June 1788.   "My dear and honoured mother!   "WITH a heart oppressed by the keenest sense of anguish and too much agitated by the idea of my very melancholy condition to express my own sentiments I have prevailed on the goodness of a commiserating friend to do me the last sad office of acquainting you with the dreadful fate that awaits me.   [114] "My dear mother! with what agony of soul do I dedicate the few last moments of my life to bid you an eternal adieu! my doom being irrevocably fixed and ere this hour to-morrow I shall have quitted this vale of wretchedness to enter into an unknown and endless eternity. I will not distress your tender maternal feelings by any long comment on the cause of my present misfortune. Let it therefore suffice to say that impelled by that strong propensity to evil which neither the virtuous precepts nor example of the best of parents could eradicate I have at length fallen an unhappy though just victim to my own follies.   "Too late I regret my inattention to your admonitions and feel myself sensibly affected by the remembrance of the many anxious moments you have passed on my account. For these and all my other transgressions however great I supplicate the Divine forgiveness; and encouraged by the promises of that Saviour who died for us all I trust - to receive that mercy in the world to come which my offences have deprived me of all hope or expectation of in this. The affliction which this will cost you I hope the Almighty will enable you to bear. Banish from your memory all my former indiscretions and let the cheering hope of a happy meeting hereafter console you for my loss. Sincerely penitent for my sins; sensible of the justice of my conviction and sentence and firmly relying on the merits of a Blessed Redeemer I am at perfect peace with all mankind and trust I shall yet experience that peace which this world cannot give. Commend my soul to the Divine mercy. I bid you an eternal farewell. [115]   Your unhappy dying Son   SAMUEL PEYTON."   "To Mrs. Peyton London."   After this nothing occurred with which I think it necessary to trouble the reader. The contents of the following chapters could not I conceive be so properly interwoven in the body of the work; I have therefore assigned them a place by themselves with a view that the conclusions adopted in them may be more strongly enforced on the minds of those to whom they are more particularly addressed. [116]     [117] CHAPTER XV.  The Face of the Country; its Productions Climate &c.  To the geographical knowledge of this country supplied by Captain Cook and Captain Furneaux we are able to add nothing. The latter explored the coast from Van Dieman's land to the latitude of 39° south; and Cook from Point Hicks which lies in 37° 58' to Endeavour Streights. The intermediate space between the end of Furneaux's discovery and Point Hicks is therefore the only part of the south-east coast unknown and it so happened on our passage thither owing to the weather which forbade any part of the ships engaging with the shore that we are unable to pronounce whether or not a streight intersects the continent hereabouts: though I beg leave to say that I have been informed by a naval friend that when the fleet was off this part of the coast a strong set-off shore was plainly felt. [118]   At the distance of 60 miles inland a prodigious chain of lofty mountains runs nearly in a north and south direction further than the eye can trace them. Should nothing intervene to prevent it the Governor intends shortly to explore their summits: and I think there can be little doubt that his curiosity will not go unrewarded. If large rivers do exist in the country which some of us are almost sceptical enough to doubt their sources must arise amidst these hills; and the direction they run in for a considerable distance must be either due north or due south. For it is strikingly singular that three such noble harbours as Botany Bay Port Jackson and Broken Bay alike end in shallows and swamps filled with mangroves.   The general face of the country is certainly pleasing being diversified with gentle ascents and little winding vallies covered for the most part with large spreading trees which afford a succession of leaves in all seasons. In those places where trees are scarce a variety of flowering shrubs abound most of them entirely new to an European and surpassing in beauty fragrance and number all I ever saw in an uncultivated state: among these a tall shrub bearing an elegant white flower which smells like English May is particularly delightful and perfumes the air around to a great distance. The species of trees are few and I am concerned to add the wood universally of so bad a grain as almost to preclude a possibility of using it: the increase of labour occasioned by this in our buildings has been such as nearly to exceed belief. These trees yield a profusion of thick red gum (not unlike the sanguis draconis) which is found serviceable in medicine particularly in dysenteric complaints where it has sometimes succeeded when all other preparations have failed. To blunt its acrid qualities it is usual to combine it with opiates. [119]   [120] The nature of the soil is various. That immediately round Sydney Cove is sandy with here and there a stratum of clay. From the sand we have yet been able to draw very little; but there seems no reason to doubt that many large tracts of land around us will bring to perfection whatever shall be sown in them. To give this matter a fair trial some practical farmers capable of such an undertaking should be sent out; for the spots we have chosen for experiments in agriculture in which we can scarce be supposed adepts have hitherto but ill repaid our toil which may be imputable to our having chosen such as are unfavourable for our purpose.   Except from the size of the trees the difficulties of clearing the land are not numerous underwood being rarely found though the country is not absolutely without it. Of the natural meadows which Mr. Cook mentions near Botany Bay we can give no account; none such exist about Port Jackson. Grass however grows in every place but the swamps with the greatest vigour and luxuriancy though it is not of the finest quality and is found to agree better with horses and cows than sheep. A few wild fruits are sometimes procured among which is the small purple apple mentioned by Cook and a fruit which has the appearance of a grape though in taste more like a green gooseberry being excessively sour: probably were it meliorated by cultivation it would become more palatable. [121]   Fresh water as I have said before is found but in inconsiderable quantities. For the common purposes of life there is generally enough; but we know of no stream in the country capable of turning a mill: and the remark made by Mr. Anderson of the dryness of the country round Adventure Bay extends without exception to every part of it which we have penetrated.   Previous to leaving England I remember to have frequently heard it asserted that the discovery of mines was one of the secondary objects of the expedition. Perhaps there are mines; but as no person competent to form a decision is to be found among us I wish no one to adopt an idea that I mean to impress him with such a belief when I state that individuals whose judgements are not despicable are willing to think favourably of this conjecture from specimens of ore seen in many of the stones picked up here. I cannot quit this subject without regretting that some one capable of throwing a better light on it is not in the colony. Nor can I help being equally concerned that an experienced botanist was not sent out for the purpose of collecting and describing the rare and beautiful plants with which the country abounds. Indeed we flattered ourselves when at the Cape of Good Hope that Mason the King's botanical gardener who was employed there in collecting for the royal nursery at Kew would have joined us but it seems his orders and engagements prevented him from quitting that beaten track to enter on this scene of novelty and variety. [122]   To the naturalist this country holds out many invitations. - Birds though not remarkably numerous are in great variety and of the most exquisite beauty of plumage among which are the cockatoo lory and parroquet; but the bird which principally claims attention is a species of ostrich approaching nearer to the emu of South America than any other we know of. One of them was shot at a considerable distance with a single ball by a convict employed for that purpose by the Governor; its weight when complete was seventy pounds and its length from the end of the toe to the tip of the beak seven feet two inches though there was reason to believe it had not attained its full growth. On dissection many anatomical singularities were observed: the gall-bladder was remarkably large the liver not bigger than that of a barn-door fowl and after the strictest search no gizzard could be found; the legs which were of a vast length were covered with thick strong scales plainly indicating the animal to be formed for living amidst deserts; and the foot differed from an ostrich's by forming a triangle instead of being cloven. Goldsmith whose account of the emu is the only one I can refer to says "that it is covered from the back and rump with long feathers which fall backward and cover the anus; these feathers are grey on the back and white on the belly." The wings are so small as hardly to deserve the name and are unfurnished with those beautiful ornaments which adorn the wings of the ostrich: all the feathers are extremely coarse but the construction of them deserves notice - they grow in pairs from a single shaft a singularity which the author I have quoted has omitted to remark. It may be presumed that these birds are not very scarce as several have been seen some of them immensely large but they are so wild as to make shooting them a matter of great difficulty. Though incapable of flying they run with such swiftness that our fleetest greyhounds are left far behind in every attempt to catch them. The flesh was eaten and tasted like beef. [123] [124]   Besides the emu many birds of prodigious size have been seen which promise to increase the number of those described by naturalists whenever we shall be fortunate enough to obtain them; but among these the bat of the Endeavour river is not to be found. In the woods are various little songsters whose notes are equally sweet and plaintive. [125]   Of quadrupeds except the kangaroo I have little to say. The few met with are almost invariably of the opossum tribe but even these do not abound. To beasts of prey we are utter strangers nor have we yet any cause to believe that they exist in the country. And happy it is for us that they do not as their presence would deprive us of the only fresh meals the settlement affords the flesh of the kangaroo. This singular animal is already known in Europe by the drawing and description of Mr. Cook. To the drawing nothing can be objected but the position of the claws of the hinder leg which are mixed together like those of a dog whereas no such indistinctness is to be found in the animal I am describing. It was the Chevalier De Perrouse who pointed out this to me while we were comparing a kangaroo with the plate which as he justly observed is correct enough to give the world in general a good idea of the animal but not sufficiently accurate for the man of science. [126]   Of the natural history of the kangaroo we are still very ignorant. We may however venture to pronounce this animal a new species of opossum the female being furnished with a bag in which the young is contained; and in which the teats are found. These last are only two in number a strong presumptive proof had we no other evidence that the kangaroo brings forth rarely more than one at a birth. But this is settled beyond a doubt from more than a dozen females having been killed which had invariably but one formed in the pouch. Notwithstanding this the animal may be looked on as prolific from the early age it begins to breed at kangaroos with young having been taken of not more than thirty pounds weight; and there is room to believe that when at their utmost growth they weigh not less than one hundred and fifty pounds. A male of one hundred and thirty pounds weight has been killed whose dimensions were as follows: [127]   Ft. / Inch. / Extreme length 7 / 3 / 3  Do. of the tail 4 1/2  Do. of the hinder legs 3  Do. of the fore paws 7 1/2  Circumference of the tail of the root 5  After this perhaps I shall hardly be credited when I affirm that the kangaroo on being brought forth is not larger than an English mouse. It is however in my power to speak positively on this head as I have seen more than one instance of it.   In running this animal confines himself entirely to his hinder legs which are possessed with an extraordinary muscular power. Their speed is very great though not in general quite equal to that of a greyhound; but when the greyhounds are so fortunate as to seize them they are incapable of retaining their hold from the amazing struggles of the animal. The bound of the kangaroo when not hard pressed has been measured and found to exceed twenty feet. [128]   At what time of the year they copulate and in what manner we know not: the testicles of the male are placed contrary to the usual order of nature.   When young the kangaroo eats tender and well flavoured tasting like veal but the old ones are more tough and stringy than bullbeef. They are not carnivorous and subsist altogether on particular flowers and grass. Their bleat is mournful and very different from that of any other animal: it is however seldom heard but in the young ones.   Fish which our sanguine hopes led us to expect in great quantities do not abound. In summer they are tolerably plentiful but for some months past very few have been taken. Botany Bay in this respect exceeds Port Jackson. The French once caught near two thousand fish in one day of a species of grouper to which from the form of a bone in the head resembling a helmet we have given the name of light horseman. To this may be added bass mullets skait soles leather-jackets and many other species all so good in their kind as to double our regret at their not being more numerous. Sharks of an enormous size are found here. One of these was caught by the people on board the Sirius which measured at the shoulders six feet and a half in circumference. His liver yielded twenty-four gallons of oil; and in his stomach was found the head of a shark which had been thrown overboard from the same ship. The Indians probably from having felt the effects of their voracious fury testify the utmost horror on seeing these terrible fish. [129]   Venomous animals and reptiles are rarely seen. Large snakes beautifully variegated have been killed but of the effect of their bites we are happily ignorant. Insects though numerous are by no means even in summer so troublesome as I have found them in America the West Indies and other countries. [130]   The climate is undoubtedly very desirable to live in. In summer the heats are usually moderated by the sea breeze which sets in early; and in winter the degree of cold is so slight as to occasion no inconvenience; once or twice we have had hoar frosts and hail but no appearance of snow. The thermometer has never risen beyond 84 nor fallen lower than 35 in general it stood in the beginning of February at between 78 and 74 at noon. Nor is the temperature of the air less healthy than pleasant. Those dreadful putrid fevers by which new countries are so often ravaged are unknown to us: and excepting a slight diarrhoea which prevailed soon after we had landed and was fatal in very few instances we are strangers to epidemic diseases.   On the whole (thunder storms in the hot months excepted) I know not any climate equal to this I write in. Ere we had been a fortnight on shore we experienced some storms of thunder accompanied with rain than which nothing can be conceived more violent and tremendous and their repetition for several days joined to the damage they did by killing several of our sheep led us to draw presages of an unpleasant nature. Happily however for many months we have escaped any similar visitations. [131]     [132] CHAPTER XVI.  The Progress made in the Settlement; and the Situation of Affairs at the Time of the Ship which conveys this Account sailing for England.  For the purpose of expediting the public work the male convicts have been divided into gangs over each of which a person selected from among themselves is placed. It is to be regretted that Government did not take this matter into consideration before we left England and appoint proper persons with reasonable salaries to execute the office of overseers; as the consequence of our present imperfect plan is such as to defeat in a great measure the purposes for which the prisoners were sent out. The female convicts have hitherto lived in a state of total idleness; except a few who are kept at work in making pegs for tiles and picking up shells for burning into lime. For the last time I repeat that the behaviour of all classes of these people since our arrival in the settlement has been better than could I think have been expected from them. [133]   Temporary wooden storehouses covered with thatch or shingles in which the cargoes of all the ships have been lodged are completed; and an hospital is erected. Barracks for the military are considerably advanced; and little huts to serve until something more permanent can be finished have been raised on all sides: Notwithstanding this the encampments of the marines and convicts are still kept up; and to secure their owners from the coldness of the nights are covered in with bushes and thatched over.   The plan of a town I have already said is marked out. And as free-stone of an excellent quality abounds one requisite towards the completion of it is attained. Only two houses of stone are yet begun which are intended for the Governor and Lieutenant Governor. One of the greatest impediments we meet with is a want of limestone of which no signs appear. Clay for making bricks is in plenty and a considerable quantity of them burned and ready for use. [134]   In enumerating the public buildings I find I have been so remiss as to omit an observatory which is erected at a small distance from the encampments. It is nearly completed and when fitted up with the telescopes and other astronomical instruments sent out by the Board of Longitude will afford a desirable retreat from the listlessness of a camp evening at Port Jackson. One of the principal reasons which induced the Board to grant this apparatus was for the purpose of enabling Lieutenant Dawes of the marines (to whose care it is intrusted) to make observations on a comet which is shortly expected to appear in the southern hemisphere. The latitude of the observatory from the result of more than three hundred observations is fixed at 33'° 52' 30" south and the longitude at 151° 16' 30" east of Greenwich. The latitude of the south head which forms the entrance of the harbour 33° 51' and that of the north head opposite to it at 33° 49' 45" south. [135]   Since landing here our military force has suffered a diminution of only three persons a serjeant and two privates. Of the convicts fifty-four have perished including the executions. Amidst the causes of this mortality excessive toil and a scarcity of food are not to be numbered as the reader will easily conceive when informed that they have the same allowance of provisions as every officer and soldier in the garrison; and are indulged by being exempted from labour every Saturday afternoon and Sunday. On the latter of those days they are expected to attend divine service which is performed either within one of the storehouses or under a great tree in the open air until a church can be built.   Amidst our public labours that no fortified post or place of security is yet begun may be a matter of surprise. Were an emergency in the night to happen it is not easy to say what might not take place before troops scattered about in an extensive encampment could be formed so as to act. An event that happened a few evenings since may perhaps be the means of forwarding this necessary work. In the dead of night the centinels on the eastern side of the cove were alarmed by the voices of the Indians talking near their posts. The soldiers on this occasion acted with their usual firmness and without creating a disturbance acquainted the officer of the guard with the circumstance who immediately took every precaution to prevent an attack and at the same time gave orders that no molestation while they continued peaceable should be offered them. From the darkness of the night and the distance they kept at it was not easy to ascertain their number but from the sound of the voices and other circumstances it was calculated at near thirty. To their intentions in honouring us with this visit (the only one we have had from them in the last five months) we are strangers though most probably it was either with a view to pilfer or to ascertain in what security we slept and the precautions we used in the night. When the bells of the ships in the harbour struck the hour of the night and the centinels called out on their posts "All's well" they observed a dead silence and continued it for some minutes though talking with the greatest earnestness and vociferation but the moment before. After having remained a considerable time they departed without interchanging a syllable with our people. [136] [137]     [138] CHAPTER XVII.  Some Thoughts on the Advantages which may arise to the Mother Country from forming the Colony.  The author of these sheets would subject himself to the charge of presumption were he to aim at developing the intentions of Government in forming this settlement. But without giving offence or incurring reproach he hopes his opinion on the probability of advantage to be drawn from hence by Great Britain may be fairly made known.   If only a receptacle for convicts be intended this place stands unequalled from the situation extent and nature of the country. When viewed in a commercial light I fear its insignificance will appear very striking. The New Zealand hemp of which so many sanguine expectations were formed is not a native of the soil; and Norfolk Island where we made sure to find this article is also without it. So that the scheme of being able to assist the East Indies with naval stores in case of a war must fall to the ground both from this deficiency and the quality of the timber growing here. Were it indeed possible to transport that of Norfolk Island its value would be found very great but the difficulty from the surf I am well informed is so insuperable as to forbid the attempt. Lord Howe Island discovered by Lieut. Ball though an inestimable acquisition to our colony produces little else than the mountain cabbage tree. [139]   Should a sufficient military force be sent out to those employed in cultivating the ground I see no room to doubt that in the course of a few years the country will be able to yield grain enough for the support of its new possessors. But to effect this our present limits must be greatly extended which will require detachments of troops not to be spared from the present establishment. And admitting the position the parent country will still have to supply us for a much longer time with every other necessary of life. For after what we have seen the idea of being soon able to breed cattle sufficient for our consumption must appear chimerical and absurd. From all which it is evident that should Great Britain neglect to send out regular supplies the most fatal consequences will ensue. [140]   Speculators who may feel inclined to try their fortunes here will do well to weigh what I have said. If golden dreams of commerce and wealth flatter their imaginations disappointment will follow: the remoteness of situation productions of the country and want of connection with other parts of the world justify me in the assertion. But to men of small property unambitious of trade and wishing for retirement I think the continent of New South Wales not without inducements. One of this description with letters of recommendation and a sufficient capital (after having provided for his passage hither) to furnish him with an assortment of tools for clearing land agricultural and domestic purposes; possessed also of a few household utensils a cow a few sheep and breeding sows would I am of opinion with proper protection and encouragement succeed in obtaining a comfortable livelihood were he well assured before he quitted his native country that a provision for him until he might be settled should be secured; and that a grant of land on his arrival would be allotted him. [141]   That this adventurer if of a persevering character and competent knowledge might in the course of ten years bring matters into such a train as to render himself comfortable and independent I think highly probable. The superfluities of his farm would enable him to purchase European commodities from the masters of ships which will arrive on Government account sufficient to supply his wants. But beyond this he ought not to reckon for admitting that he might meet with success in raising tobacco rice indigo or vineyards (for which last I think the soil and climate admirably adapted) the distance of a mart to vend them at would make the expence of transportation so excessive as to cut off all hopes of a reasonable profit; nor can there be consumers enough here to take them off his hands for so great a length of time to come as I shall not be at the trouble of computing. [142]   Should then any one induced by this account emigrate hither let him before he quits England provide all his wearing apparel for himself family and servants; his furniture tools of every kind and implements of husbandry (among which a plough need not be included as we make use of the hoe) for he will touch at no place where they can be purchased to advantage. If his sheep and hogs are English also it will be better. For wines spirits tobacco sugar coffee tea rice poultry and many other articles he may venture to rely on at Teneriffe or Madeira the Brazils and Cape of Good Hope. It will not be his interest to draw bills on his voyage out as the exchange of money will be found invariably against him and a large discount also deducted. Drafts on the place he is to touch at or cash (dollars if possible) will best answer his end. [143]   To men of desperate fortune and the lowest classes of the people unless they can procure a passage as indented servants similar to the custom practised of emigrating to America this part of the world offers no temptation: for it can hardly be supposed that Government will be fond of maintaining them here until they can be settled and without such support they must starve.   Of the Governor's instructions and intentions relative to the disposal of the convicts when the term of their transportation shall be expired I am ignorant. They will then be free men and at liberty I apprehend either to settle in the country or to return to Europe. The former will be attended with some public expence; and the latter except in particular cases will be difficult to accomplish from the numberless causes which prevent a frequent communication between England and this continent.   [144] A LIST of the Civil and Military Establishments in NEW SOUTH WALES  [147] POSTSCRIPT  Sydney Cove Port Jackson New South Wales. October 1st 1788.  Little material has occurred in this colony since the departure of the ships for England on the 14th July last. On the 20th of that month His Majesty's ship Supply Captain Ball sailed for Norfolk Island and returned on the 26th August. Our accounts from thence are more favourable than were expected. The soil proves admirably adapted to produce all kinds of grain and European vegetables. But the discovery which constitutes its value is the New Zealand flax plants of which are found growing in every part of the island in the utmost luxuriancy and abundance. This will beyond doubt appear strange to the reader after what has been related in the former part of my work: and in future let the credit of the testimony be as high as it may I shall never without diffidence and hesitation presume to contradict the narrations of Mr. Cook. The truth is that those sent to settle and explore the island knew not the form in which the plant grows and were unfurnished with every particular which could lead to a knowledge of it. Unaccountable as this may sound it is nevertheless incontestably true. Captain Ball brought away with him several specimens for inspection and on trial by some flax-dressers among us the threads produced from them though coarse are pronounced to be stronger more likely to be durable and fitter for every purpose of manufacturing cordage than any they ever before dressed.   Every research has been made by those on the island to find a landing-place whence it might be practicable to ship off the timber growing there but hitherto none has been discovered. A plan however for making one has been laid before the Governor and is at present under consideration though (in the opinion of many here) it is not such an one as will be found to answer the end proposed.   Lieut. King and his little garrison were well when the Supply left them: but I am sorry to add that from casualties their number is already five less than it originally was. A ship from hence is ready to sail with an encrease of force besides many convicts for the purpose of sawing up timber and turning the flax-plant to advantage. [148]   So much for Norfolk. In Port Jackson all is quiet and stupid as could be wished. We generally hear the lie of the day as soon as the beating of the Reveille announces the return of it; find it contradicted by breakfast time; and pursue a second through all its varieties until night welcome as to a lover gives us to sleep and dream ourselves transported to happier climes.   Let me not however neglect telling you the little news which presents itself. All descriptions of men enjoy the highest state of health; and the convicts continue to behave extremely well. A gang of one hundred of them guarded by a captain two subalterns and 20 marines is about to be sent up to the head of the harbour at the distance of 3 leagues in a westerly direction from Sydney Cove for the purpose of establishing a settlement there. The convicts are to be employed in putting the land around into cultivation as it appears to be of a more promising nature than that near the encampment. Indeed this last hitherto succeeds but very indifferently though I do not yet despair that when good seeds can be procured our toil will be better rewarded. But as this is an event at a distance and in itself very precarious Governor Phillip has determined on procuring a supply of flour and other necessaries from the Cape of Good Hope as our stock on hand is found to be on examination not quite so ample as had been reckoned upon. To execute this purpose his Excellency has ordered the Sirius to prepare for the voyage; by which conveyance the opportunity of writing to you is afforded me. It was at first intended to dispatch the Sirius to some of the neighbouring islands (the Friendly or Society) in the Pacific Ocean to procure stock there but the uselessness of the scheme joined to the situation of matters here has happily for us prevented its being put into execution.   Watkin Tench   Captain of Marines.   FINIS   22nd April 1788. On the morning of this day the governor accompanied by the same party with the addition of Lieutenant Cresswell of the marines and six privates landed at the head of the harbour with an intention of penetrating into the country westward as far as seven days provisions would admit of; every individual carrying his own allowance of bread beef rum and water. The soldiers beside their own provisions carried a camp kettle and two tents with their poles &c.  Thus equipped with the additional weight of spare shoes shirts trowsers together with a great coat or Scotch plaid for the purpose of sleeping in as the nights were cold we proceeded on our destination. We likewise took with us a small hand hatchet in order to mark the trees as we went on those marks (called in America blazing) being the only guide to direct us in our return. The country was so rugged as to render it almost impossible to explore our way by the assistance of the compass. [147]   In this manner we proceeded for a mile or two through a part well covered with enormous trees free from underwood. We then reached a thicket of brush-wood which we found so impervious as to oblige us to return nearly to the place from whence we had set out in the morning. Here we encamped near some stagnant water for the night during which it thundered lightened [sic] and rained. About eleven o'clock the governor was suddenly attacked with a most violent complaint in his side and loins brought on by cold and fatigue not having perfectly gotten the better of the last expedition.  The next morning being fine his excellency who was rather better though still in pain would not relinquish the object of his pursuit; and therefore we proceeded and soon got round the wood or thicket which had harassed us so much the day before. [148] After we had passed it we fell in with an hitherto unperceived branch of Port Jackson harbour along the bank of which the grass was tolerably rich and succulent and in height nearly up to the middle interspersed with a plant much resembling the indigo. [128]   We followed this branch westward for a few miles until we came to a small fresh-water stream that emptied itself into it. Here we took up our quarters for the night as our halts were always regulated by fresh water an essential point by no means to be dispensed with and not very abundant or frequently to be met with in this country. We made a kettle of excellent soup out of a white cockatoo and two crows which I had shot as we came along. The land all around us was similar to that which we had passed.  At night we had thunder lightning and rain. The governor though not free from pain was rather recovering.  24th. As soon as the dew which is remarkably heavy in this country was off the ground we proceeded to trace the river or small arm of the sea. The banks of it were now pleasant the trees immensely large and at a considerable distance from each other; and the land around us flat and rather low but well covered with the kind of grass just mentioned. Here the tide ceased to flow; and all further progress for boats was stopped by a flat space of large broad stones over which a fresh-water stream ran. [149]   Just above this flat close to the water-side we discovered a quarry of slates from which we expected to derive great advantage in respect to covering our houses stores &c. it being a material beyond conception difficult to be procured in this country; but on trial it was found of no use as it proved to be of a crumbling and rotten nature. On this fresh-water stream as well as on the salt we saw a great many ducks and teal three of which we shot in the course of the day besides two crows and some loraquets [lorikeets].  About four in the afternoon being near the head of the stream and somewhat apprehensive of rain we pitched our tents before the grass became wet a circumstance which would have proved very uncomfortable during the night. Here we had our ducks picked stuffed with some slices of salt beef and roasted and never did a repast seem more delicious; the salt beef serving as a palatable substitute for the want of salt gave it an agreeable relish.  The evening cleared up and the night proved dry. During the latter we heard a noise which not a little surprised us on account of its resemblance to the human voice. What it proceeded from we could not discover but I am of opinion that it was made by a bird or some animal. The country round us was by no means so good or the grass so abundant as that which we had passed. [150]   The water though neither clear nor in any great quantity was neither of a bad quality nor ill-tasted.  The next day after having sowed some seeds we pursued our route for three or four miles west where we met with a mean hut belonging to some of the natives but could not perceive the smallest trace of their having been there lately. Close to this hut we saw a kangaroo which had come to drink at an adjacent pool of stagnated water but we could not get within shot of it. A little farther on we fell in with three huts as deserted as the former and a swamp not unlike the American rice grounds.  Near this we saw a tree in flames without the least appearance of any natives; from which we suspected that it had been set on fire by lightning. This circumstance was first suggested by Lieutenant Ball who had remarked as well as myself that every part of the country though the most inaccessible and rocky appeared as if at certain times of the year it had been all on fire. Indeed in many parts we met with very large trees the trunks of which and branches were evidently rent and demolished by lightning. Close by the burning tree we saw three kangaroos. [151]   Though by this time very much fatigued we proceeded about two miles farther on in hopes of finding some good water but without effect; and about half past four o'clock we took up our quarters near a stagnant pool. The ground was so very dry and parched that it was with some difficulty we could drive either our tent pegs or poles into it. The country about this spot was much clearer of underwood than that which we had passed during the day. The trees around us were immensely large and the tops of them filled with loraquets and paroquets of exquisite beauty which chattered to such a degree that we could scarcely hear each other speak. We fired several times at them but the trees were so very high that we killed but few.  26th. We still directed our course westward and passed another tree on fire and others which were hollow and perforated by a small hole at the bottom in which the natives seemed to have snared some animal. It was certainly done by the natives as the trees where these holes or perforations were had in general many knotches cut for the purpose of getting to the top of them. [152]   After this we crossed a water-course which shews that at some seasons the rain is very heavy here notwithstanding that there was at present but little water in it. Beyond the chasm we came to a pleasant hill the top of which was tolerably clear of trees and perfectly free from underwood. His excellency gave it the name of Belle Veüe.  From the top of this hill we saw a chain of hills or mountains which appeared to be thirty or forty miles distant running in a north and south direction. The northernmost being conspicuously higher than any of the rest the governor called it Richmond Hill; the next or those in the centre Lansdown Hills; and those to the southward which are by much the lowest Carmarthen Hills.  In a valley below Belle Veüe we saw a fire and by it found some chewed root of a saline taste which shewed that the natives had recently been there. The country hereabout was pleasant to the eye well wooded and covered with long sour grass growing in tufts. At the bottom of this valley or flat we crossed another water-course and ascended a hill where the wood was so very thick as to obstruct our view. Here finding our provisions to run short our return was concluded on though with great reluctance as it was our wish and had been our determination to reach the hills before us if it had been possible. [153]   In our way back which we easily discovered by the marks made in the trees we saw a hollow tree on fire the smoke issuing out of the top part as through a chimney. On coming near and minutely examining it we found that it had been set on fire by the natives; for there was some dry grass lighted and put into the hole wherein we had supposed they used to snare or take the animal before alluded to.  In the evening where we pitched our tents we shot two crows and some loraquets for supper. The night was fine and clear during which we often heard as before a sound like the human voice and from its continuance on one spot we concluded it to proceed from a bird perched on some of the trees near us.  27th. We now found ourselves obliged to make a forced march back as our provisions were quite exhausted a circumstance rather alarming in case of losing our way which however we met with no difficulty in discovering by the marked trees. By our calculation we had penetrated into the country to the westward not less than thirty-two or thirty-three miles. [154]   This day we saw the dung of an animal as large as that of a horse but it was more like the excrement of a hog intermixed with grass.  When we got as far back as the arm or branch of the sea which forms the upper part of Port Jackson harbour we saw many ducks but could not get within shot of any of them. It was now growing late and the governor being apprehensive that the boats which he had ordered to attend daily might be for that day returning before we could reach them he sent Lieutenants Johnston and Cresswell with a marine a-head in order to secure such provisions as might have been sent up and to give directions for the boats to come for us the next morning as it then appeared very unlikely that all the party who were without exception much fatigued could be there soon enough to save the tide down. Those gentlemen accordingly went forward and were so fortunate as to be just in time; and they returned to us with a seasonable supply of bread beef rum and wine.  As soon as they had joined us we encamped for the night on a spot about the distance of a mile from the place where the boats were to take us up in the morning. His excellency was again indisposed occasioned by a return of his complaint which had been brought on by a fall into a hollow place in the ground that being concealed by the long grass he was unable to discern. [155]   We passed the next day in examining different inlets in the upper part of the harbour. We saw there some of the natives who in their canoes came along-side of the boat to receive some trifles which the governor held out to them. In the evening we returned to Sydney Cove. [132]   1st May 1788. James Bennet a youth was executed for robbing a tent belonging to the Charlotte transport of sugar and some other articles. Before he was turned off he confessed his guilt and acknowledged that young as he was he had been an old offender. Some other trifling thefts were brought before the court at the same time and those concerned in them sentenced to receive corporeal punishment.  The Supply tender sailed for Lord Howe's Island to fetch turtle; as did the Lady Penrhyn transport for China. The Scarborough dropped down the harbour; she was followed the next day by the Charlotte and they sailed in company for China! [156]   Some of the natives came along-side the Sirius and made signs to have their beards taken off. One of them patiently and without fear or distrust underwent the operation from the ship's barber and seemed much delighted with it.  21st. William Ayres a convict who was in a state of convalescence and to whom I had given permission to go a little way into the country for the purpose of gathering a few herbs wherewith to make tea was after night brought to the hospital with one of the spears used by the natives sticking in his loins. It had been darted at him as he was stooping and while his back was turned to the assailant. The weapon was barbed and stuck so very fast that it would admit of no motion. After dilating the wound to a considerable length and depth with some difficulty I extracted the spear which had penetrated the flesh nearly three inches.  After the operation he informed us that he received his wound from three of the natives who came behind him at a time when he suspected no person to be near him except Peter Burn whom he had met a little before employed on the same business as himself. He added that after they had wounded him they beat him in a cruel manner and stripping the cloaths from his back carried them off making signs to him (as he interpreted them) to return to the camp. He further related that after they had left him he saw Burn in the possession of another party of the natives who were dragging him along with his head bleeding and seemingly in great distress while he himself was so exhausted with loss of blood that instead of being able to assist his companion he was happy to escape with his life. [157]   The Port Jackson thrush of which a plate is annexed inhabits the neighbourhood of Port Jackson. The top of the head in this species is blueish-grey; from thence down the hind part of the neck and the back the colour is a fine chocolate brown; the wings and tail are lead colour the edges of the feathers pale; the tail itself pretty long and even at the end; all the under parts from chin to vent are dusky-white except the middle of the neck just above the breast which inclines to chocolate. The bill is of a dull yellow; legs brown.  25th. The Supply arrived from Lord Howe's Island without a single turtle the object for which she was sent: a dreadful disappointment to those who were languishing under the scurvy many of whom are since dead and there is great reason to fear that several others will soon share the same fate. This disorder has now risen to a most alarming height without any possibility of checking it until some vegetables can be raised which from the season of the year cannot take place for many months. And even then I am apprehensive that there will not be a sufficiency produced such are the labour and difficulty which attend the clearing of the ground. [158]   It will scarcely be credited when I declare that I have known twelve men employed for five days in grubbing up one tree; and when this has been effected the timber (as already observed) has been only fit for fire-wood; so that in consequence of the great labour in clearing of the ground and the weak state of the people to which may be added the scarcity of tools most of those we had being either worn out by the hardness of the timber or lost in the woods among the grass through the carelessness of the convicts the prospect before us is not of the most pleasing kind.  All the stock that was landed both public and private seems instead of thriving to fall off exceedingly. The number at first was but inconsiderable and even that number is at present much diminished. The sheep in particular decrease rapidly very few being now alive in the colony although there were numbers the property of Government or individuals when first landed. [159]   26th. Two men of the Sirius were brought before the criminal court and tried for assaulting and beating in a cruel manner another man belonging to the same vessel while employed on an island appropriated by the governor to the use of the ship. They were sentenced to receive five hundred lashes each but could not undergo the whole of that punishment as like most of the persons in the colony they were much afflicted with the scurvy.  28th. Captain Hunter his first lieutenant and the surgeon of the Sirius went to the point of land which forms the north head of Port Jackson. In going there they discovered an old man with a little girl about five years of age lying close to the ground watching their motions and at the same time endeavouring to conceal themselves. The surgeon had his gun with him the effects of which he let the old man see by shooting a bird which fell at his feet. The explosion at first greatly alarmed him but perceiving that they intended him no ill he soon got over his fears. The bird was then given to him which (having barely plucked and not more than half broiled it) he devoured entrails bones and all. The little girl was much frightened and endeavoured to hide herself behind the old man to escape the least observation. [160]   30th. Captain Campbell of the marines who had been up the harbour to procure some rushes for thatch brought to the hospital the bodies of William Okey and Samuel Davis two rush-cutters whom he had found murdered by the natives in a shocking manner.  Okey was transfixed through the breast with one of their spears which with great difficulty and force was pulled out. He had two other spears sticking in him to a depth which must have proved mortal. His skull was divided and comminuted so much that his brains easily found a passage through. His eyes were out but these might have been picked away by birds.  Davis was a youth and had only some trifling marks of violence about him. This lad could not have been many hours dead for when Captain Campbell found him which was among some mangrove-trees and at a considerable distance from the place where the other man lay he was not stiff nor very cold; nor was he perfectly so when brought to the hospital. From these circumstances we have been led to think that while they were dispatching Okey he had crept to the trees among which he was found and that fear united with the cold and wet in a great degree contributed to his death. [161]   What was the motive or cause of this melancholy catastrophe we have not been able to discover but from the civility shewn on all occasions to the officers by the natives whenever any of them were met I am strongly inclined to think that they must have been provoked and injured by the convicts.  We this day caught a Yellow-eared Flycatcher. This bird is a native of New Holland the size of a martin and nearly seven inches in length; the bill is broad at the bottom and of a pale colour; the legs dusky; the plumage is mostly brown mottled with paler brown; the edges of the wing feathers yellowish; the under part of the body white inclining to dusky about the chin and throat; the tail is pretty long and when spread seems hollowed out at the tip; beneath the eye on each side is an irregular streak growing wider and finishing on the ears of a yellow or gold colour.  Early the next morning the governor Lieutenants G. Johnston and Kellow myself six soldiers and two armed convicts whom we took as guides went to the place where the murder had been committed in hopes by some means or other to be able to find out either the actual perpetrators or those concerned. As most of their clothes and all their working tools were carried off we expected that these might furnish us with some clue but in this we were disappointed. We could not observe a single trace of the natives ever having been there. [162]   We then crossed the country to Botany Bay still flattering ourselves that we might be able to discover among a tribe at that place some proof that they had been concerned as the governor was resolved on whomsoever he found any of the tools or clothing to shew them his displeasure and by every means in his power endeavour to convince them of his motives for such a procedure. In our route we saw several kangaroos and shot a very fine teal.  A little before sun-set after a long and fatiguing march we arrived at Botany Bay. When we approached the bay we saw eleven canoes with two persons in each fishing; most of them had a fire in their canoe a convenience which they seldom go without at any time or season but particularly at this as the weather was very cold. Here we pitched our tents for (as I have before observed) we never travel without them and kindled large fires both in front and rear; still however the cold was so very intense that we could scarcely close our eyes during the night. In the morning the grass was quite white with a hoar frost so as to crackle under our feet. [163]   After breakfast we visited the grave of the French abbé who died whilst the Count de Peyrouse was here. It was truly humble indeed being distinguished only by a common head-stone stuck slightly into the loose earth which covered it. Against a tree just above it was nailed a board with the following inscription on it:  HIC JACET  LE RECEVEUR  EX F.F. MINORIBUS GALLIA SACERDOS  PHYSICUS IN CIRCUMNAVIGATIONE MUNDI  DUCE D. DE LA PEYROUSE.  OBIIT DIE 17th FEBR. ANNO 1788.  As the painting on the board could not be permanent Governor Phillip had the inscription engraved on a plate of copper and nailed to the same tree; and at some future day he intends to have a handsome head-stone placed at the grave. We cut down some trees which stood between that on which the inscription is fixed and the shore as they prevented persons passing in boats from seeing it. [164]   Between this and the harbour's mouth we found forty-nine canoes hauled upon the beach but not a native to be seen. After we had passed them we fell in with an Indian path and as it took a turn towards the camp we followed it about two miles when on a sudden in a valley or little bay to the northward of Botany Bay we were surprised at hearing the sound of voices which we instantly found to proceed from a great number of the natives sitting behind a rock who appeared to be equally astonished with ourselves as from the silence we observed they had not perceived us till we were within twenty yards of them.  Every one of them as they got up armed himself with a long spear the short stick before described used in throwing it a shield made of bark and either a large club pointed at one end or a stone hatchet. At first they seemed rather hostilely inclined and made signs with apparent tokens of anger for us to return; but when they saw the governor advance towards them unarmed and with his hands opened wide (a signal we had observed among them of amity and peace) they with great confidence came up to him and received from him some trifles which he had in his pocket such as fish-hooks beads and a looking-glass. [165]   As there appeared not to be less than three hundred of them in this bay all armed the soldiers were ordered to fix their bayonets and to observe a close well-connected order of march as they descended the hill. These people (as already mentioned) seem to dislike red coats and those who carry arms but on the present occasion they shewed very little fear or distrust; on the contrary they in a few minutes mixed with us and conducted us to a very fine stream of water out of which some of them drank to shew that it was good.  The women and children kept at some distance one or two more forward than the rest excepted who came to the governor for some presents. While he was distributing his gifts the women danced (an exercise every description of people in this country seem fond of) and threw themselves into some not very decent attitudes.  The men in general had their skins smeared all over with grease or some stinking oily substance; some wore a small stick or fish-bone fixed cross-ways in the division of the nose which had a very strange appearance; others were painted in a variety of ways and had their hair ornamented with the teeth of fish fastened on by gum and the skin of the kangaroo. [166]   As they conducted us to the water a toadstool was picked up by one of our company which some of the natives perceiving they made signs for us to throw it away as not being good to eat. Soon after I gathered some wood-sorrel which grew in our way but none of them endeavoured to prevent me from eating it; on the contrary if a conclusion may be drawn from the signs which they made relative to the toadstool they shewed by their looks that there was nothing hurtful in it.  We halted but a short time with them as it was growing late and we had a long way to walk. Before we parted from them the governor gave them two small hand-axes in exchange for some of their stone axes and two of their spears. As we ascended a hill after our departure from them eight of them followed us until we had nearly reached the top where one of those who had been most familiar with us made signs for us to stop; which we readily complying with he ran to the summit and made a strange kind of hallooing holding at the same time his hands open above his head. [167]   As soon as we came up to him we discovered another large body of them in a bay about half a mile below us. Our new friend seemed anxious to carry us down to them but it not being in our way we declined his offer. Seeing us take another direction he halted and opened his hands in order as we supposed to put us in mind that he had received nothing from us; upon which we presented him with a bird the only thing we had with which he returned to appearance fully content and satisfied.  We now proceeded towards the camp where we arrived about sun-set.  This was the greatest number of the natives we had ever seen together since our coming among them. What could be the cause of their assembling in such numbers gave rise to a variety of conjectures. Some thought they were going to war among themselves as they had with them a temporary store of half-stinking fish and fern-root the latter of which they use for bread. This we remarked as several of them were eating it at the time we were among them. [168] Others conjectured that some of them had been concerned in the murder of our men notwithstanding we did not meet with the smallest trace to countenance such an opinion and that fearing we should revenge it they had formed this convention in order to defend themselves against us. Others imagined that the assemblage might be occasioned by a burial a marriage or some religious meeting.  The Tabuan Parrot one of which was observed here and of which a plate is annexed is a bird about eighteen inches in length and bigger than the Scarlet Lory. The head neck and under parts are of a fine scarlet; the upper parts of the body and wings are of a beautiful green; across the upper part of the wing coverts is an oblique bar of yellowish green more glossy than the rest; the lower part of the back and rump is blue; there is also a small patch of blue at the lower part of the neck behind between a scarlet and green dividing those colours; the tail is pretty long and of an olive brown colour; the bill is reddish; the legs deep brown nearly black.  The female is mostly green; the head neck and under parts olive brown; belly red; rump blue; tail on the upper surface green beneath dusky. [139] [169]   The above inhabits Botany Bay and seems much allied to the Tabuan Parrot described by Mr. Latham in his Synopsis of Birds; but in that the head neck and under parts incline to purplish or chocolate colour; both quills and tail are blue more or less edged with green and a crescent of blue at the back part of the neck; it has also the under jaw surrounded with green feathers. It is probable therefore that our bird is only a variety of the Tabuan species. [140]   4th June 1788. This being the anniversary of his Majesty's birth-day and the first celebration of it in New South Wales his excellency ordered the Sirius and Supply to fire twenty-one guns at sun-rise at one o'clock and at sun-set.  Immediately after the King's ships had ceased firing at one o'clock the Borrowdale Friendship Fishburne Golden Grove and Prince of Wales fired five guns each. The battalion was under arms at twelve and fired three vollies succeeded by three cheers.  After this ceremony had taken place the lieutenant-governor with all the officers of the settlement civil and military paid their respects to his excellency at his house. At two o'clock they all met there again to dinner during which the band of musick played God save the King and several excellent marches. After the cloth was removed his Majesty's health was drank with three cheers. The Prince of Wales the Queen and royal family the Cumberland family and his Royal Highness Prince William Henry succeeded. His Majesty's ministers were next given; who it was observed may be Pitted against any that ever conducted the affairs of Great Britain! [170]   When all the public toasts had gone round the governor nominated the district which he had taken possession of Cumberland County; and gave it such an extent of boundary as to make it the largest county in the whole world. His excellency said that he had intended to have named the town and laid the first stone on this auspicious day but the unexpected difficulties which he had met with in clearing the ground and from a want of artificers had rendered it impossible; he therefore put it off till a future day. Its name however we understand is to be ALBION.  The day was passed in cheerfulness and good-humour; but it was a little damped by our perceiving that the governor was in great pain from a return of his complaint. Though his countenance too plainly indicated the torture which he suffered he took every method in his power to conceal it lest it should break in upon the festivity and harmony of the day. [171]   His excellency ordered every soldier a pint of porter besides his allowance of grog and every convict half a pint of spirits made into grog that they all might drink his Majesty's health; [141] and as it was a day of general rejoicing and festivity he likewise made it a day of forgiveness remitting the remainder of the punishment to which the sailors of the Sirius were subject and pardoning Lovel Sideway Hall and Gordon who had been confined on a little sterile island or rather rock situated in the harbour until a place of banishment could be found.  This act of lenity and mercy added to many others which the governor had shewn it is to be hoped will work some change on the minds of these men. Indeed some good may be expected from Hall and Gordon who since their sentence have appeared penitent; but from Lovel and Sideway very little change for the better can be expected because they seem so truly abandoned and incorrigible.  At night every person attended an immense bonfire that was lighted for the occasion after which the principal officers of the settlement and of the men of war supped at the governor's where they terminated the day in pleasantry good humour and cheerfulness. [172]   The next morning we were astonished at the number of thefts which had been committed during the general festivity by the villanous part of the convicts on one another and on some of the officers whose servants did not keep a strict look-out after their marquees. Availing themselves thus of the particular circumstances of the day is a strong instance of their unabated depravity and want of principle. Scarcely a day passes without an example being made of some one or other of these wretches but it seems to have no manner of effect upon them.  10th. John Ascott and Patrick Burn two convicts were brought before the criminal court and prosecuted by Lieutenant G. William Maxwell of the Sirius and Mr Kelter the Master of the same ship for having a few nights before in a riotous manner with many more of the convicts attacked some seamen belonging to the men of war and behaving in an insolent and contemptuous manner to them. After a long and judicious hearing the prisoners were acquitted as the charge brought against them was by no means substantiated. [173]   26th. About four in the afternoon a slight shock of an earthquake was felt at Sydney Cove and its environs. This incident had so wonderful an effect on Edward Corbett a convict who had eloped about three weeks before on a discovery being made of his having stolen a frock that he returned and gave himself up to justice. [142] A few days antecedent to his return he had been outlawed and was supposed to have driven off with him four cows the only animals of this kind in the colony. This however he declared himself innocent of but confessed his having committed the theft laid to his charge.  The strictest search was made but in vain after the cows. It is probable that they have strayed so far off in this endless wild as to be irrecoverably lost.  Previously to the return of Corbett he must have suffered very severely from hunger; his eyes were sunk into his head and his whole appearance shewed that he had been half starved. While he was absent he says he frequently fell in with the natives who though they never treated him ill did not seem to like his company. He informed us that in a bay adjacent to that where the governor and his party had met with so many of the natives he saw the head of one of the convicts lying near the place where the body had been burnt in a large fire. This in all likelihood was Burn who was carried off at the time Ayres was wounded as he has not been heard of since. [174]   The natives of this country though their mode of subsisting seems to be so very scanty and precarious are I am convinced not cannibals. One of their graves which I saw opened the only one I have met with contained a body which had evidently been burned as small pieces of the bones lay in the bottom of it. The grave was neatly made and well covered with earth and boughs of trees.  The Pennantian Parrot was about this time first noticed. The general colour of the body in the male is crimson; the feathers of the back black in their middle; the chin and throat blue; the wings blue with a bar of a paler colour down the middle of them; the tail is long and blue also and all but the two middle feathers have the ends very pale.  The female differs in having the upper parts of the neck and body of a greenish colour; the top of the head red and a patch of the same under each eye; the chin and throat blue; lower part of the neck and breast red as are the rump and vent; [143] the middle of the belly dusky green; tail dark blue fringed with chestnut; shoulders blue; the rest of the wing the same but darker; bill and legs as in the male. [175]   24th. The governor revoked the decree by which Corbett was outlawed and he was tried by the criminal court simply for the theft he had committed and sentenced to be hanged.  Samuel Payton a convict likewise received the same sentence for feloniously entering the marquee of Lieutenant Fuzer on the night of the fourth of June and stealing from thence some shirts stockings and combs. His trial had been put off to the present time on account of a wound in his head which he had received from Captain Lieutenant Meredith who on his return from the bonfire found Payton in his marquee. When brought to the hospital in consequence of the wound which he had received he was perfectly senseless. During the time he remained under my care I frequently admonished him to think of the perilous situation he then stood in and to make known the accomplices whom he was supposed to have; but he firmly and uniformly denied his guilt and disclaimed his having any knowledge of or concern in robbing Lieutenant Fuzer. [176]   He further said that he did not recollect how he came to Captain Lieutenant Meredith's tent or any circumstance relative to it. However since he received his sentence he has confessed that he robbed Lieutenant Fuzer and gave him information where to find the articles he had been robbed of; he at the same time acknowledged that he entered Mr. Meredith's marquee with an intention to rob him doubting not but he should be able to make his escape undiscovered as every one seemed so fully engaged on the pleasures of the day.  When he and Corbett were brought to the fatal tree they (particularly Payton) addressed the convicts in a pathetic eloquent and well-directed speech. He acknowledged the justice of his sentence a sentence which (he said) he had long deserved. He added that he hoped and trusted that the ignominious death he was about to suffer would serve as a caution and warning to those who saw and heard him. They both prayed most fervently begging forgiveness of an offended GOD. They likewise hoped that those whom they had injured would not only forgive them as they themselves did all mankind but offer up their prayers to a merciful REDEEMER that though so great sinners they might be received into that bliss which the good and virtuous only can either deserve or expect. [144] [177]   They were now turned off and in the agonizing moments of the separation of the soul from the body seemed to embrace each other.  The execution of these unhappy youths the eldest of whom was not twenty-four years of age which seemed to make a greater impression on the convicts than any circumstance had done since their landing will induce them it is to be hoped to change their conduct and to adopt a better mode of life than I am sorry to say they have hitherto pursued. [145]   June 1788 (contd). The principal business now going forward is the erecting huts for the marines and convicts with the cabbage-tree. We have been here nearly six months and four officers only as yet got huts: when the rest will be provided with them seems uncertain but this I well know that living in tents as the rainy season has commenced is truly uncomfortable and likely to give a severe trial to the strongest and most robust constitution.  The trees of this country are immensely large and clear of branches to an amazing height. While standing many of them look fair and good to the eye and appear sufficient to make a mast for the largest ship but when cut down they are scarcely convertible to any use whatever. At the heart they are full of veins through which an amazing quantity of an astringent red gum issues. This gum I have found very serviceable in an obstinate dysentery that raged at our first landing and still continues to do so though with less obstinacy and violence. [178]   When these trees are sawed and any way exposed to the sun the gum melts or gets so very brittle that the wood falls to pieces and appears as if the pieces had been joined together with this substance. How any kind of houses except those built of the cabbage tree can be raised up the timber being so exceedingly bad it is impossible to determine.  I have already said that the stone of this country is well calculated for building could any kind of cement be found to keep them together. As for lime-stone we have not yet discovered any in the country and the shells collected for that purpose have been but inconsiderable. From Captain Cook's account one would be led to suppose that oyster and cockle shells might be procured in such quantities as to make a sufficiency of lime for the purpose of constructing at least a few Public buildings but this is by no means the case. That great navigator notwithstanding his usual accuracy and candour was certainly too lavish of his praises on Botany Bay. [179]   The peculiarity I have mentioned relative to the wood of this place is strange. There are only three kinds of it and neither of them will float on the water. [146] We have found another resin here not unlike the balsam Tolu in smell and effect but differing widely in colour being of a clear yellow which exudes from the tree. This however is not to be met with in such quantities as the red gum before mentioned nor do I think that its medicinal virtues are by any means so powerful.  A kind of earth has been discovered which makes good bricks but we still are in want of cement for them as well as for the stone.  What animals we have yet met with have been mostly of the Opossum kind. The Kangaroo so very accurately delineated by Captain Cook is certainly of that class and the largest animal seen in the country. One has been brought into camp which weighed a hundred and forty-nine pounds.  The conformation of this animal is peculiarly singular. Its hinder parts have great muscular power and are perhaps beyond all parallel out of proportion when compared with the fore parts. As it goes it jumps on its two hind legs from twenty to twenty-eight feet and keeps the two fore ones close to the breast; these are small and short and it seems to use them much like a squirrel. The tail of these animals is thick and long; they keep it extended and it serves as a kind of counterpoise to the head which they carry erect when bounding at full speed. [180]   The velocity of a Kangaroo as far outstrips that of a greyhound as that animal exceeds in swiftness a common dog. It is a very timid shy and inoffensive creature evidently of the granivorous kind. Upon our first discovering one of them as it does not use its fore feet to assist it in running or rather jumping many were of opinion that the tail which is immensely large and long was made use of by them in the act of progression; but this is by no means the case. Had it been used in such a manner the hair would probably have been worn away from the part which of course must be applied to the ground.  The tail from its size and weight seems to serve it for a weapon both of defence and offence; for it does not appear that nature has provided it with any other. Its mouth and head even when full grown are too small for it to do much execution with the teeth; nor is the conformation of either at all calculated for the purpose. Indeed its fore feet which it uses as a squirrel or monkey to handle any thing with and which assist it in lying down are too small and out of proportion as are all the superior parts to admit of its either possessing or exerting much strength. [181]   It has been reported by some convicts who were out one day accompanied by a large Newfoundland dog that the latter seized a very large Kangaroo but could not preserve its hold. They observed that the animal effected its escape by the defensive use it made of its tail with which it struck its assailant in a most tremendous manner. The blows were applied with such force and efficacy that the dog was bruised in many places till the blood flowed. They observed that the Kangaroo did not seem to make any use of either its teeth or fore feet but fairly beat off the dog with its tail and escaped before the convicts though at no great distance could get up to secure it.  The female has a pouch or pocket like the Opossum in which she carries her young. Some have been shot with a young one not larger than a walnut sticking to a teat in this pocket. Others with young ones not bigger than a rat: one of which most perfectly formed with every mark and distinguishing characteristic of the Kangaroo I have sent to Mr. Wilson of Gower Street Bedford Square. [182]   There is a peculiar formation in the generative parts of this animal. Of its natural history we at present know little and therefore as we are so unacquainted with its habits haunts and customs to attempt particular and accurate descriptions of it might beget error which time or a fuller knowledge of its properties would directly contradict. As to mere conjectures (and such too often are imposed upon the public for incontestible facts) it cannot be improper to suppress them.  Every animal in this country partakes in a great measure of the nature of the Kangaroo. We have the Kangaroo Opossum the Kangaroo Rat &c. In fact every quadruped that we have seen except the flying squirrel and a spotted creature nearly the size of a Martin resembles the Kangaroo in the formation of the fore legs and feet which bear no proportion to the length of the hind legs.  The scarcity of boats will prevent our being so well supplied with fish as otherwise might be expected. Fish is far from abounding at the cold season of the year but in the summer judging from the latter end of the last we have every reason to conclude that the little bays and coves in the harbour are well stored with them. The fish caught here are in general excellent but several of them like the animals in some degree resembling the Kangaroo partake of the properties of the shark. [148] The land the grass the trees the animals the birds and the fish in their different species approach by strong shades of similitude to each other. A certain likeness runs through the whole. [183]   8th July. A party of the natives came to the place where the Sirius's boat had been to haul the seine and having beaten the crew took from them by force a part of the fish which they had caught. It is a great misfortune to us that we cannot find proper wood in this place wherewith to build a boat particularly as fish is not only so very plentiful in the summer but the only change from salt provisions which we can procure there being neither wild nor domestic animals fit for food.  Here where no other animal nourishment is to be procured the Kangaroo is considered as a dainty; but in any other country I am sure that such food would be thrown to the dogs for it has very little or no fat about it and when skinned the flesh bears some likeness to that of a fox or lean dog. [184]   A few days since a civil court of jurisdiction (which consisted of the judge advocate the Reverend Mr. Johnson and myself) was convened by his excellency to hear a complaint made against Duncan Sinclair master of the Alexander transport by Henry Coble and Susannah his wife (the Norwich convicts who so much excited the public attention) for the non-delivery of a parcel sent on board the Alexander by Mrs. Jackson of Somerset Street containing wearing apparel books and other things for the use of the said Henry Coble his wife and child value twenty pounds. The parcel was proved (and this even by the acknowledgment of the master) to have been received on board; and it likewise appeared in evidence that on moving it from one part of the ship to another the package had broken and the books had fallen out which books the convict said had been delivered to him.  The court after deducting five pounds (the value of the books received) gave a verdict in favour of the couple in whose cause the world had seemed so much to interest themselves and in consequence of the authority unto them granted by Act of Parliament in such cases made and provided they adjudged the master of the transport fully to compensate the loss of the convicts amounting to fifteen pounds. [185]   Sinclair considered it as oppressive to be obliged to pay for that on account of which he had not received any freightage but this objection had no weight with the court as the ship was in the service of government and paid for the sole purpose of conveying these people and the little property which they possessed to this country.  13th. The Alexander Friendship and Prince of Wales transports with the Borrowdale victualler sailed for England. His Majesty's brig the Supply sailed at the same time for Norfolk Island with provisions &c. for the people there.  21st. I went down the harbour with the master of the Golden Grove victualler to look for a cabbage tree as a covering for my hut. On our return we fell in with three canoes that had been out fishing. We rowed towards them when the natives in them suddenly appeared intimidated and paddled away with all possible dispatch. Willing to convince them that they had nothing to dread from us we rowed after them in order to present them with some trifles which we had about us. When we approached the canoes an old woman in one of them began to cast her fish overboard in great haste; whether it was for fear that we should take them from her or whether she threw them to us we could not ascertain. However when we came along-side our conduct soon convinced her that her alarms with respect to us were groundless. [186]   She had in the canoe with her a young girl whom as she wore a complete apron we could not help considering as such an instance of female decency as we had not at any other time observed among the natives. The girl did not betray the least sign of apprehension but rather seemed pleased at the interview. She laughed immoderately either at us or at the petulance shown by the old woman who I believe was more terrified on the girl's account than on her own.  After this we left them fully satisfied that we did not mean to offer them any injury.  We discovered the New Holland Creeper. The general colour of the bird is black spotted in various parts with white: the bill is dusky growing paler towards the tip; the neck breast belly and sides are more or less streaked with white; over the eye is also a white streak and the sides of the neck and beginning of the back have likewise some streaks of the same. The quills and tail feathers are marked with yellow on the outer margins; the last are rounded in shape and two or three of the outer feathers spotted within at the tip with white; legs dusky; is about the size of a nightingale and measures seven inches in length. It is probably a non-descript species. [187]   July 1788 (contd). A party of convicts who had crossed the country to Botany Bay to gather a kind of plant resembling balm which we found to be a good and pleasant vegetable were met by a superior number of the natives armed with spears and clubs who chased them for two miles without being able to overtake them; but if they had succeeded in the pursuit it is probable that they would have put them to death for wherever persons unarmed or inferior in numbers have fallen in with them they have never failed to maltreat them.  The natives had with them some middling-sized dogs somewhat resembling the species called in England fox-dogs. A servant of Captain Shea being one day out shooting he found a very young puppy belonging to the natives eating part of a dead Kangaroo. He brought it to the camp and it thrives much. The dog in shape is rather short and well made has very fine hair of the nature of fur and a sagacious look. When found though not more than a month old he showed some symptoms of ferocity. It was a considerable time before he could be induced to eat any flesh that was boiled but he would gorge it raw with great avidity. [188]   23rd. The blacksmith's shop which was built of common brush wood was burnt down. Very fortunately for us the bellows and the other tools were through the exertion of the people saved. To effect this was no easy point as in the course of three or four minutes the wood being very dry every part of the shop was in flames.  29th. One of the convicts was met by some of the natives who wounded him very severely in the breast and head with their spears. They would undoubtedly have destroyed him had he not plunged into the sea near which he happened to be and by that means saved himself. When he was brought to the hospital he was very faint from the loss of blood which had flowed plentifully from his wounds. A piece of a broken spear had entered through the scalp and under his ear so that the extraction gave him great pain. [189]   Their spears are made of a kind of cane which grows out of the tree that produces the yellow gum; they are ten or twelve feet long pointed and sometimes barbed with a piece of the same cane or the teeth of fish. [152] These they throw with the assistance of the short stick already mentioned which has a shell made fast to the end of it with the yellow gum.  With this gum they likewise fasten their barbs to their spears and fish-gigs. The latter of these differ from the former by having four prongs and being always barbed which is not generally the case with the spears.  Their spears the only weapon they are ever seen to have that may be considered in any degree as dangerous they throw thirty or forty yards with an unerring precision. When equipped for any exploit they are also armed with a shield made of the bark of a tree with which they very dexterously ward off any thing thrown at them. An humble kind of scymitar a bludgeon or club about twenty inches long with a large and pointed end and sometimes a stone hatchet make up the catalogue of their military implements. [190]   We this day shot a Knob-fronted Bee-eater. This is about the size of a blackbird; the plumage mostly brown above and white beneath; the head and upper part of the neck are sparingly covered with narrow feathers almost like hairs; but the fore part of the neck and breast are furnished with long ones of a white colour and pointed at the ends; the tail is pretty long and the feathers tipped with white; the bill is about one inch in length and pale; but what is most remarkable on the forehead just at the base of the bill is a short blunt knob about a quarter of an inch in length and of a brownish colour; the tongue is nearly of the length of the bill and bristly at the end; the legs are brown. This inhabits New South Wales and is supposed to be a non-descript species.  This day three canoes with a man and woman in each came behind the point on which the hospital is built to fish. I went over to them as did two other gentlemen my assistants without their shewing any fear at our coming; on the contrary they manifested a friendly confidence. [191] We gave them some bread which they received with apparent pleasure but did not eat any of it while in our presence. We likewise presented them with a looking-glass but this they received with indifference and seemed to hold in no kind of estimation. [153]   I gave one of the women a pocket handkerchief which she immediately tied round her head and shewed great satisfaction. She had a young child between her knees in the canoe (the way in which they always carry their infants) for whom she solicited something in the most suppliant tone of voice I ever heard. The only thing I had about me was a narrow slip of linen which I gave her; and trifling as it was she appeared to be perfectly satisfied with it and bound it round the child's head. She would not come out of the canoe though along-side the rocks; but the man quitted it and shewed us some wild figs that grew near at hand. Such as were green and unripe he did not pull; but after some search having found one that was tolerably ripe he made me pluck it and put it into his mouth. He eat it with an apparent relish and smacked his lips after he had swallowed it to convince us how good it was. [192]   At some little distance from the place where we were a sheep lay dead. As soon as he had discovered it he took it by the horns and as well as we could understand him he was extremely inquisitive and anxious to know what it was. When his curiosity was satisfied he went into the canoe where the woman had been waiting for him.  About ten or twenty yards from the shore among the long grass in the shallow water he struck and took with his fish-gig several good fish; an acquisition to which at this season of the year it being cold and wet we were unequal. While he was engaged in watching for them both he and the woman chewed something which they frequently spit into the water; and which appeared to us from his immediately striking a fish to be a lure.  While they were thus employed one of the gentlemen with me sung some songs; and when he had done the females in the canoes either sung one of their own songs or imitated him in which they succeeded beyond conception. Any thing spoken by us they most accurately recited and this in a manner of which we fell greatly short in our attempts to repeat their language after them.  While we were thus amicably engaged all on a sudden they paddled away from us. On looking about to discover the cause we perceived the gunner of the Supply at some little distance with a gun in his hand an instrument of death against which they entertain an insuperable aversion. As soon as I discovered him I called to him to stay where he was and not make a nearer approach; [154] or if he did to lay down his gun. The latter request he immediately complied with; and when the natives saw him unarmed they shewed no further fear but returning to their employment continued alternately to sing songs and to mimic the gentlemen who accompanied me. [193]   [NN] August. We this day shot the Sacred Kings-Fisher. This bird is about the size of a thrush and measures nearly ten inches in length: the top of the head is blue and crested; sides of the head and back part of it black; over the eye from the nostrils a rusty-coloured streak; the chin the middle of the neck all round and all the under part of the body buff-colour more or less inclining to rust; the upper part of the plumage chiefly blue; but the beginning of the back is black as are also the quills and tail feathers within being blue only on the outer edges; the bill is large and black but the base of the under jaw is whitish; the legs are brown. This bird is subject to great variety several of them being mentioned by Mr. Latham in his Synopsis. [...] [194]   12th. Celebrated the Prince of Wales's birthday. The men of war fired a royal salute and all the officers in the colony civil and military dined with the governor. The evening was spent in making bonfires and testifying such other demonstrations of joy as could be shewn in this country. The weather is now very wet and cold and has been so for the last six weeks. Several mornings we have had a hoar frost and a few distinct pelicles of ice were formed on shallow spots of water; the thermometer frequently as low as the freezing point.  16th. A convict who had been out gathering what they called sweet tea about a mile from the camp met a party of the natives consisting of fourteen by whom he was beaten and also slightly wounded with the shell-stick used in throwing their spears; they then made him strip and would have taken from him his clothes and probably his life had it not been for the report of two musquets; which they no sooner heard than they ran away. This party were returning from the wood with cork which they had been cutting either for their canoes or huts; and had with them no other instruments than those that were necessary for the business on which they were engaged such as a stone hatchet and the shell stick before mentioned. [155] Had they been armed with any other weapons the convict would probably have lost his life. [195]   That which we call the sweet tea is a creeping kind of vine running to a great extent along the ground; the stalk is not so thick as the smallest honey-suckle; nor is the leaf so large as the common bay leaf though something similar to it; and the taste is sweet exactly like the liquorice root of the shops. Of this the convicts and soldiers make an infusion which is tolerably pleasant and serves as no bad succedaneum for tea. Indeed were it to be met with in greater abundance it would be found very beneficial to those poor creatures whose constant diet is salt provisions. In using it for medical purposes I have found it to be a good pectoral and as I before observed not at all unpleasant. [196]   We have also a kind of shrub in this country resembling the common broom which produces a small berry like a white currant but in taste more similar to a very sour green gooseberry. This has proved a good antiscorbutic; but I am sorry to add that the quantity to be met with is far from sufficient to remove the scurvy.  That disorder still prevails with great violence nor can we at present find any remedy against it notwithstanding that the country produces several sorts of plants and shrubs which in this place are considered as tolerable vegetables and used in common. The most plentiful is a plant growing on the sea shore greatly resembling sage. Among it are often to be found samphire and a kind of wild spinage besides a small shrub which we distinguish by the name of the vegetable tree and the leaves of which prove rather a pleasant substitute for vegetables.   22nd August 1788. His Excellency Governor Phillip Lieutenant George Johnston his Adjutant of Orders Lieutenant Cresswell of the Marines myself and six soldiers landed in Manly Cove in order to examine the coast to Broken Bay. At a short distance from the shore we saw sixteen canoes with two persons in each and in some three employed in fishing. They seemed to take very little notice as we passed them so very intent were they on the business in which they were engaged. [197]   On our landing we saw sixty more of the natives about two hundred yards distant from us. Some of them immediately came up to us and were very friendly. A black man who carried our tents gave two of them a stocking each with which they seemed much pleased; and pointing to the naked leg expressed a great desire to have that also clothed. The morning was so cold that these poor wretches stood shivering on the beach and appeared to be very sensible of the comfort and advantage of being clothed.  We sent back our boats and proceeded northward along the coast about six miles where we were forced to halt for near two hours until the tide had run out of a lagoon or piece of water so as to admit of its being forded. While we were detained here an old native came to us and in the most friendly manner pointed out the shallowest part of the water we had to cross; but the tide ran with too much rapidity at that time for us to attempt it.  After we had waded through one of our company shot a very fine duck which we had dressed for supper on a little eminence by the side of a cabbage tree swamp about half a mile from the run of the tide. Here the whole party got as much cabbage to eat with their salt provisions as they chose. [198]   While we had been detained by the tide several natives were on the opposite side who also pointed out to us the shoalest water and appeared by their signs and gestures to wish us very much to come over; but before the tide was sufficiently low they went away. One of them wore a skin of a reddish colour round his shoulders.  I remained on the Island from January 1788 unto March 1791. On the 28 day of March made my escape in Compy with 7 men more and me with one woman and two childn - in an open six oar boat having of provision on Bd one hundred wt of flower and one hundd wt of rice 14lb of pork and about eight galons of water - having a Copass Quardrant and Chart. After two days sail reach a little creek about 2 degrees to the northward of Port Jackson there found a quantity of fine burng coal. There remaind nights and one day and found a varse quantty of cabage tree which we cut down and procured the cabage. Then the natives came down to which we gave some cloathes and other articles and they went away very much satisfied. The apperanance of the land appears more better here than at Sidney Cove. Here we got avarse quantity of fish which of a great refreshment to us. After our stay of 2 nights and one day we proceeded our voyage to they northward after 2 days sail we made a very fine harbour seeming to run up the country for many miles and quite commodious for the anchorage of shipping. Here we found aplenty of fresh water. Hawld our boat ashore to repair her bottom being very leaky the better to pay her bottom with some beeswax and rosin which we had a small quantity thereof - But on they same night was drove of by the natives - which meant to destroy us. We launched our boat and road off in the strame quite out of reach of them - that being Sunday. Monday we were of in ye stream we rowed lower down thinging to land some miles below. On Monday morng we attempted to land when we found a place convenient for to repair our boat we accordg we put some of our things - part being ashore. There came the natives in vase numbers with speers and sheilds etc. We formed in parts one party of us made towards them the better by signes to posify them but they not taking the least notice. Accordingly we fired a musket thinking to afright them but they took not the least notice thereof. On perceving them rush more foreward we were forsed to take to our boat and to get out of their reach as fast as we could - and what to do we could not tell. But on consulting with wach other it was detirmined for to rowed up the harbour 9 or 10 miles till we made a little white Sandy Isld in the middle of the harbour - which landd upon and hawld up our boat and repair her bottom with what little materials we had. Whilst our stay of 2 days we had no interupon from the natives. Then we rowed of to the main[land] where we took in fresh water and a few cabage trees - and then put out to sea. The natives here is quiet naked of a copper colour-shock hair - have the cannoos made of bark. Then we proceedd the Northard having a leadg breez from the S:W. But that night the wind changed and drove us quite out of sight of land - which we hawld our wind having a set of sails in the boat.  "December 7th. Went to Scheffer's farm. I found him at home conversed with him and walked with him over all his cultivated [153] ground. He had one hundred and forty acres granted to him fourteen of which are in cultivation twelve in maize one in wheat and one in vines and tobacco. He has besides twenty-three acres on which the trees are cut down but not burnt off the land. - He resigned his appointment and began his farm last May; and had at first five convicts to assist him; he has now four. All his maize except three acres is mean. This he thinks may be attributed to three causes: a middling soil; too dry a spring; and from the ground not being sufficiently pulverized before the seed was put into it. The wheat Js thin and poor: he does not reckon its produce at more than eight or nine bushels. His vines nine hundred in number are flourishing and will he supposes bear fruit next year. His tobacco plants are not very luxuriant: to these two last articles he means principally to direct his exertions. He says (and truly) that they will always be saleable and profitable. On one of the boundaries of his land is plenty of water. A very good brick house is nearly completed for his use by the governor; and in the mean time he lives in a very decent one which was built for him on his settling here. He is to be supplied with provisions from the public store and with medical assistance for eighteen months reckoning from last May. At the expiration of this period he is bound to support himself; and the four convicts are to be withdrawn. But if he shall then or at any future period declare himself able to maintain a moderate number of these people for their labour they will be assigned to him.  "Mr. Scheffer is a man of industry and respectable character. He came out to this country as superintendant of convicts at a salary of forty pounds per annum; and brought with him a daughter of twelve years old. He is by birth a Hessian and served in America in a corps of Yaghers with the rank of lieutenant. He [154] never was professionally in any part of life a farmer but he told me that his father owned a small estate on the banks of the Rhine on which he resided and that he had always been fond of looking at and assisting in his labours particularly in the vineyard. In walking along he more than once shook his head and made some mortifying observations on the soil of his present domain compared with the banks of his native stream. He assured me that (exclusive of the sacrifice of his salary) he has expended more than forty pounds in advancing his ground to the state in which I saw it. Of the probability of success in his undertaking he spoke with moderation and good sense. Sometimes he said he had almost despaired and had often balanced about relinquishing it; but had as often been checked by recollecting that hardly any difficulty can arise which vigour and perseverance will not overcome. - I asked him what was the tenure on which he held his estate. He offered to shew the written document saying that it was exactly the same as Ruse's. I therefore declined to trouble him; and took my leave with wishes for his success and prosperity.  "Near Mr. Scheffer's farm is a small patch of land cleared by lieutenant Townson of the New South Wales corps about two acres of which are in maize and wheat both looking very bad.  "Proceeded to the farm of Mr. Arndell one of the assistant surgeons. This gentleman has six acres in cultivation as follows rather more than four in maize one in wheat and the remainder in oats and barley; the wheat looks tolerably good rather thin but of a good height and the ears well filled. His farming servant guesses the produce will be twelve bushels and I do not think he overrates it. The maize he guesses at thirty bushels [155] which from appearances it may yield but not more: the oats and barley are not contemptible; this ground has been turned up but once; the aspect of it is nearly south on a declivity of the river or arm of the sea on which Rose Hill stands: it was cleared of wood about nine months ago and sown this year for the first time."  "December 8th. Went this morning to the farm of Christopher Magee a convict settler nearly opposite to that of Mr. Scheffen. - The situation of this farm is very eligible provided the river in floods does not inundate it which I think doubtful. This man was bred to husbandry and lived eight years in America; he has no less than eight acres in cultivation five and a half in maize one in wheat and one and a half in tobacco. From the wheat he does not expect more than ten bushels: but he is extravagant enough to rate the produce of maize at one hundred bushels; perhaps he may get fifty; on tobacco he means to go largely hereafter. He began to clear this ground in April but did not settle until last July. I asked by what means he had been able to accomplish so much?" He answered "by industry and by hiring all the convicts I could get to work in their leisure hours besides some little assistance which the governor has occasionally thrown in." - "His greatest impediment is want of water being obliged to fetch all he uses more than half a mile. He sunk a well and found water but it was brackish and not fit to drink. If this man shall continue in habits of industry and sobriety I think him sure of succeeding.  "Reached Ruse's farm and begged to look at his grant the material part of which runs thus - A lot of thirty acres to be [156] called Experiment Farm; the said lot to be holden free of all taxes quit-rents &c. for ten years provided that the occupier his heirs or assigns shall reside within the same and proceed to the improvement thereof; reserving however for the use of the crown all timber now growing or which hereafter shall grow fit for naval purposes; at the expiration of ten years an annual quit-rent of one shilling shall be paid by the occupier in acknowledgment. - Ruse now lives in a comfortable brick house built for him by the governor. He has eleven acres and a half in cultivation and several more which have been cleared by convicts in their leisure hours on condition of receiving the first year's crop. He means to cultivate little besides maize; wheat is so much less productive. Of the culture of vineyards and tobacco he is ignorant; and with great good sense he declared that he would not quit the path he knew for an uncertainty. His live stock consists of four breeding sows and thirty fowls. He has been taken from the store (that is has supplied himself with provisions) for some months past; and his wife is to be taken off at Christmas at which time if he deems himself able to maintain a convict labourer one is to be given to him.  "Crossed the river in a boat to Robert Webb's farm. This man was one of the seamen of the Sirius and has taken in conjunction with his brother (also a seaman of the same ship) a grant of sixty acres on the same terms as Ruse save that the annual quit-rent is to commence at the expiration of five years instead of ten. The brother is gone to England to receive the wages due to them both for their services; which money is to be expended by him in whatever he judges will be most conducive to the success of their plan. Webb expects to do well; talks as a man should talk who has just set out on a doubtful enterprize which [157] he is bound to pursue; he is sanguine in hope and looks only at the bright side of the prospect; he has received great encouragement and assistance from the governor. He has five acres cleared and planted with maize which looks thriving and promises to yield a decent crop. His house and a small one adjoining for pigs and poultry were built for him by the governor who also gave him two sows and seven fowls to which he adds a little stock of his own acquiring.  "Near Webb is placed William Read another seaman of the Sirius on the same terms and to whom equal encouragement has been granted.  "My survey of Rose Hill is now closed; I have inspected every piece of ground in cultivation here both public and private and have written from actual examination only.  "But before I bade adieu to Rose Hill in all probability for the last time of my life it struck me that there yet remained one object of consideration not to be slighted: Barrington had been in the settlement between two and three months and I had not seen him.  "I saw him with curiosity. He is tall approaching to six feet slender and his gait and manner bespeak liveliness and activity. Of that elegance and fashion with which my imagination had decked him (I know not why) I could distinguish no trace. Great allowance should however be made for depression and unavoidable deficiency of dress. His face is thoughtful and intelligent; to a strong cast of countenance he adds a penetrating eye and a prominent forehead: his whole demeanour is humble not servile. Both on his passage from England and since his arrival here his conduct has been irreproachable. He is appointed high-constable of the settlement of Rose Hill a post of some respectability and certainly one of importance to those [158] who live here. His knowledge of men particularly of that part of them into whose morals manners and behaviour he is ordered especially to inspect eminently fit him for the office.  "I cannot quit him without bearing my testimony that his talents promise to be directed in future to make reparation to society for the offences he has heretofore committed against it."  The number of persons of all descriptions at Rose Hill at this period will be seen in the following return.  A return of the number of persons at Rose Hill 3d of December [...]  Of my Sydney journal I find no part sufficiently interesting to be worth extraction. This place had long been considered only as a depôt for stores; it exhibited nothing but a few old scattered [159] huts and some sterile gardens: cultivation of the ground was abandoned and all our strength transferred to Rose Hill. Sydney nevertheless continued to be the place of the governor's residence and consequently the head-quarters of the colony. No public building of note except a storehouse had been erected since my last statement. The barracks so long talked of so long promised for the accommodation and discipline of the troops were not even begun when I left the country; and instead of a new hospital the old one was patched up and with the assistance of one brought ready framed from England served to contain the sick.  December 1791. The employment of the male convicts here as at Rose Hill was the public labour. Of the women the majority were compelled to make shirts trowsers and other necessary parts of dress for the men from materials delivered to them from the stores into which they returned every Saturday night the produce of their labour a stipulated weekly task being assigned to them. In a more early stage government sent out all articles of cloathing ready made; but by adopting the present judicious plan not only a public saving is effected but employment of a suitable nature created for those who would otherwise consume leisure in idle pursuits only.  On the 26th of November 1791 the number of persons of all descriptions at Sydney was 1259 to which if 1628 at Rose Hill and 1172 at Norfolk Island be added the total number of persons in New South Wales and its dependency will be found to amount to 4059.  On the 13th of December 1791 the marine battalion embarked on board his Majesty's ship Gorgon and on the 18th sailed for England.    [160] CHAPTER XVII.  Miscellaneous Remarks on the Country. - On its Vegetable Productions. On its Climate - On its Animal Productions - On its Natives &c.  The journals contained in the body of this publication illustrated by the map which accompanies it are I conceive so descriptive of every part of the country known to us that little remains to be added beyond a few general observations.  The first impression made on a stranger is certainly favourable. He sees gently swelling hills connected by vales which possess every beauty that verdure of trees and form simply considered in itself can produce: but he looks in vain for those murmuring rills and refreshing springs which fructify and embellish more happy Iands. Nothing like those tributary streams which feed rivers in o ther countries are here seen: for when I speak of the stream at Sydney I mean only the drain of a morass; and the river at Rose Hill is a creek of the harbour which above high water mark would not in England be called even a brook. Whence the Hawkesbury the only fresh water river known to exist in the country derives its supplies would puzzle a transient observer. He sees nothing but torpid unmeaning ponds (often stagnant and always still unless agitated by heavy rains) which communicate with it. Doubtless the springs which arise in Caermarthen mountains may be said to constitute its source. To cultivate its banks within many miles of the bed of the stream (except on [161] some elevated detached spots) will be found impracticable unless some method be devised of erecting a mound sufficient to repel the encroachments of a torrent which sometimes rises fifty feet above its ordinary level inundating the surrounding country in every direction.  The country between the Hawkesbury and Rose Hill is that which I have hitherto spoken of. When the river is crossed this prospect soon gives place to a very different one: the green vales and moderate hills disappear at the distance of about three miles from the river side; and from Knight Hill and Mount Twiss the limits which terminate our researches nothing but precipices wilds and desarts are to be seen. Even these steeps fail to produce streams. The difficulty of penetrating this country joined to the dread of a sudden rise of the Hawkesbury forbidding all return has hitherto prevented our reaching Caermarthen mountains.  Let the reader now cast his eye on the relative situation of Port Jackson. He will see it cut off from communication with the northward by Broken Bay and with the southward by Botany Bay; and what is worse the whole space of intervening country yet explored (except a narrow strip called the Kanguroo ground) in both directions is so bad as to preclude cultivation.  The course of the Hawkesbury will next attract his attention. To the southward of every part of Botany Bay we have traced this river; but how much farther in that line it extends we know not. Hence its channel takes a northerly direction and finishes its course in Broken Bay; running at the back of Port Jackson in such a manner as to form the latter into a peninsula.  The principal question then remaining is what is the distance [162] between the head of Botany Bay and the part of the Hawkesbury nearest to it? And is the intermediate country a good one or does it lead to one which appearances indicate to be good? To future adventurers who shall meet with more encouragement to persevere and discover than I and my fellow wanderer did I resign the answer. In the mean time the reader is desired to look at the remarks on the map which were made in tile beginning of August 1790 from Pyramid Hill which bounded our progress on the southern expedition; when and when only this part of the country has been seen.  It then follows that from Rose Hill to within such a distance of the Hawkesbury as is protected from its inundations is the only tract of land we yet know of in which cultivation can be carried on for many years to come. To aim at forming a computation of the distance of time of the labour and of the expence which would attend forming distinct convict settlements beyond the bounds I have delineated; or of the difficulty which would attend a system of communication between such establishments and Port Jackson is not intended here.  Until that period shall arrive the progress of cultivation when it shall have once passed Prospect Hill will probably steal along to the southward in preference to the northward from the superior nature of the country in that direction as the remarks inserted in the map will testify.  Such is my statement of a plan which I deem inevitably entailed on the settlement at Port Jackson. In sketching this outline of it let it not be objected that I suppose the reader as well acquainted with the respective names and boundaries of the country as long residence and unwearied journeying among them have made the author. To have subjoined perpetual explanations [163] would have been tedious and disgusting. Familiarity with the relative positions of a country can neither be imparted or acquired but by constant recurrence to geographic delineations.  On the policy of settling with convicts only a country at once so remote and extensive I shall offer no remarks. Whenever I have heard this question agitated since my return to England the cry of "what can we do with them! where else can they be sent!" has always silenced me.  Of the soil opinions have not differed widely. A spot eminently fruitful has never been discovered. That there are many spots cursed with everlasting and unconquerable sterility no one who has seen the country will deny. At the same time I am decidedly of opinion that many large tracts of land between Rose Hill and the Hawkesbury even now are of a nature sufficiently favourable to produce moderate crops of whatever may be sown in them. And provided a sufficient number of cattle be imported to afford manure for dressing the ground no doubt can exist that subsistence for a limited number of inhabitants may be drawn from it. To imperfect husbandry and dry seasons must indubitably be attributed part of the deficiency of former years. Hitherto all our endeavours to derive advantage from mixing the different soils have proved fruitless: though possibly only from want of skill on our side.  The spontaneous productions of the soil will be soon recounted. Every part of the country is a forest: of the quality of the wood [164] take the following instance. - The Supply wanted wood for a mast and more than forty of the choicest young trees were cut down before as much wood as would make it could be procured: the trees being either rotten at the heart or riven by the gum which abounds in them. This gum runs not always in a longitudinal direction in the body of the tree but is found in it in circles like a scroll. There is however a species of light wood which is found excellent for boat building; but it is scarce and hardly ever found of large size. To find lime-stone many of our researches were directed. But after repeated essays with fire and chemical preparations on all the different sorts of stone to be picked up it is still a desideratum. Nor did my experiments with a magnet induce me to think that any of the stones I tried contained Iron. I have however heard other people report very differently on this head. The list of esculent vegetables and wild fruits is too contemptible to deserve notice if the sweet tea whose virtues have been already recorded and the common orchis root be excepted. That species of palm-tree which produces the mountain cabbage is also found in most of the fresh water swamps within six or seven miles of the coast; but is rarely seen farther inland: even the banks of the Hawkesbury are unprovided with it. The inner part of the trunk of this tree was greedily eaten by our hogs and formed their principal support. The grass as has been remarked in former publications does not overspread the land in a continued sward but arises in small detached tufts growing every way about three inches apart the intermediate space being bare; though the heads of the grass are often so luxuriant as to hide all deficiency on the surface. The rare and beautiful flowering shrubs which abound in every part deserve the highest admiration and panegyric.  Of the vegetable productions transplanted from other climes maize flourishes beyond any other grain. And as it affords a strong [165] and nutritive article of food its propagation will I think altogether supersede that of wheat and barley.  Horticulture has been attended in some places with tolerable success. At Rose Hill I have seen gardens which without the assistance of manure have continued for a short time to produce well grown vegetables. But at Sydney without constantly dressing the ground it was in vain to expect them; and with it a supply of common vegetables might be procured by diligence in all seasons. Vines of every sort seem to flourish: melons cucumbers and pumpkins run with unbounded luxuriancy; and I am convinced that the grapes of New South Wales will in a few years equal those of any other country. 'That their juice will probably hereafter furnish an indispensable article of luxury at European tables' has already been predicted in the vehemence of speculation. Other fruits are yet in their infancy; but oranges lemons and figs (of which last indeed I have eaten very good ones) will I dare believe in a few years become plentiful. Apples and the fruits of colder climes also promise to gratify expectation. The banana-tree has been introduced from Norfolk Island where it grows spontaneously.  Nor will this surprize if the genial influence of the climate be considered. Placed in a latitude where the beams of the sun in the dreariest season are sufficiently powerful for many hours of the day to dispense warmth and nutrition the progress of vegetation never is at a stand. The different temperatures of Rose Hill and Sydney in winter though only twelve miles apart afford however curious matter of speculation. Of a well attested instance of ice being seen at the latter place I never heard. At the former place its production is common and once a few flakes of snow fell. The difference can be accounted for only by supposing that the woods stop the warm vapours of the sea from reaching Rose Hill which is at the distance of sixteen miles inland; whereas [166] Sydney is but four. Again the heats of summer are more violent at the former place than at the latter and the variations incomparably quicker. The thermometer has been known to alter at Rose Hill in the course of nine hours more than 50°; standing a little before sunrise at 50° and between one and two at more than 100°. To convey an idea of the climate in summer I shall transcribe from my meteorological journal accounts of two particular days which were the hottest we ever suffered under at Sydney.  "December 27th 1790. Wind NNW; it felt like the blast of a heated oven and in proportion as it increased the heat was found to be more intense the sky hazy the sun gleaming through at intervals.  At 9 AM  85°  At noon  104  Half past twelve  107 1/2  From one P.M. until 20 minutes past two  108 1/2  At 20 minutes past two  109  At Sunset  89  At 11 P.M.  78 1/2  December 28th.  At 8 A.M.  86  10 A.M.  93  11 A.M.  101  At noon  103 1/2  Half an hour past noon  104 1/2  At one P.M.  102  At a quarter past i it stood at only 89 having from a sudden shift of wind fallen 13° in 15 minutes.  .At 5 P.M.  73  At sunset  69 1/2  [167] My observations on this extreme heat succeeded by so rapid a change were that of all animals man seemed to bear it best. Our dogs pigs and fowls lay panting in the shade or were rushing into the water. I remarked that a hen belonging to me which had sat for a fortnight frequently quitted her eggs and shewed great uneasiness but never remained from them many minutes at one absence; taught by instinct that the wonderful power in the animal body of generating cold in air heated beyond a certain degree was best calculated for the production of her young. The gardens suffered considerably; all the plants which had not taken deep root were withered by the power of the sun. No lasting ill effects however arose to the human constitution; a temporary sickness at the stomach accompanied with lassitude and headach attacked many but they were removed generally in twenty- four hours by an emetic followed by an anodyne. During the time it lasted we invariably found that the house was cooler than the open air and that in proportion as the wind was excluded was comfort augmented.  But even this heat was judged to be far exceeded in the latter end of the following February when the north-west wind again set in and blew with great violence for three days. At Sydney it fell short by one degree of what I have just recorded: but at Rose Hill it was allowed by every person to surpass all that they had before felt either there or in any other part of the world. Unluckily they had no thermometer to ascertain its precise height. It must however have been intense from the effects it produced. [168] An immense flight of bats driven before the wind covered all the trees around the settlement whence they every moment dropped dead or in a dying state unable longer to endure the burning state of the atmosphere.' Nor did the perroquettes though tropical birds bear it better; the ground was strewed with them in the same condition as the bats.  Were I asked the cause of this intolerable heat I should not hesitate to pronounce that it was occasioned by the wind blowing over immense desarts which I doubt not exist in a north-west direction from Port Jackson and not from fires kindled by the natives. This remark I feel necessary as there were methods used by some persons in the colony both for estimating the degree of heat and for ascertaining the cause of its production which I deem equally unfair and unphilosophical. The thermometer whence my observations were constantly made was hung in the open air in a southern aspect never reached by the rays of the sun at the distance of several feet above the ground.  My other remarks on the climate will be short; it is changeable beyond any other I ever heard of; but no phaenomena sufficiently accurate to reckon upon are found to indicate the approach of alteration. Indeed for the first eighteen months that we lived in the country changes were supposed to take place more commonly at the quartering of the moon than at other times. But lunar empire afterwards lost its credit; for the last two years and a half of our residing at Port Jackson its influence was unperceived. Three days together seldom passed without a necessity occuring for lighting a fire in an evening. A habit d'etè or a habit de demi sâison would be in the highest degree absurd; clouds storms and sunshine pass in rapid succession. Of rain we found in general not a sufficiency but torrents of water sometimes fall. Thunder storms in summer are common and very tremendous [169] but they have ceased to alarm from rarely causing mischief; sometimes they happen in winter. I have often seen large hailstones fall. Frequent strong breezes from the westward purge the air; these are almost invariably attended with a hard clear sky. The easterly winds by setting in from the sea. bring thick weather and rain except in summer when they become regular sea-breezes. The aurora australis is sometimes seen but is not distinguished by superior brilliancy.  To sum up: - Notwithstanding the inconveniences which I have enumerated I will venture to assert in few words that no climate hitherto known is more generally salubrious or affords more days on which those pleasures which depend on the state of the atmosphere can be enjoyed than that of New South Wales; the winter season is particularly delightful.  The leading animal production is well known to be the kanguroo. The natural history of this animal will probably be written from observations made upon it in England; as several living ones of both sexes have been brought home. Until such an account shall appear probably the following desultory observation may prove acceptable.  The genus in which the kanguroo is to be classed I leave to better naturalists than myself to determine. - How it copulates those who pretend to have seen disagree in their accounts: nor do we know how long the period of gestation lasts. - Prolific it cannot be termed bringing forth only one at a birth which the dam carries in her pouch wherever she goes until the young one be enabled to provide for itself; and even then in the moment of alarm [170] she will stop to receive and protect it. We have killed she-kanguroos whose pouches contained young ones completely covered with fur and of more than fifteen pounds weight which had ceased to suck and afterwards were reared by us. In what space of time it reaches such a growth as to be abandoned entirely by the mother we are ignorant. It is born blind totally bald the orifice of the ear closed and only just the centre of the mouth open but a black score denoting what is hereafter to form the dimension of the mouth is marked very distinctly on each side of the opening. At its birth the kanguroo (notwithstanding it weighs when full grown 200 pounds) is not so large as a half-grown mouse. I brought some with me to England even less which I took from the pouches of the old ones. This phenomenon is so striking and so contrary to the general laws of nature that an opinion has been started that the animal is brought forth not by the pudenda but descends from the belly into the pouch by one of the teats which are there deposited. On this difficulty as I can throw no light I shall hazard no conjecture. It may however be necessary to observe that the teats are several inches long and capable of great dilatation. And here I beg leave to correct an error which crept into my former publication wherein I asserted that "the teats of the kanguroo never exceed two in number." They sometimes though rarely amount to four. There is great reason to believe that they are slow of growth and live many years. - This animal has a clavicle or collar-bone similar to that of the human body. The general colour of the kanguroo is very like that of the ass; but varieties exist: its shape and figure are well known by the plates which have been given of it. - The elegance of the ear is particularly deserving of admiration: this far exceeds the ear of the hare in quickness of sense; and is so flexible as to admit of being turned by the animal nearly quite round the head doubtless for the purpose [171] of informing the creature of the approach of its enemies; as it is of a timid nature and poorly furnished with means of defence though when compelled to resist it tears furiously with its fore-paws and strikes forward very hard with its hind legs. - Notwithstanding its unfavourable conformation for such a purpose its swims strongly; but never takes to the water unless so hard pressed by its pursuers as to be left without all other refuge. The noise they make is a faint bleat querulous but not easy to describe. They are sociable animals and unite in droves sometimes to the number of fifty or sixty tgether; when they are seen playful and feeding on grass which alone forms their food. At such time they move gently about like all other quadrupeds on all fours; but at the slightest noise they spring up on their hind legs and sit erect listening to what it may proceed from; and if it increases they bound off on those legs only; the fore ones at the same time being carried close to the breast like the paws of a monkey; and the tail stretched out acts as a rudder on a ship. - In drinking the kanguroo laps. - It is remarkable that they are never found in a fat state; being invariably lean. Of the flesh we always eat with avidity; but in Europe it would not be reckoned a delicacy: a rank flavour forms the principal objection to it. - The tail is accounted the most delicious part when stewed.  Hitherto I have spoken only of the large or grey kanguroo to which the natives give the name of Pat-ag-a-ràn. But there are (besides the kanguroo-rat) two other sorts. One of them we called the red kanguroo from the colour of its fur which is like that of a hare and sometimes is mingled with a large portion of black: the natives call it Bàg-a-ray. It rarely attains to more than [172] forty pounds weight. The third sort is very rare and in the formation of its head resembles the oppossum. - The kanguroo-rat is a small animal never reaching at its utmost growth more than fourteen or fifteen pounds and its usual size is not above seven or eight pounds. It joins to the head and bristles of a rat the leading distinctions of a kanguroo by running when pursued on its hind legs only and the female having a pouch. Unlike the kanguroo who appears to have no fixed place of residence this little animal constructs for itself a nest of grass on the ground of a circular figure about ten inches in diameter with a hole on one side for the creature to enter at; the inside being lined with a finer sort of grass very soft and downy. But its manner of carrying the materials with which it builds the nest is the greatest curiosity: - by entwining its tail (which like that of all the kanguroo tribe is long flexible and muscular) around whatever it wants to remove and thus dragging along the load behind it. This animal is good to eat; but whether it be more prolific at a birth than the kanguroo I know not.  The Indians sometimes kill the kanguroo; but their greatest destroyer is the wild dog who feeds on them. Immediately on hearing or seeing this formidable enemy the kanguroo flies to the thickest cover in which if he can involve himself he generally escapes. In running to the cover they always if possible keep in paths of their own forming to avoid the high grass and stumps of trees which might be sticking up among it to wound them and impede their course.  [173] Our methods of killing them were but two; either we shot them or hunted them with greyhounds; we were never able to ensnare them. Those sportsmen who relied on the gun seldom met with success unless they slept near covers into which the kanguroos were wont to retire at night and watched with great caution and vigilance when the game in the morning sallied forth to feed. They were however sometimes stolen in upon in the day-time; and that fascination of the eye which has been by some authors so much insisted upon so far acts on the kanguroo that if he fixe his eye upon any one and no other object move at the same time he will often continue motionless in stupid gaze while the sportsman advances with measured step towards him until within reach of his gun. The greyhounds for a long time were incapable of taking them; but with a brace of dogs if not near cover a kanguroo almost always falls since the greyhounds have acquired by practice the proper method of fastening upon them. Nevertheless the dogs are often miserably torn by them. The rough wiry greyhound suffers least in the conflict and is most prized by the hunters.  Other quadrupeds besides the wild dog consist only of the flying squirrel of three kinds of oppossums and some minute animals usually marked by the distinction which so peculiarly characterizes the oppossurn tribe. The rats soon after our landing became not only numerous but formidable from the destruction they occasioned in the stores. Latterly they had almost disappeared though to account for their absence were not easy. - The first time Colbee saw a monkey he called Wùr-ra (a rat); but on examining its paws he exclaimed with astonishment and affright Mùl-la (a man).  At the head of the birds the cassowary or emu stands conspicuous. The print of it which has already been given to the public [174] is so accurate for the most part that it would be malignant criticism in a work of this kind to point out a few trifling defects.  Here again naturalists must look forward to that information which longer and more intimate knowledge of the feathered tribe than I can supply shall appear. I have nevertheless had the good fortune to see what was never seen but once in the country I am describing by Europeans - a hatch or flock of young cassowaries with the old bird. I counted ten but others said there were twelve. We came suddenly upon them and they ran up a hill exactly like a flock of turkies but so fast that we could not get a shot at them. The largest cassowary ever killed in the settlement weighed ninety-four pounds: three young ones which had been by accident separated from the dam were once taken and presented to the governor. They were not larger than so many pullets although at first sight they appeared to be so from the length of their necks and legs. They were very beautifully striped and from their tender state were judged to be not more than three or four days old. They lived only a few days.  A single egg the production of a cassowary was picked up in a desart place dropped on the sand without covering or protection of any kind. Its form was nearly a perfect ellipsis; and the colour of the shell a dark green full of little indents on its surface. It measured eleven inches and a half in circumference five inches and a quarter in height and weighed a pound and a quarter. - Afterwards we had the good fortune to take a nest: it was found by a soldier in a sequestered solitary situation made in a patch of lofty fern about three feet in diameter rather of an oblong shape and composed of dry leaves and tops of fern stalks very inartificially put together. The hollow in which lay the eggs twelve in number seemed made solely by the pressure of the bird. The eggs were regularly placed in the following position.  [175]  The soldier instead of greedily plundering his prize communicated the discovery to an officer who immediately set out for the spot.  When they had arrived there they continued for a long time to search in vain for their object; and the soldier was just about to be stigmatized with ignorance credulity or imposture when suddenly up started the old bird and the treasure was found at their feet.  The food of the cassowary is either grass or a yellow bell-flower growing in the swamps. - It deserves remark that the natives deny the cassowary to be a bird because it does not fly.  Of other birds the varieties are very numerous. Of the parrot tribe alone I could while I am writing count up from memory fourteen different sorts: hawks are very numerous; so are quails. A single snipe has been shot: ducks geese and other aquatic birds are often seen in large flocks; but are universally so shy that it is found difficult to shoot them. Some of the smaller birds are very beautiful but they are not remarkable for either sweetness or variety of notes. To one of them not bigger than a tom-tit we have given the name of coach-whip from its note exactly resembling the smack of a whip. The country I am of opinion would abound with birds did not the natives by perpetually [176] setting fire to the grass and bushes destroy the greater part of the nests; a cause which also contributes to render small quadrupeds scarce: they are besides ravenously fond of eggs and eat them wherever they find them. - They call the roe of a fish and a bird's egg by one name.  So much has been said of the abundance in which fish are found in the harbours of New South Wales that it looks like detraction to oppose a contradiction. Some share of knowledge may however be supposed to belong to experience. Many a night have I toiled (in the times of distress) on the public service from four o'clock in the afternoon until eight o'clock next morning hauling the seine in every part of the harbour of Port Jackson: and after a circuit of many miles and between twenty and thirty hauls seldom more than a hundred pounds of fish were taken. However it sometimes happens that a glut enters the harbour and for a few days they sufficiently abound: but the universal voice of all professed fishermen is that they never fished in a country where success was so precarious and uncertain.  I shall not pretend to enumerate the variety of fish which are found; they are seen from a whale to a gudgeon: in the intermediate classes may be reckoned sharks of a monstrous size skait rock-cod grey-mullet bream horse-mackarel now and then a sole and john dory and innumerable others unknown in Europe many of which are extremely delicious and many highly beautiful. At the top of the list as an article of food stands a fish which we named lighthorseman. The relish of this excellent fish was increased by our natives who pointed out to us its delicacies. No epicure in England could pick a head with more glee and dexterity than they do that of a light-horseman.  Reptiles in the swamps and covers are numerous. Of snakes there are two or three sorts: but whether the bite of any of them [177] be mortal or even venomous is somewhat doubtful: I know but of one well attested instance of a bite being received from a snake. A soldier was bitten so as to draw blood; and the wound healed as a simple incision usually does without shewing any symptom of malignity. - A dog was reported to be bitten by a snake and the animal swelled and died in great agony. But I will by no means affirm that the cause of his death was fairly ascertained. It is however certain that the natives shew on all occasions the utmost horror of the snake and will not eat it although they esteem lizards guanas and many other reptiles delicious fare. On this occasion they always observe that if the snake bites them they become lame: but whether by this they mean temporary or lasting lameness I do not pretend to determine . - I have often eaten snakes and always found them palatable and nutritive though it was difficult to stew them to a tender state.  Summer here as in all other countries brings with it a long list of insects. In the neighborhood of rivers and morasses musquitoes and sand-flies are never wanting at any season; but at Sydney they are seldom numerous or troublesome. The most nauseous and destructive of all the insects is a fly which blows not eggs but large living maggots; and if the body of the fly be opened it is found full of them. Of ants there are several sorts one of which bites very severely: the white ant is sometimes seen. Spiders are large and numerous. Their webs are not only the strongest but the finest and most silky I ever felt. I have often thought their labour might be turned to advantage. It has I believe been proved that spiders were it not for their quarrelsome disposition which irritates them to attack and destroy each other might be employed more profitably than silk-worms.  The hardiness of some of the insects deserves to be mentioned. A beetle was immersed in proof spirits for four hours and when [178] taken out crawled away almost immediately. It was a second time immersed and continued in a glass of rum for a day and a night at the expiration of which period it still shewed symptoms of life. Perhaps however what I from ignorance deem wonderful is common.  ----  The last but the most important production yet remains to be considered. Whether plodding in London; reeking with human blood in Paris; or wandering amidst the solitary wilds of New South Wales - Man is ever an object of interest curiosity and reflection.  The natives around Port Jackson are in person rather more diminitive and slighter made especially about the thighs and legs than the Europeans. It is doubtful whether their society contained a person of six feet high. The tallest I ever measured reached five feet eleven inches; and men of his height were rarely seen. Baneelon who towered above the majority of his countrymen stood barely five feet eight inches high; his other principal dimensions were as follows: -  Girth of the Chest.  Girth of the Belly.  Girth of the Thigh.  Girth of the Leg at the Calf.  Girth of the Leg at the Small.  Girth of arm half way between the shoulder and elbow.  2 Feet 10 Inches  2' 6 1/2"  18' 1/8"  12' 3/8"  10 Inches  9 Inches  Instances of natural deformity are scarce; nor did we ever see one of them left-handed. They are indeed nearly ambidexter; but the sword the spear and the fish-gig are always used with the righthand. Their muscular force is not great; but the pliancy of [179] their limbs renders them very active. "Give to civilized man all his machines and he is superior to the savage; but without these how inferior is he found on opposition even more so than the savage in the first instance." These are the words of Rousseau; and like many more of his positions must be received with limitation. Were an unarmed Englishman and an unarmed New Hollander to engage the latter I think would fall.  Mr. Cook seems inclined to believe the covering of their heads to be wool. But this is erroneous; it is certainly hair which when regularly combed becomes soon nearly as flexible and docile as our own. Their teeth are not so white and good as those generally found in Indian nations except in the children: but the inferiority originates in themselves; they bite sticks stones shells and all other hard substances indiscriminately with them which quickly destroys the enamel and gives them a jagged and uneven appearance. A high forehead with prominent overhanging eye-brows is their leading characteristic and when it does not operate to destroy all openness of countenance gives an air of resolute dignity to the aspect which recommends in spite of a true negro nose thick lips and a wide mouth. The prominent shin bone so invariably found in the Africans is not however seen. But in another particular they are more alike; the rank offensive smell which disgusts so much in the negro prevails strongly among them when they are in their native state; but it wears off in those who have resided with us and have been taught habits of cleanliness. Their hands and feet are small especially the former. [180] Their eyes are full black and piercing; but the almost perpetual strain in which the optic nerve is kept by looking out for prey renders their sight weak at an earlier age than we in general find ours affected. These large black eyes are universally shaded by the long thick sweepy eyelash so much prized in appreciating beauty that perhaps hardly any face is so homely which this aid cannot in some degree render interesting; and hardly any so lovely which without it bears not some trace of insipidity. Their tone of voice is loud but not harsh: I have in some of them found it very pleasing.  Longevity I think is seldom attained by them. Unceasing agitation wears out the animal frame and is unfriendly to length of days. We have seen them grey with age but not old; perhaps never beyond sixty years. But it may be said the American Indian in his undebauched state lives to an advanced period. True; but he has his seasons of repose: he reaps his little harvest of maize and continues in idleness while it lasts; he kills the roe-buck or the moose-deer which maintains him and his family for many days during which cessation the muscles regain their spring and fit him for fresh toils. Whereas every sun awakes the native of New South Wales (unless a whale be thrown upon the coast) to a renewal of labour to provide subsistence for the present day.  The women are proportionally smaller than the men. I never measured but two of them who were both I think about the medium height. One of them a sister of Baneelon stood exactly five feet two inches high: the other named Goo-ree-dee-à-na was shorter by a quarter of an inch.  But I cannot break from Gooreedeeana so abruptly. - She belonged to the tribe of Cameragal and rarely came among us. One day however she entered my house to complain of hunger. She excelled in beauty all their females I ever saw: her age about [181] eighteen: the firmness the symmetry and the luxuriancy of her bosom might have tempted painting to copy its charms: her mouth was small; and her teeth though exposed to all the destructive purposes to which they apply them were white sound and unbroken. - Her countenance though marked by some of the characteristics of her native land was distinguished by a softness and sensibility unequalled in the rest of her countrywomen: and I was willing to believe that these traits indicated the disposition of her mind. I had never before seen this elegant timid female of whom I had often heard; but the interest I took in her led me to question her about her husband and family. She answered me by repeating a name which I have now forgotten; and told me she had no children. I was seized with a strong propensity to learn whether the attractions of Gooreedeeana were sufficiently powerful to secure her from the brutal violence with which the women are treated: and as I found my question either ill understood or reluctantly answered I proceeded to examine her head the part on which the husband's vengeance generally alights. - With grief I found it covered by contusions and mangled by scars. The poor creature grown by this time more confident from perceiving that I pitied her pointed out a wound just above her left knee which she told me was received from a spear thrown at her by a man who had lately dragged her by force from her home to gratify his lust. I afterwards observed that this wound had caused a slight lameness and that she limped in walking. I could only compassionate her wrongs and sympathize in her misfortunes: to alleviate her present sense of them when she took her leave I gave her however all the bread and salt pork which my little stock afforded.  After this I never saw her but once when I happened to be near [182] the harbour's mouth in a boat with captain Ball. We met her in a canoe with several more of her sex. She was painted for a ball with broad stripes of white earth from head to foot; so that she no longer looked like the same Gooreedeeana. We offered her several presents all of which she readily accepted; but finding our eagerness and solicitude to inspect her she managed her canoe with such address as to elude our too near approach and acted the coquet to admiration.  To return from this digression to my subject I have only farther to observe that the estimation of female beauty among the natives (the men at least) is in this country the same as in most others. Were a New-Hollander to pourtray his mistress he would draw her the Venus aux belles fesses. Whenever Baneelon described to us his favourite fair he always painted her in this and another particular as eminently luxuriant.  Unsatisfied however with natural beauty like the people of all other countries they strive by adscititious embellishments to heighten attraction and often with as little success. Hence the naked savage of New South Wales pierces the septum of his nose through which he runs a stick or a bone; and scarifies his body the charms of which increase in proportion to the number and magnitude of seams by which it is distinguished. The operation is performed by making two longitudinal incisions with a sharpened shell and afterwards pinching up with the nails the intermediate space of skin and flesh which thereby becomes considerably elevated and forms a prominence as thick as a man's finger. No doubt but pain must be severely felt until the wound be healed. But the love of ornament defies weaker considerations: and no English beau can bear more stoutly the extraction of his teeth to make room for a fresh set from a chimney sweeper; or a fair one suffer her tender ears [183] to be perforated with more heroism than the grisly nymphs on the banks of Port Jackson submit their sable shoulders to the remorseless lancet.  That these scarifications are intended solely to encrease personal allurement I will not however positively affirm. Similar perhaps to the cause of an excision of part of the little finger of the left hand in the women and of a front tooth in the men; or probably after all our conjectures superstitious ceremonies by which they hope either to avert evil or to propagate good are intended. The colours with which they besmear the bodies of both sexes possibly date from the same common origin. White paint is strictly appropriate to the dance. Red seems to be used on numberless occasions and is considered as a colour of less consequence. It may be remarked that they translate the epithet white when they speak of us not by the name which they assign to this white earth; but by that with which they distinguish the palms of their hands.  As this leads to an important subject I shall at once discuss it. "Have these people any religion: any knowledge of or belief in [184] a deity? - any conception of the immortality of the soul?" are questions which have been often put to me since my arrival in England: I shall endeavour to answer them with candour and seriousness.  Until belief be enlightened by revelation and chastened by reason; religion and superstition are terms of equal import. One of our earliest impressions is the consciousness of a superior power. The various forms under which this impression has manifested itself are objects of the most curious speculation.  The native of New South Wales believes that particular aspects and appearances of the heavenly bodies predict good or evil consequences to himself and his friends. He oftentimes calls the sun and moon. 'weeree' that is malignant pernicious. Should he see the leading fixed stars (many of which he can call by name) obscured by vapours he sometimes disregards the omen; and sometimes draws from it the most dreary conclusions.- I remember Abaroo running into a room where a company was assembled and uttering frightful exclamations of impending mischiefs about to light on her and her countrymen. When questioned on the cause of such agitation she went to the door and pointed to the skies saying that whenever the stars wore that appearance misfortunes to the natives always followed. The night was cloudy and the air disturbed by meteors. - I have heard many more of them testify similar apprehensions.  However involved in darkness and disfigured by error such a belief be no one will I presume deny that it conveys a direct implication of superior agency; of a power independent of and uncontrolled by. those who are the objects of its vengeance: - but proof stops not here: - when they hear the thunder roll and view the livid glare they flee them not; but rush out and deprecate destruction. They have a dance and a song appropriated to this [185] awful occasion. which consist of the wildest and most uncouth noises and gestures. - Would they act such a ceremony did they not conceive that either the thunder itself. or he who directs the thunder might be propitiated by its performance? that a living intellectual principle exists capable of comprehending their petition and of either granting or denying it? They never address prayers to bodies which they know to be inanimate either to implore their protection or avert their wrath. When the gum- tree in a tempest nods over them; or the rock overhanging the cavern in which they sleep threatens by its fall to crush them they calculate (as far as their knowledge extends) on physical principles like other men the nearness and magnitude of the danger and flee it accordingly. And yet there is reason to believe that from accidents of this nature they suffer more than from lightning. Baneelon once shewed us a cave the top of which had fallen in and buried under its ruins seven people who were sleeping under it.  To descend; is not even the ridiculous superstition of Colbee related in one of our journies to the Hawkesbury? And again the following instance: - Abaroo was sick; to cure her one of her own sex slightly cut her on the forehead in a perpendicular direction with an oyster shell so as just to fetch blood: she then put one end of a string to the wound and beginning to sing. held the other end to her own gums which she rubbed until they bled copiously. This blood she contended was the blood of the patient flowing through the string and that she would thereby soon recover. Abaroo became well; and firmly believed that she owed her cure to the treatment she had received. - Are not these I say links subordinate ones indeed of the same golden chain? He who believes in magic confesses supernatural agency: and a belief of this sort extends farther in many persons than they are willing to allow. There have lived men so inconsistent with their own principles [186] as to deny the existence of a God who have nevertheless turned pale at the tricks of a mountebank.  But not to multiply arguments on a subject where demonstration (at least to me) is incontestable I shall close by expressing my firm belief that the Indians of New South Wales acknowledge the existence of a superintending deity. Of their ideas of the origin and duration of his existence; of his power and capacity; of his benignity or maleficence; or of their own emanation from him I pretend not to speak. I have often in common with others tried to gain information from them on this head; but we were always repulsed by obstacles which we could neither pass by or surmount. Mr. Dawes attempted to teach Abaroo some of our notions of religion and hoped that she would thereby be induced to communicate hers in return. But her levity and love of play in a great measure defeated his efforts; although every thing he did learn from her served to confirm what is here advanced. It may be remarked that when they attended at church with us (which was a common practice) they always preserved profound silence and decency as if conscious that some religious ceremony on our side was performing.  The question of whether they believe in the immortality of the soul will take up very little time to answer. They are universally fear- ful of spirits. They call a spirit Mawn: they often scruple to approach a corpse saying that the mawn will seize them and that it fastens upon them in the night when asleep. When asked where their deceased friends are they always point to the skies. To believe in after existence is to confess the immortality of some [187] part of being. To enquire whether they assign a limited period to such future state would be superfluous: this is one of the subtleties of speculation which a savage may be supposed not to have considered without impeachment either of his sagacity or happiness.  Their manner of interring the dead has been amply described. It is certain that instead of burying they sometimes burn the corpse; but the cause of distinction we know not. A dead body covered by a canoe at whose side a sword and shield were placed in state was once discovered. All that we could learn about this important personage was that he was a Gwee-a-gal (one of the tribe of Gweea) and a celebrated warrior.  To appreciate their general powers of mind is difficult. Ignorance prejudice the force of habit continually interfere to prevent dispassionate judgment. I have heard men so unreasonable as to exclaim at the stupidity of these people for not comprehending what a small share of reflection would have taught them they ought not to have expected. And others again I have heard so sanguine in their admiration as to extol for proofs of elevated genius what the commonest abilities were capable of executing.  If they be considered as a nation whose general advancement and acquisitions are to be weighed they certainly rank very low even in the scale of savages. They may perhaps dispute the right of precedency with the Hottentots or the shivering tribes who inhabit the shores of Magellan. But how inferior do they show when compared with the subtle African; the patient watchful American; or the elegant timid islander of the South Seas. Though suffering from the vicissitudes of their climate - strangers to cloathing: tho' feeling the sharpness of hunger and knowing the precariousness of supply from that element on whose stores they principally depend ignorant of cultivating the earth - a less enlightened state we shall exclaim can hardly exist.  [188] But if from general view we descend to particular inspection and examine individually the persons who compose this community they will certainly rise in estimation. In the narrative part of this work I have endeavoured rather to detail information than to deduce conclusions; leaving to the reader the exercise of his own judgment. The behaviour of Arabanoo of Baneelon of Colbee and many others is copiously described; and assuredly he who shall make just allowance for uninstructed nature will hardly accuse any of those persons of stupidity or deficiency of apprehension.  To offer my own opinion on the subject I do not hesitate to declare that the natives of New South Wales possess a considerable portion of that acumen or sharpness of intellect which bespeaks genius. All savages hate toil and place happiness in inaction: and neither the arts of civilized life can be practised or the advantages of it felt without application and labour. Hence they resist knowledge and the adoption of manners and customs differing from their own. The progress of reason is not only slow but mechanical.- "De toutes les Instructions propres à l'homme celle qu'il acquiert le plus tard et le plus difficilement est la raison même." The tranquil indifference and uninquiring eye with which they surveyed our works of art have often in my hearing been stigmatized as proofs of stupidity and want of reflection. But surely we should discriminate between ignorance and defect of understanding. The truth was they often neither comprehended the design nor conceived the utility of such works: but on subjects in any degree familiarized to their ideas they generally testified not only acuteness of discernment but a large portion of good sense. I have always thought that the distinctions they shewed in their estimate of us on first entering into our society strongly displayed the latter quality: - when they were led into our respective [189] houses at once to be astonished and awed by our superiority their attention was directly turned to objects with which they were acquainted. They passed without rapture or emotion our numerous artifices and contrivances: but when they saw a collection of weapons of war or of the skins of animals and birds they never failed to exclaim and to confer with each other on the subject. The master of that house became the object of their regard as they concluded he must be either a renowned warrior or an expert hunter. Our surgeons grew into their esteem from a like cause. In a very early stage of intercourse several natives were present at the amputation of a leg: when they first penetrated the intention of the operator they were confounded; not believing it possible that such an operation-could be performed without loss of life; and they called aloud to him to desist: but when they saw the torrent of blood stopped the vessels taken up and the stump dressed their horror and alarm yielded to astonishment and admiration which they expressed by the loudest tokens.- If these instances bespeak not nature and good sense I have yet to learn the meaning of the terms.  If it be asked why the same intelligent spirit which led them to contemplate and applaud the success of the sportsman and the skill of the surgeon did not equally excite them to meditate on the labours of the builder and the ploughman; I can only answer that what we see in its remote cause is always more feebly felt than that which presents to our immediate grasp both its origin and effect.  Their leading good and bad qualities I shall concisely touch upon. - Of their intrepidity no doubt can exist: their levity their fickleness their passionate extravagance of character cannot be defended. They are indeed sudden and quick in quarrel; but if their resentment be easily roused their thirst of revenge is not implacable. [190] - Their honesty when tempted by novelty is not unimpeachable; but in their own society there is good reason to believe that few breaches of it occur. - It were well if similar praise could be given to their veracity: but truth they neither prize nor practice. When they wish to deceive they scruple not to utter the grossest and most hardened lies. Their attachment and gratitude to those among us whom they have professed to love have always remained inviolable unless effaced by resentment from sudden provocation: then like all other Indians the impulse of the moment is alone regarded by them.  Some of their manufactures display ingenuity when the rude tools with which they work and their celerity of execution are considered. - The canoes fish-gigs swords shields spears throwingsticks clubs and hatchets are made by the men: to the women are committed the fishing-lines hooks and nets. - As very ample collections of all these articles are to be found in many museums in England I shall only briefly describe the way in which the most remarkable of them are made. - The fish-gigs and spears are commonly (but not universally) made of the long spiral shoot which arises from the top of the yellow gum-tree and bears the flower: the former have several prongs barbed with the bone of kanguroo; the latter are sometimes barbed with the same substance; or with the prickle of the sting-ray; or with stone; or hardened gum; and sometimes simply pointed. Dexterity in throwing and parrying the spear is considered as the highest acquirement: the children of both sexes practice from the time that they are able to throw a rush; their first essay. - It forms their constant recreation. They afterwards heave at each other with pointed twigs. He who acts on the defensive holds a piece of new soft bark in the left hand to represent a shield in which he receives [191] the darts of the assailant the points sticking in it. Now commences his turn: he extracts the twigs and darts them back at the first thrower who catches them similarly. - In warding off the spear they never present their front but always turn their side; their head at the same time just clear of the shield to watch the flight of the weapon; and the body covered. If a spear drop from them when thus engaged they do not stoop to pick it up; but hook it between the toes and so lift it until it meet the hand: thus the eye is never diverted from its object the foe. If they wish to break a spear or any wooden substance they lay it not across the thigh or the body but upon the head and press down the ends until it snap. Their shields are of two sorts: that called Il-ee-mon is nothing but a piece of bark with a handle fixed in the inside of it: the other dug out of solid wood is called Ar-a-goòn and is made as follows with great labour. On the bark of a tree they mark the size of the shield; then dig the outline as deep as possible in the wood with hatchets; and lastly flake it off as thick as they can by driving in wedges.The sword is a large heavy piece of wood shaped like a sabre and capable of inflicting a mortal wound: in using it they do not strike with the convex side but with the concave one; and strive to hook in their antagonists so as to have them under their blows. - The fishing-lines are made of the bark of a shrub: the women roll shreds of this on the inside of the thigh so as to twist it together carefully inserting the ends of every fresh piece into the last made: - they are not as strong as lines of equal size formed of hemp. - The fish-hooks are chopped with a stone out of a particular shell and afterwards rubbed until they become smooth. They are very much curved and not barbed. Considering the quickness with which they are finished the excellence of the work if it be inspected is admirable. - In all these manufactures the sole of the foot is used both by men and women [192] as a work-board. They chop a piece of wood or aught else upon it even with an iron tool without hurting themselves: it is indeed nearly as hard as the hoof of an ox.  Their method of procuring fire is this: They take a reed and shave one side of the surface flat; in this they make a small incision to reach the pith and introducing a stick purposely blunted at the end into it turn it round between the hands (as chocolate is milled) as swiftly as possible until flame be produced. As this operation is not only laborious but the effect tedious they frequently relieve each other at the exercise. And to avoid being often reduced to the necessity of putting it in practice they always if possible carry a lighted stick with them whether in their canoes or moving from place to place on land.  Their treatment of wounds must not be omitted. A doctor is with them a person of importance and esteem; but his province seems rather to charm away occult diseases than to act the surgeon's part which as a subordinate science is exercised indiscriminately.  Their excellent habit of body the effect of drinking water only speedily heals wounds without an exterior application which with us would take weeks or months to close. They are nevertheless sadly tormented by a cutaneous eruption; but we never found it contagious. - After receiving a contusion if the part swell they fasten a ligature very tightly above it so as to stop all circulation. Whether to this application or to their undebauched habit it be attributable I know not but it is certain that a disabled limb among them is rarely seen; although violent inflammations from bruises which in us would bring on a gangrene daily happen. If they get burned either from rolling into the fire when asleep; [193] or from the flame catching the grass on which they lie (both of which are common accidents) they cover the part with a thin paste of kneaded clay which excludes the air and adheres to the wound until it be cured and the eschar falls off.  Their form of government and the detail of domestic life yet remain untold. The former cannot occupy much space. Without distinctions of rank except those which youth and vigour confer theirs is strictly a system of Equality attended with only one inconvenience - the strong triumph over the weak. - Whether any laws exist among them for the punishment of offences committed against society; or whether the injured party in all cases seeks for relief in private revenge I will not positively affirm; though I am strongly inclined to believe that only the latter method prevails. I have already said that they are divided into tribes; but what constitutes the right of being enrolled in a tribe or where exclusion begins and ends I am ignorant. The tribe of Cameragal is of all the most numerous and powerful. Their superiority probably arose from possessing the best fishing ground; and perhaps from their having suffered less from the ravages of the small-pox.  In the domestic detail there may be novelty but variety is unattainable: one day must be very like another in the life of a savage. Summoned by the calls of hunger and the returning light he starts from his beloved indolence and snatching up the remaining brand of his fire hastens with his wife to the strand to commence their daily task. In general the canoe is assigned to her into which she puts the fire and pushes off into deep water to fish with hook and line this being the province of the women. If she have a child at the breast she takes it with her. And thus in her skiff a piece of bark tied at both ends with vines and the edge of it but just above the surface of the water she pushes out regardless of the elements if they be but commonly agitated. While she paddles to the fishing- [194] bank and while employed there the child is placed on her shoulders entwining its little legs around her neck and closely grasping her hair with its hands. To its first cries she remains insensible as she believes them to arise only from the inconveniency of a situation. to which she knows it must be inured. But if its plaints continue and she supposes it to be in want of food she ceases her fishing and clasps it to her breast. An European spectator is struck with horror and astonishment at their perilous situation: but accidents seldom happen. The management of the canoe alone appears a work of unsurmountable difficulty its breadth is so inadequate to its length. The Indians aware of its ticklish formation practise from infancy to move in it without risk. Use only could reconcile them to the painful position in which they sit in it: they drop in the middle of the canoe upon their knees and resting the buttocks on the heels extend the knees to the sides against which they press strongly so as to form a poize. sufficient to retain the body in its situation and relieve the weight which would otherwise fall wholly upon the toes. Either in this position or cautiously moving in the centre of the vessel the mother tends her child; keeps up her fire which is laid on a small patch of earth; paddles her boat; broils fish; and provides in part the subsistence of the day. - Their favourite bait for fish is a cockle.  The husband in the mean time warily moves to some rock over which he can peep into unruffled water to look for fish. For this purpose he always chuses a weather shore; and the various windings of the numerous creeks and indents always afford one. Silent and watchful he chews a cockle and spits it into the water. Allured by the bait the fish appear from beneath the rock. He prepares his fish-gig and pointing it downward moves it gently towards the object always trying to approach it as near as possible to the fish before the stroke be given. At last he deems himself [195] sufficiently advanced and plunges it at his prey. If he has hit his mark he continues his efforts and endeavours to transpierce it or so to entangle the barbs in the flesh as to prevent its escape. When he finds it secure he drops the instrument and the fish fastened on the prongs rises to the surface floated by the buoyancy of the staff. Nothing now remains to be done but to haul it to him with either a long stick or another fish-gig (for an Indian if he can help it never goes into the water on these occasions) to disengage it and to look out for fresh sport.  But sometimes the fish have either deserted the rocks for deeper water or are too shy to suffer approach. He then launches his canoe and leaving the shore behind watches the rise of prey out of the water and darts his gig at them to the distance of many yards. Large fish he seldom procures by this method; but among shoals of mullets which are either pursued by enemies or leap at objects on the surface he is often successful. Baneelon has been seen to kill more than twenty fish by this method in an afternoon. The women sometimes use the gig and always carry one in each canoe to strike large fish which may be hooked and thereby facilitate the capture. But generally speaking this instrument is appropriate to the men who are never seen fishing with the line and would indeed consider it as a degradation of their pre- eminence.  When prevented by tempestuous weather or any other cause from fishing these people suffer severely. They have then no resource but to pick up shell-fish which may happen to cling to the rocks and be cast on the beach; to hunt particular reptiles and small animals which are scarce; to dig fern root in the swamps; or to gather a few berries destitute of flavour and nutrition which the woods afford. To alleviate the sensation of hunger they tie a ligature tightly around the belly as I have often seen our soldiers do from the same cause.  [196] Let us however suppose them successful in procuring fish. The wife returns to land with her booty and the husband quitting the rock joins his stock to hers; and they repair either to some neighbouring cavern or to their hut. This last is composed of pieces of bark very rudely piled together in shape as like a soldier's tent as any known image to which I can compare it: too low to admit the lord of it to stand upright; but long and wide enough to admit three or four persons to lie under it. "Here shelters himself a being born with all those powers which education expands and all those sensations which culture refines." With a lighted stick brought from the canoe they now kindle a small fire at the mouth of the hut and prepare to dress their meal. They begin by throwing the fish exactly in the state in which it came from the water on the fire. When it has become a little warmed they take it off rub away the scales and then peal off with their teeth the surface which they find done and eat. Now and not before they gut it; but if the fish be a mullet or any other which has a fatty substance about the intestines they carefully guard that part and esteem it a delicacy. The cooking is now completed by the remaining part being laid on the fire until it be sufficiently done. A bird a lizard a rat or any other animal they treat in the same manner: the feathers of the one and the fur of the other they thus get rid of.  [197] Unless summoned away by irresistable necessity sleep always follows the repast. They would gladly prolong it until the following day; but the canoe wants repair; the fish-gig must be barbed afresh; new lines must be twisted and new hooks chopped out - they depart to their respective tasks which end only with the light.  Such is the general life of an Indian. But even he has his hours of relaxation in seasons of success when fish abounds. Wanton with plenty he now meditates an attack upon the chastity of some neighbouring fair one; and watching his opportunity he seizes her and drags her away to complete his purpose. The signal of war is lighted; her lover her father her brothers her tribe assemble and vow revenge on the spoiler. He tells his story to his tribe: they judge the case to be a common one and agree to support him. Battle ensues: they discharge their spears at each other and legs and arms are transpierced. When the spears are expended the combatants close and every species of violence is practiced: they seize their antagonist and snap like enraged dogs: they wield the sword and club; the bone shatters beneath their fall; and they drop the prey of unsparing vengeance.  Too justly as my observations teach me has Hobbes defined a state of nature to be a state of war. In the method of waging it among these people one thing should not however escape notice. Unlike all other Indians they never carry on operations in the night or seek to destroy by ambush and surprize. Their ardent fearless character seeks fair and open combat only.  But enmity has its moments of pause: then they assemble to sing and dance. We always found their songs disagreeable from their monotony: they are numerous and vary both in measure and time. They have songs of war of hunting of fishing for the rise and set of the sun for rain for thunder and for many other [198] occasions. One of these songs which may be termed a speaking pantomime recites the courtship between the sexes and is accompanied with acting highly expressive. I once heard and saw Nanbaree and Abaroo perform it: after a few preparatory motions she gently sunk on the ground as if in a fainting fit: Nanbaree applying his mouth to her ear began to whisper in it; and baring her bosom breathed on it several times. At length the period of the swoon having expired with returning animation she gradually raised herself: she now began to relate what she had seen in her vision mentioning several of her countrymen by name whom we knew to be dead; mixed with other strange incoherent matter equally new and inexplicable though all tending to one leading poit-the sacrifice of her charms to her lover.  At their dances I have often been present; but I confess myself unable to convey in description an accurate account of them. Like their songs they are conceived to represent the progress of the passions and the occupations of life. Full of seeming confusion yet regular and systematic their wild gesticulations and frantic distortions of body are calculated rather to terrify than delight a spectator. These dances consist of short parts or acts accompanied with frequent vociferations and a kind of hissing or whizzing noise: they commonly end with a loud rapid shout and after a short respite are renewed. While the dance lasts one of them (usually a person of note and estimation) beats time with a stick on a wooden instrument held in the left hand accompanying the music with his voice; and the dancers sometimes sing in concert. - I have already mentioned that white is the colour appropriated to the dance; but the style of painting is left to every one's fancy. Some are streaked with waving lines from head to foot; others marked by broad crossbars on the breast back and thighs; or encircled with spiral lines; or regularly striped like a zebra. Of these ornaments the face never [199] wants its share; and it is hard to conceive any thing in the shape of humanity more hideous and terrific than they appear to a stranger: seen perhaps through the livid gleam of a fire; the eyes surrounded by large white circles in contrast with the black ground; the hair stuck full of pieces of bone; and in the hand a grasped club which they occasionally brandish with the greatest fierceness and agility. Some dances are performed by men only; some by women only; and in others the sexes mingle. In one of them I have seen the men drop on their hands and knees and kiss the earth with the greatest fervor between the kisses looking up to Heaven. They also frequently throw up their arms exactly in the manner in which the dancers of the Friendly Islands are depicted in one of the plates of Mr. Cook's last voyage.  Courtship here as in other countries is generally promoted by this exercise where every one tries to recommend himself to attention and applause. Dancing not only proves an incentive but offers an opportunity in its intervals. The first advances are made by the men who strive to render themselves agreeable to their favourites by presents of fishing-tackle and other articles which they know will prove acceptable. Generally speaking a man has but one wife; but infidelity on the side of the husband with the unmarried girls is very frequent. For the most part perhaps they intermarry in their respective tribes: this rule is not however constantly observed; and there is reason to think that a more than ordinary share of courtship and presents on the part of the man is required in this case. Such difficulty seldom operates to extinguish desire; and nothing is more common than for the unsuccessful suitor to ravish by force that which he cannot accomplish by entreaty. I do not believe that very near connexions by blood ever cohabit: - we knew of no instance of it.  But indeed the women are in all respects treated with savage [200] barbarity; condemned not only to carry the children but all other burthens they meet in return for submission only with blows kicks and every other mark of brutality. When an Indian is provoked by a woman he either spears her or knocks her down on the spot: on this occasion he always strikes on the head using indiscriminately a hatchet a club or any other weapon which may chance to be in his hand. The heads of the women are always consequently seen In the state which I found that of Gooreedeeana. Colbee who was certainly in other respects a good tempered merry fellow made no scruple of treating Daringa who was a gentle creature thus. Baneelon did the same to Barangaroo; but she was a scold and a vixen and nobody pitied her. It must nevertheless be confessed that the women often artfully study to irritate and inflame the passions of the men although sensible that the consequence will alight on themselves.  Many a matrimonial scene of this sort have I witnessed. Lady Mary Wortley Montague in her sprightly letters from Turkey longs for some of the advocates for passive obedience and unconditional submission then existing in England to be present at the sights exhibited in a despotic government. A thousand times in like manner have I wished that those European philosophers whose closet speculations exalt a state of nature above a state of civilization could survey the phantom which their heated imaginations have raised: possibly they might then learn that a state of nature is of all others least adapted to promote the happiness of a being capable of sublime research and unending ratiocination: that a savage roaming for prey amidst his native deserts is a creature deformed by all those passions which afflict and degrade our nature unsoftened by the influence of religion philosophy and legal restriction: and that the more men unite their talents the more closely the bands of society are drawn; and civilization [201] advanced inasmuch is human felicity augmented and man fitted for his unalienable station in the universe.  Of the language of New South Wales I once hoped to have subjoined to this work such an exposition as should have attracted public notice; and have excited public esteem. But the abrupt departure of Mr. Dawes who stimulated equally by curiosity and philanthropy had hardly set foot on his native country when he again quitted it to encounter new perils in the service of the Sierra Leona company precludes me from executing this part of my original intention in which he had promised to co-operate with me; and in which he had advanced his researches beyond the reach of competition. The few remarks which I can offer shall be concisely detailed.  We were at first inclined to stigmatize this language as harsh and barbarous in its sounds; their combinations of words in the manner they utter them frequently convey such an effect. But if not only their proper names of men and places but many of their phrases and a majority of their words be simply and unconnectedly considered they will be found to abound with vowels and to produce sounds sometimes mellifluous and sometimes sonorous. What ear can object to the names of Còlbee (pronounced exactly as Colby is with us) Bèreewan Bòndel Imèerawanyee Deedòra Wòlarawaree or Bàneelon among the men; or to Wereewèea Gòoreedeeana Mìlba or Matìlba among the women. Parramàtta Gwèea Càmeera Càd-i and Mèmel are names of places. The tribes derive their appellations from the places they inhabit: thus Cèmeeragal means the men who reside in the bay of Cameera; Cèdigal those who reside in the bay of Cadi; and so of the others. The women of the tribe are denoted by adding eean to any of the [202] foregoing words: a Cadigalèean imports a woman living at Cadi or of the tribe of Cadigal. These words as the reader will observe are accented either on the first syllable or the penultima. In general however they are partial to the emphasis being laid as near the beginning of the word as possible.  Of compound words they seem fond: two very striking ones appear in the journal to the Hawkesbury. Their translations of our words into their language are always apposite comprehensive and drawn from images familiar to them: a gun for instance they call Goòroobeera that is - a stick of fire. - Sometimes also by a licence of language they call those who carry guns by the same name. But the appellation by which they generally distinguished us was that of Bèreewolgal meaning - men come from afar. - When they salute any one they call him Damèeli or namesake a term which not only implies courtesy and good-will but a certain degree of affection in the speaker. An interchange of names with any one is also a symbol of friendship. Each person has several names; one of which there is reason to believe is always derived from the first fish or animal which the child in accompanying its father to the chace or a fishing may chance to kill.  Not only their combinations but some of their simple sounds were difficult of pronunciation to mouths purely English: diphthongs often occur: one of the most common is that of a e or perhaps a i pronounced not unlike those letters in the French verb haïr to hate. The letter y frequently follows d in the same syllable: thus the word which signifies a woman is Dyin; although the structure of our language requires us to spell it Dee-in.  But if they sometimes put us to difficulty many of our words were to them unutterable. The letters s and v they never could pronounce: the latter became invariably w and the former mocked all their efforts which in the instance of Baneelon has [203] been noticed; and a more unfortunate defect in learning our language could not easily be pointed out.  They use the ellipsis in speaking very freely; always omitting as many words as they possibly can consistent with being understood. They inflect both their nouns and verbs regularly; and denote the cases of the former and the tenses of the latter not like the English by auxiliary words; but like the Latins by change of termination. Their nouns whether substantive or adjective seem to admit of no plural. I have heard Mr. Dawes hint his belief of their using a dual number similar to the Greeks: but I confess that I never could remark aught to confirm it. The method by which they answer a question that they cannot resolve is similar to what we sometimes use. Let for example the following question be put - Waw Colbee yagoono? - Where is Colbee to-day? - Waw baw! Where indeed! would be the reply. They use a direct and positive negative: but express the affirmative by a nod of the head or an inclination of the body.  Opinions have greatly differed whether or not their language be copious. In one particular it is notoriously defective; they cannot count with precision more than four. However as far as ten by holding up the fingers they can both comprehend others and explain themselves. Beyond four every number is called great; and should it happen to be very large great great which is an Italian idiom also. This occasions their computations of time and space to be very confused and incorrect: of the former they have no measure but the visible diurnal motion of the sun or the monthly revolution of the moon.  To conclude the history of a people for whom I cannot but feel some share of affection: let those who have been born in more favoured lands and who have profited by more enlightened systems compassionate but not despise their destitute and obscure [204] situation. Children of the same omniscient paternal care let them recollect that by the fortuitous advantage of birth alone they possess superiority: that untaught unaccommodated man is the same in Pall Mall as in the wilderness of New South Wales: and ultimately let them hope and trust that the progress of reason and the splendor of revelation will in their proper and allotted season be permitted to illumine and transfuse into these desert regions knowledge virtue and happiness.    [205] CHAPTER XVIII.  Observations on the Convicts.  SHORT account of that class of men for whose disposal and advantage the colony was principally if not totally founded seems necessary.  If it be recollected how large a body of these people are now congregated in the settlement of Port Jackson and at Norfolk Island it will I think not only excite surprize but afford satisfaction to learn that in a period of four years few crimes of a deep dye or of a hardened nature have been perpetrated: murder and unnatural sins rank not hitherto in the catalogue of their enormities: and one suicide only has been committed.  To the honour of the female part of our community let it be recorded that only one woman has suffered capital punishment: on her condemnation she pleaded pregnancy; and a jury of venerable matrons was impanneled on the spot to examine and pronounce her state; which the forewoman a grave personage between 60 and 70 years old did by this short address to the court; 'Gentlemen! she is as much with child as I am.' Sentence was accordingly passed and she was executed.  Besides the instance of Irving two other male convicts William Bloodsworth of Kingston upon Thames and John Arscott of Truro in Cornwall were both emancipated for their good conduct in the years 1790 and 1791. Several men whose terms of transportation had expired and against whom no legal impediment [206] existed to prevent their departure have been permitted to enter in merchant ships wanting hands: and as my Rose Hill journals testify many others have had grants of land assigned to them and are become settlers in the country.  In so numerous a community many persons of perverted genius and of mechanical ingenuity could not but be assembled. Let me produce the following example: - Frazer was an iron manufacturer bred at Sheffield of whose abilities as a workman we had witnessed many proofs. The governor had written to England for a set of locks to be sent out for the security of the public stores which were to be so constructed as to be incapable of being picked. On their arrival his excellency sent for Frazer and bade him examine them; telling him at the same time that they could not be picked. Frazer laughed and asked for a crooked nail only to open them all. A nail was brought and in an instant he verified his assertion. Astonished at his dexterity a gentleman present determined to put it to farther proof. He was sent for in a hurry some days after to the hospital where a lock of still superior intricacy and expence to the others had been provided. He was told that the key was lost and that the lock must be immediately picked. He examined it attentively; remarked that it was the production of a workman; and demanded ten minutes to make an instrument 'to speak with it.' Without carrying the lock with him he went directly to his shop; and at the expiration of his term returned applied his instrument and open flew the lock. But it was not only in this part of his business that he excelled: he executed every branch of it in superior style. Had not his villainy been still more notorious than his skill he would have proved an invaluable possession to a new country. He had passed through innumerable scenes in life and had played many parts. When too lazy to work at his trade he had turned thief in fifty [207] different shapes; was a receiver of stolen goods; a soldier; and a travelling conjurer. He once confessed to me that he had made a set of tools for a gang of coiners every man of whom was hanged.  Were the nature of the subject worthy of farther illustration many similar proofs of misapplied talents might be adduced.  Their love of the marvellous has been recorded in an early part of this work. The imposture of the gold finder however prominent and glaring nevertheless contributed to awaken attention and to create merriment. He enjoyed the reputation of a discoverer until experiment detected the imposition. But others were less successful to acquire even momentary admiration. The execution of forgery seems to demand at least neatness of imitation and dexterity of address. - On arrival of the first fleet of ships from England several convicts brought out recommendatory letters from different friends. Of these some were genuine and many owed their birth to the ingenuity of the bearers. But these last were all such bungling performances as to produce only instant detection and succeeding contempt. One of them addressed to the governor with the name of Baron Hotham affixed to it began "Honored Sir!"  A leading distinction which marked the convicts on their outset in the colony was an use of what is called the flash or kiddy language. In some of our early courts of justice an interpreter was frequently necessary to translate the deposition of the witness and the defence of the prisoner. This language has many dialects. The sly dexterity of the pickpocket; the brutal ferocity of the footpad; the more elevated career of the highwayman; and the deadly purpose of the midnight ruffian is each strictly appropriate in the terms which distinguish and characterize it. I have ever been of opinion that an abolition of this unnatural jargon would [208] open the path to reformation. And my observations on these people have constantly instructed me that indulgence in this infatuating cant is more deeply associated with depravity and continuance in vice than is generally supposed. I recollect hardly one instance of a return to honest pursuits and habits of industry where this miserable perversion of our noblest and peculiar faculty was not previously conquered.  Those persons to whom the inspection and management of our numerous and extensive prisons in England are committed will perform a service to society by attending to the foregoing observation. Let us always keep in view that punishment when not directed to promote reformation is arbitrary and unauthorized.    [209] CHAPTER XIX. Facts relating to the Probability of establishing a Whale Fishery on the Coast of New South Wales: - With Thoughts on the same.  IN every former part of this publication I have studiously avoided mentioning a whale fishery; as the information relating to it will I conceive be more acceptably received in this form by those to whom it is addressed than if mingled with other matter.  Previous to entering on this detail it must be observed that several of the last fleet of ships which had arrived from England with convicts were fitted out with implements for whale fishing and were intended to sail for the coast of Brazil to pursue the fishery immediately on having landed the convicts.  On the 14th of October 1791 the Britannia captain Melville one of these ships arrived at Sydney. In her passage between Van Dieman's Land and Port Jackson the master reported that he had seen a large shoal of spermaceti whales. His words were "I saw more whales at one time around my ship than in the whole of six years which I have fished on the coast of Brazil."  This intelligence was no sooner communicated than all the whalers were eager to push to sea: Melville himself was among the most early; and on the 10th of November returned to Port Jackson more confident of success than before. He assured me that in the fourteen days which he had been out he had seen more spermaced [210] whales than in all his former life: they amounted he said to many thousands most of them of enormous magnitude; and had he not met with bad weather he could have killed as many as he pleased. Seven he did kill; but owing to the stormy agitated state of the water he could not get any of them aboard. In one however which in a momentary interval of calm was killed and secured by a ship in company he shared. The oil and head matter of this fish he extolled as of an extraordinary fine quality. He was of opinion the former would fetch ten pounds per ton more in London than that procured on the Brazil coast. He had not gone farther south than 37°; and described the latitude of 35° to be the place where the whales most abounded just on the edge of soundings which here extends about fifteen leagues from the shore; though perhaps on other parts of the coast the bank will be found to run hardly so far off.  On the following day (November 11th) the Mary Anne captain Munro another of the whalers returned into port after having been out sixteen days. She had gone as far south as 41°; but saw not a whale; and had met with tremendously bad weather in which she had shipped a sea that had set her boiling coppers afloat and had nearly carried them overboard.  November 22d. The William and Anne captain Buncker returned after having been more than three weeks out and putting into Broken Bay. This is the ship that had killed the fish in which Melville shared. Buncker had met with no farther success owing he said entirely to gales of wind; for he had seen several immense shoals; and was of opinion that he should have secured fifty tons of oil had the weather been tolerably moderate. I asked him whether he thought the whales he had seen were fish of passage. "No" he answered "they were going on every point of the compass and were evidently on feeding ground which I saw [211] no reason to doubt that they frequent." Melville afterwards confirmed to me this observation. - December 3d the Mary Anne and Matilda again returned. The former had gone to the southward and off Port Jervis had fallen in with two shoals of whales nine of which were killed: but owing to bad weather part of five only were got on board: as much the master computed as would yield 30 barrels of oil. He said the whales were the least shy of any he had ever seen; "not having been cut up" (a fisherman's phrase for harrassed disturbed.) The latter had gone to the northward and had seen no whales but a few fin-backs.  On the 5th of December both these ships sailed again; and on the 16th and 17th of the month (just before the author sailed for England) they and the Britannia and William and Anne returned to Port Jackson without success; having experienced a continuation of the bad weather; and seen very few fish. They all said that their intention was to give the coast one more trial; and if it miscarried to quit it and steer to the northward in search of less tempestuous seas.  The only remark which I have to offer to adventurers on the above subject is not to suffer discouragement by concluding that bad weather only is to be found on the coast of New South Wales where the whales have hitherto been seen. Tempests happen sometimes there as in other seas: but let them feel assured that there are in every month of the year many days in which the whale fishery may be safely carried on. The evidence of the abundance in which spermaceti whales are sometimes seen is incontrovertible: that which speaks to their being not fish of passage is at least respectable and hitherto uncontradicted. The prospect merits attention - may it stimulate to enterprize.  The two discoveries of Port Jervis and Matilda Bay (which are to be found in the foregoing sheets) may yet be wanting in the maps [212] of the coast. My account of their geographic situation except possibly in the exact longitude of the latter (a point not very material) may be safely depended upon. A knowledge of Oyster Bay discovered and laid down by the Mercury store-ship in the year 1789 would also be desirable: but this I am incapable of furnishing.  Here terminates my subject. Content with the humble province of detailing facts and connecting events by undisturbed narration I leave to others the task of anticipating glorious or gloomy consequences from the establishment of a colony which unquestionably demands serious investigation ere either its prosecution or abandonment be determined.  But doubtless not only those who planned but those who have been delegated to execute an enterprize of such magnitude have deeply revolved that "great national expence does not imply the necessity of national suffering. While revenue is employed with success to some valuable end the profits of every adventure being more than sufficient to repay its costs the public should gain and its resources should continue to multiply. But an expence whether sustained at home or abroad; whether a waste of the present or an anticipation of the future revenue if it bring no adequate return is to be reckoned among the causes of national ruin."   THE END.  A LETTER FROM THE REVEREND FYSHE PALMER TO DOCTOR JOHN SYDNEY N.S.WALES JUNE 13 1795.  MY DEAR SIR  WHEN Mr. White the principal surgeon of this settlement sailed last December in the DAEDALUS I entrusted him with what is dearer to me than life my character. I was under the necessity of defending this against the infernal machinations of Captain Patrick Campbell master of the SURPRISE transport who had hired and suborned some of the outcasts who sailed with him to swear away my life by the accusation of mutiny and the intended murder of him and his principal officers. Of this murderous attempt of Campbell's I sent the most indubitable evidence of many depositions made before a magistrate. In the hurry Mr Ellis sent the attested copies as well the originals so that my character depends on the safe arrival and honesty of Mr. White. They were accompanied with the dismal narrative of my sufferings (of which last I have a copy) and entrusted to the care of Mr. Joyce. I am extremely anxious for the fate of them. My history since then is little else than a register of vexations and persecutions.  The officers have monopolised all the trade of the colony. They suffer no one but themselves to board any ship that may arrive. They alone buy the cargo and sell it at 1 2 3 400 and even 1000 per cent. profit. Mr. Ellis and Boston were ordered into confinement for entering a ship and endeavouring to purchase things not prohibited for their use. With great respect but firmness they remonstrated against this invasion of the common rights of British subjects. This was construed into an audacious attack upon the privileges and interests of these military monopolists. And from that time (now many months ago) they have set their faces against them and me. They have had no grants and no servants. Mr. Boston though sent out by the government principally to cure fish and make salt has been the whole time unemployed My men which I bought at a monstrous rate with a farm have been taken from me. A message has been sent me to pull off my hat to the officers or I should be confined in the cells and punished. Public orders have been twice given for no soldier to speak to me under the penalty of 100 lashes. Now I never had omitted the ceremony of capping the officers and never conversed with the soldiers. The most impudent claims on my property from the most unprincipled thieves were listened to and enforced without deigning to hear a single word I had to say.  The situation the colony is in at present is dreadful. It is put an half allowance and even at this rate there is not enough in the stores to last three weeks. They have begun to kill the livestock. The cows are condemned but all the stock in the colony will not last a month. The only respite is about three months provisions of Indian corn a food inadequate to labour. In this state Mr. Boston wrote to the commanding officer that he was sent out by the government on purpose to make salt and cure fish and that he would undertake with the assistance of boats and men to supply from Lord Howe's Island in the neighbourhood a full or even double allowance of well cured fish at a third of the price of beef and pork. Can you conceive that little or no notice was taken of this and nearly a flat denial given?  Yesterday a large ship came in from India the ENDEAVOUR Bampton master with the company's colours flying. These were called American by some by others the colours of Britain - of a frigate sent to fetch us over. Good heavens! What were my sensations! mocked with groundless joy to be plunged again into melancholy. She brings live stock arrack tea sugar muslin buffalo-fat but only fourteen barrels of provisions. Fowls sell at 5 / - each; cabbages 6d.; park 1 / 6 per pound. I have never accepted any provisions of any kind from the stores that no pretence might be made to demand my labour and I therefore find living enormously dear. Mr. Muir myself Mr. and Mrs. Boston and Ellis live together and are all well.  It gave me great pleasure on landing to see the harmony between the natives and whites. This was owing to the indefatigable pains of governor Phillips to cultivate a good understanding with them. When himself was speared he would suffer no vengeance to be taken and on no account an injury to be done them by a white man. The natives of the Hawkesbury (the richest land possibly in the world producing 30 and 40 bushels of wheat per acre) lived an the wild yarns an the banks. Cultivation has rooted out these and poverty compelled them to steal Indian corn to support nature. The unfeeling settlers resented this by unparalleled severities. The blacks in return speared two or three whites but tired out they came unarmed and sued for peace. This government thought proper to deny them and last week sent sixty soldiers to kill and destroy all they could meet with and drive them utterly from the Hawkesbury. They seized a native boy who had lived with a settler and made him discover where his parents and relations concealed themselves. They came upon them unarmed and unexpected killed five and wounded many more. The dead they hang an gibbets in terrorem. The war may be universal on the part of the blacks whose improvement and civilization will be a long time deferred. The people killed were unfortunately the most friendly of the blacks and one of them more than once saved the life of a white man.  Governor Hunter whose arrival is so anxiously expected will come out with just and liberal ideas I trust of policy and correct the many abuses and oppressions we groan under as well as those of the poor natives. It seems a strange time to drive these poor wretches into famine the almost certain consequences of driving them from their situation when we are so near It ourselves.  Ever since I landed I have been attacked by the malady of the country sore - eyes; so that I have been obliged to give up writing and reading. I have now blisters behind my ears from which I find some relief Same lose their sight but in general after the first attack their vision is as good as ever.  You may be sure I am all anxiety concerning the fate of those men who are suffering for the welfare of others. Remember me to them if you have the opportunity with all the sympathy they deserve.  I am dear Sir  Your much obliged and affectionate  T.F. PALMER.  Sydney  September 16 1795.  Sir  Probably you will be a little surprised at receiving this unexpected line but as a circumstance hath occurred in this Colony which I am pursuaded will be gratifying to you I have taken the liberty to communicate it. On the 20th of this month on the very day Governors Hunter's Commission was read we received information that the cattle which were lost about seven years ago were found. They have not yet been brought into Camp neither have their number been fully ascertained. The men who found them told thirty-nine three large bulls - and the rest cows and calves - they imagine there are many more than the above number. I remember you contended very strongly when I was in England that the Cows were not destroyed but that they would in future be found which is now proved to be the ease. Another very singular circumstance hath also happened lately. About five years age some convicts left the Colony in an open boat in hopes of making their escape four of whom a few days ago were found by Captain Broughton (who commands his Majesties ship "Providence" 20 guns which is sent out here on discovery) in Port Stevens and brought to Port Jackson. [11]   They have never been heard of for these five years past and have all this time been living amongst the natives of New Holland. I have not yet had an opportunity of learning how these men have spent their time amongst the poor savages. They were quite naked like the miserable natives when Captain Breughton met with them.  With respect to the Colony it prospers much. Cultivation goes on very rapidly. At present we have the prospect of a very large crop of wheat which will be ready for reaping in November. I think it one of the finest countries in the known world and no people I believe will be more happy than the people of this island in a short time. Our live stock increases very fast. I suppose there are not less than 1400 female goats and sheep in the colony at present and these have young twice in a year. We are now totally independent of foreign countries for dry provisions and in three or four years shall have plenty of animal food. I wish we had some thousands of the poor English families here we would soon make them very comfortable. I have lately visited Norfolk Island. The inhabitants there are well provided for. They have both plenty of dry provisions and animals raised by themselves. You may purchase a good fowl for sixpence and a Duck for ten-pence or a shilling. They have the greatest plenty of fresh pork. Should you hear any reports of the sufferings of the people here they ought not to be believed such reports must in a great measure be false.  Should this short letter written in the greatest haste (as the ship is already gone down the Harbour) afford you one moments amusement I shall be happily recompensed for my trouble.  Mrs. Marsden joins me in kind respects to you and Mrs. Stokes.  I am Dear Sir  Yours &c &c  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  CHAP. XVII. [...]   May. The mortality in the last month had been extremely great. Distressing as it was however to see the poor wretches daily dropping into the grave it was far more afflicting to observe the countenances and emaciated persons of many that remained soon to follow their miserable companions. [210] Every step was taken that could be deviled to save them; a fishery was established at the South-head exclusively for the use of the sick under the direction of one Barton who had been formerly a pilot and who in addition to this duty was to board all ships coming into the harbour and pilot them to the settlement. The different people who were employed by individuals to kill game were given up for the use of the hospital; and to stimulate them to exertion two pounds of flour in addition to the ration were ordered for every kangooroo that they should bring beside the head one fore-quarter and the pluck of the animal.  The weakest of the convicts were excused from any kind of hard labour; but it was not hard labour that destroyed them; it was an entire want of strength in the constitution to receive nourishment to throw off the debility that pervaded their whole system or to perform any fort of labour whatever.  This dreadful mortality was chiefly confined to the convicts who had arrived in the last year; of one hundred and twenty-two male convicts who came out in the Queen transport from Ireland fifty only were living at the beginning of this month. The different robberies which were committed were also confined to this class of the convicts and the wretches who were concerned in the commission of them were in general too weak to receive a punishment adequate to their crimes. Their universal plea was hunger; but it was a plea that in the then situation of the colony could not be so much attended to as it certainly would have been in a country of greater plenty.  The quantity of Indian corn stolen and destroyed this season was not ascertained but was supposed to have been at least one Sixth of what was railed. The people employed in bringing it in daily reported that they found immense piles of the hulks and stalks concealed in the midst of what was standing having been there shelled and taken off at different times. This was a very serious loss and became an object of immediate consideration in Such a scarcity as the colony then experienced; most anxiously it expected supplies from England which did not arrive though the time had elapsed in which they should have appeared had their departure taken place at the period mentioned by the secretary of state (the autumn of last year). His excellency therefore thought it prudent still farther to abridge the ration of flour which was then issued; and on the 9th of the month directed the commissary to Serve weekly until further orders one pound and an half of flour with four pounds of maize to each man; and one pound and an half of flour with three pounds of maize to each woman and to every child ten years of age; but made no alteration in the ration of salt provisions. [211]   This ration was to take place on Saturday the 12th ; and as maize or Indian corn was now necessarily become the principal part of each person's subsistence hand-mills and querns were set to work to grind it coarse for every person both at Sydney and at Parramatta; and at this latter place wooden mortars with a lever and a pestle were also used to break the corn and these pounded it much finer than it could be ground by the hand-mills; but it was effected with great labour.  On comparing this ration with that issued in the month of April 1790 it will appear that the allowance then received from the public store was in most respects better than that now ordered. We then received in addition to two pounds and a half of flour two pounds of rice which taken together yielded more nutritive substance than the four pounds of maize and one pound and a half of flour; for the maize when perfectly ground sifted and divested of the unwholesome and unprofitable part the hulk would not give more than three pounds of good meal; and the rice was used by the convicts in a much greater variety of modes than it was possible to prepare the maize in.  As at this period the flour in store was reduced to a very inconsiderable quantity twenty-four days at the new ration (one pound and a half per week) and the salt provisions at the present ration not affording a Supply for a longer time than three months it became a melancholy although natural reflection that had not such numbers died both in the passage and Since the landing of those who survived the voyage we should not at this moment have had any thing to receive from the public stores; thus strangely did we derive a benefit from the miseries of our fellow - creatures!  Several of the settlers who had farms at or near Parramatta notwithstanding the extreme drought of the season preceding the laying of their corn had such crops that they found themselves enabled to take off from the public store some one and others two convicts to assist in preparing their grounds for the next season. [212] The salt provisions with which they supplied them they procured by bartering their corn for that article reserving a sufficiency for the support of themselves and families and for feed. Mr. Schaffer from a Small patch of ground got in about two hundred bushels of Indian corn; and with the assistance of four convicts expected to have thirty acres in cultivation the next season. But others of the settlers inattentive to their own interests and more desirous of acquiring for the present what they deemed comforts than studious to provide for the future not only neglected the cultivation of their lands but sold the breeding flock with which they had been Supplied by order of the governor. Two settlers of the former description having clearly forfeited their grants and it being understood. that they did not intend to proceed to cultivation any further than to save appearances till they could get away their grants were taken from them and other settlers placed on the grounds. But exclusive of the idle people of which there were but few the settlers were found in general to be doing very well their farms promising to place them shortly in a state of independence on the public stores in the articles of provisions and grain; and it must not be omitted in this account that they had to combat with the bad effects of a short and reduced ration nearly the whole of the time that they had been employed in cultivating ground on their own account.  Many complaints having been made by the Settlers of depredations committed on their Indian corn by some of the convicts it was ordered that every convict residing at Parramatta who should be fully convicted before a magistrate of stealing Indian corn should in addition to such corporal punishment as he might think it necessary to adjudge be sent from Parramatta to the New Grounds there to be employed in cultivation. Mr. Richard Atkins who came out in the Pitt and who had been sworn a justice of the peace went up to Parramatta to reside there the constant presence of a magistrate being deemed by the governor indispensable at that settlement.  It was soon perceived that the punishment of being sent from Parramatta was more dreaded by the convicts than any corporal correction however Severe that could have been inflicted on them. The being deprived of a comfortable hut and garden and quitting a place whence the communication with Sydney was frequent particularly when shipping were in the cove operated so powerfully with one offender who was ordered out to the 'New Grounds that he chose rather to make an attempt to destroy himself than be sent thither; and had very nearly effected his purpose having made an incision in his neck of such depth as to lay bare the carotid artery. [213]   In addition to the depredations of our own people the natives had for some time been suspected of stealing the corn at the settlements beyond Parramatta. On the 18th a party of the tribe inhabiting the woods to the number of fifteen or sixteen was observed coming out of a hut at the middle settlement dressed in such clothing as they found there and taking with them a quantity of corn in nets. The person who saw them imagined at first from their appearance that they were convicts; but perceiving one of them preparing to throw a spear at him he levelled his piece which was loaded with Small shot and fired at him. The native instantly dropped his spear and the whole party ran away leaving behind them the nets with the corn some blankets and one or two spears. It was supposed that the native was wounded; for in a few days information was received from Parramatta that a convict who was employed in well-digging at Prospect Hill having come in from thence to receive some flops which were issued was on his return met midway and murdered or rather butchered by some of the natives. When the body was found it was not quite cold and had at least thirty Spear wounds in it. The head was cut in several places and most of the teeth were knocked out. They had taken his clothing and provisions and the provisions of another man which he was carrying out to him. The natives with whom we had intercourse said that this murder was committed by some of the people who inhabited the woods and was done probably in revenge for the shot that was fired at the natives who Some time before were stripping the hut.  Toward the end of the month the corn was all got in and housed at Parramatta. As the grounds were cleared of the stalks the depredations which had been committed became visible; and several of the convicts were detected by the night-watch in bringing in large quantities of shelled corn which had been stolen buried or concealed in the woods and shelled as they could find opportunity. [214] Seven bushels were recovered in one night by the vigilance of the watch; and as different quantities were found from time to time in the huts the people who resided in them were all ordered to the New Grounds.  The works during this month both at Sydney and at Parramatta went on but slowly. At Sydney a tank that would contain about seven thousand nine hundred and ninety-six gallons of water with a well in the centre fifteen feet deep was finished and the water let into it. Brick huts were in hand for the convicts in room of the miserable hovels occupied by many which had been put up at their first landing and in room of others which from having been erected on such ground as was then cleared were now found to interfere with the direction of the streets which the governor was laying out. People were also employed in cutting paling for fencing in their gardens. At Parramatta and the New Grounds during the greatest part of the month the people were employed in getting in the maize and sowing wheat. A foundation for an hospital was laid a house built for the master carpenter and roofs prepared for the different huts either building or to be built in future.  The following were the prices of grain and other articles as they were sold during this month at Sydney and at the market-place at Parramatta. [...] [215]   June. With infinite satisfaction it was observed at the beginning of the month that the mortality and sickness among the people had very much decreased. This was attributed by the medical gentlemen to the quantities of fresh meat which had been obtained at Parramatta by the people who were employed to shoot for the hospital; a sufficiency having been brought in at one time to supply the sick with fresh meat for a week; and for the remainder of the month in the proportion of twice or three times a week. Great quantities of vegetables had also been given to those who were in health as well as to the sick both from the public ground at the farther settlement (which had been sown and produced some most excellent turnips) and from the governor's garden.  4th. The anniversary of his Majesty's birth-day was observed with as much distinction as was in our power. The governor always wished to celebrate that day in the year in a manner that should render it welcome to all descriptions of people in the different settlements. Heretofore on the same occasion he had increased the ration of provisions; but the situation of the public stores not admitting of such increase at the present the commissary was directed to issue on that day half a pint of rum to each person of the civil and military department and a quarter of a pint of rum to each female in the settlement. At noon the New South Wales corps fired three vollies and the governor received the compliments of the day; after which the officers of each department were entertained by his Excellency at dinner at government-house. Bonfires were made at night and the day concluded joyfully without any interruption to the peace of the settlement.  The small allowance of spirits which was given for the day to the convalescents and to such sick in the hospital as the surgeon judged proper being found of infinite service to them the governor directed that the surgeon should receive a certain quantity and at his discretion issue it from time to time to such sick under his care as he thought would derive benefit from it; the remainder was ordered to be reserved for the use of the sloop when it might be necessary to send her to sea. [216] The spirits at this time in the colony were the surplus of what had been sent out for his majesty's ship Sirius and the Supply armed tender.  As it had been customary too on this day to grant a pardon to such offenders as might be in custody or under sentence of corporal punishment his Excellency was pleased a few days after to release such convicts as were sentenced to work in irons for a limited time at Parramatta and the New Grounds and who were not very notorious offenders. This lenity was the rather shewn at this time as the convicts were in general giving proofs of a greater disposition to honesty than had for some time been visible among them. The convicts at the New Grounds being assembled for this purpose the governor acquainted them "that the state of the colony requiring a still farther reduction in the ration it would very shortly take place; but that "he hoped soon to have it in his power to augment it". The deficiencies in the established ration he informed them should at a future " period be made up; but in the meantime he expected that every " man would continue to exert himself and get the corn into the " ground to insure support for the next year." Indeed these exertions became every day more necessary. On the 6th of this month there was only a sufficiency of flour in store to serve till the 2d of July and salt provisions till the 6th of August following at the ration then issued; and neither the Atlantic storeship from Calcutta nor the expected supplies from England had arrived.  Notwithstanding the mortality and sickness which had prevailed among the convicts who came out in the last ships much labour had been performed at the New Grounds by those who were capable of handling the hoe and the spade. At this time the quantity of ground in wheat and cleared and broken up for maize there and at Parramatta was such as (if not visited again by a dry season) would at least computing the produce even at what it was the last year yield a sufficiency of grain for all our numbers for a twelvemonth. But every one doubted the possibility of getting all the corn into the ground within the proper time unless the colony should be very speedily relieved from its distresses as the reduction in the ration would inevitably be followed by a diminution of the daily labour. [217]   On the 20th however to the inexpressible joy of all ranks of people in the settlements the Atlantic storeship anchored safely in the cove with a cargo of rice soujee and dholl from Calcutta having been much longer performing her voyage than was expected owing to some delays at Calcutta in settling and arranging the contract for the supply of provisions which had been required. The merchants who in the year 1790 had made a tender to supply this colony with certain articles at a stipulated price were from several concurring circumstances unable to furnish what was required by Lieutenant Bowen agreeable to the prices then stipulated; it was therefore determined by the members of the council at Calcutta to whom Lieutenant Bowen delivered his letters and instructions (Earl Cornwallis who had several months previous to his arrival been desired by the secretary of state to direct any supplies which might be required for this settlement being absent with the army) to invite offers for supplying the different articles which were required by contract. Lieutenant Bowen arrived at Calcutta on the 4th of February and it was not till the 27th of the following month that the business was finally arranged and a contract entered into by the house of Lambert Ross and Co. satisfactory to the council and to Lieutenant Bowen.  It appearing that the flour of Bengal unless it was dressed for the purpose which would have taken a great deal of time was not of a quality to keep even for the voyage from Calcutta to this country a large proportion of rice of that sort which was laid to be the fittest for preservation was purchased. A small quantity of flour too was put on board but merely for the purpose of experiment. It was called soujee by the natives but was much inferior in quality to the flour prepared in Europe and more difficult to make into bread.  The Atlantic left Calcutta the 28th of March and on her passage met with much bad weather and some heavy gales of wind. She brought two bulls and a cow of the Bengal breed together with twenty sheep and twenty goats; but these were of so diminutive a species that unless the breed could be considerably improved by that already in the country very little benefit was for a length of time to be expected from their importation. [218] Various feeds and plants also were received from the company's botanical garden; and much commendation was due to Colonel Kydd the gentleman who superintended the selection and arrangement of them for the voyage; as well as to Lieutenant Bowen for his care and for the accommodation which he gave up both to them and to the cattle in the cabin of the ship.  Information was received by the Calcutta papers of the loss of his Majesty's ship Pandora Captain Edwards who had been among the Friendly Islands in search of Christian and his piratical crew fourteen of whom he had secured and was returning with the purpose of surveying Endeavour Straits pursuant to his instructions when he unfortunately struck upon a reef in latitude 23° S. eleven degrees only to the northward of this port. By his boats he providentially reached Timor with ninety-nine of his officers and people being the whole of his ship's company which were saved. At Timor on his arrival he found Bryant and his companions who made their escape from this place in the fishing cutter in the night of the 28th of March 1791. These people had framed and told a plausible tale of distress of their having been cast away at lea ; and this for a time was believed; but they soon by their language to each other and by practising the tricks of their former profession gave room for suspicion; and being taken up their true characters and the circumstances of their escape were divulged. The Dutch governor of Timor delivered them to Captain Edwards who took them on with him to Batavia whence he was to proceed to England. The circumstance of these people having reached Timor confirmed what was suggested immediately after their departure that the master of the snow Waaksamheyd had furnished Bryant with instructions how to proceed and with every thing he stood in need of for his voyage; and it must be remembered that though this man during his stay in this port had constantly laid that every fort of refreshment was to be procured at Timor yet when Captain Hunter while at lea proposed to steer for that island he declared that nothing was to be got there and so prevented that officer from going thither. There cannot be a doubt that expecting to find his friends at Timor he did not choose either to endanger them or risk a discovery of the part he had acted in aiding their escape. [219]   Had it not been for the fortunate discovery and subsequent delivery of these people to a captain of a British man of war the evident practicability of reaching Timor in an open boat might have operated with others to make the attempt and to carry off boats from the settlements; which during the absence of the king's ships belonging to the station was never difficult; and it was now hoped that the certainty of every boat which should reach that or any other Dutch settlement under similar circumstances being suspected and received accordingly would have its due effect here.  The supply of provisions received by the Atlantic being confined to grain it became necessary to reduce the ration of salt meat. It was therefore ordered on the 21st that after the Friday following only two pounds of pork should be issued in lieu of four. The allowance of one pound and a half of flour and four pounds of maize was continued but one pound of rice and one quart of pease were added.  The general order given out on this occasion stated "That the arrival of ships with further supplies of provisions might be daily looked for; but as it was possible that some unforeseen accident might have happened to the ships which were expected to have sailed from England shortly after the departure of the Pitt it became necessary to reduce the ration of provisions then issued in order that the quantity in store might hold out till the arrival of those ships which might be supposed to have sailed for this country about the months of January or February last; it having been the intention of government that ships should fail from England for this colony twice in every year. And as all deficiencies in the ration were to be made good hereafter the following extract from the instructions which fixed the ration for the colony was inserted viz. Ration for each marine and male convict for seven days successively: 7 pounds of bread or in lieu thereof 7 pounds of flour; 7 pounds of beef or in lieu thereof 4 pounds of pork; 3 pints of pease; 6 ounces of butter; 1 pound of flour or in lieu thereof 1/2 a pound of rice: Being the same as are allowed his Majesty's troops serving in the West-India Islands excepting only the allowance of spirits. [220]   And two thirds of the above ration were directed to be issued to each woman in the settlement. So far the general order.  As however a sufficient quantity of rice could not be landed in time to issue on the Saturday one pound of maize was issued in lieu of the same quantity of rice.  At this ration the rice and flour or soujee were calculated to last five months; and the pease or dholl for nearly a twelvemonth. But if the Atlantic had not arrived the prospect in the colony would have been truly dreary and distressing; as it was intended to have issued only one pound and a half of flour three pounds of maize and two pounds of pork per week on Saturday the 23d; a ration that would have derived very little assistance from vegetables as at that season of the year the gardens had scarcely any thing in them. Gloomy and unpromising however as was the situation of the settlements before her arrival that event which happened the very day on which two years before the colony had been relieved by the arrival of the Justinian storeship cast a gleam of sunshine which penetrated every one capable of reflection and by effecting a sudden change in the ideas operated so powerfully on the mind that we all felt alike and found it impossible to fit for one minute seriously down to any business or accustomed pursuit.  A black the same who had secreted himself on board the Supply when she went to Batavia having found means to conceal himself on board the Atlantic on her departure for Calcutta and to remain concealed until she had left Norfolk Island was brought back again to the settlement notwithstanding he endeavoured to escape from the ship in the Ganges. As it appeared that he had served the term for which he was sentenced to be transported even before he got off on board the Atlantic (of which Lieutenant Bowen had only his assertion) no punishment was inflicted upon him and he was left at liberty to get away in any ship that would receive him on board.  The little live stock that was received by the Atlantic was landed at Parramatta directly after her arrival and placed in an inclosure separated from the others. [221]   About two hundred and fifty gallons of Bengal rum having been received the governor directed that in consequence of the ration being reduced that quantity together with what was in store and had been intended for the use of the sloop at a future time should be issued to the civil and military reserving a proportion for those at Norfolk Island.  The flag-staff which had been erected at the South Head under the direction of Captain Hunter in the month of January 1790 being found too short to skew the signal at any great distance a new one was taken down the harbour and erected the day the Atlantic arrived within a few feet of the other; its height above ground was sixty feet.  It was not found that the return of the Atlantic had caused any diminution in the price of grain or flock either at Parramatta or at Sydney. At this latter place a market had been established for the sale of grain fish or poultry similar to that at Parramatta; a clerk being appointed to superintend it and take account of the different articles brought for Sale to prevent the barter of goods stolen by the convicts.  On the last day of the month some natives residing at the South shore of Botany Bay whether from a hope of reward or from actually having seen some ships at a distance informed the governor that a few days before they had perceived four or five sail one of which they described to be larger than the others standing off the land with a westerly wind. Little credit was however given to their report.  July. As the merchants who supplied the provisions received by the Atlantic were only to be paid for such part of the cargo as was actually landed and found to be in a merchantable condition it became necessary to weigh and survey the whole of the cargo; for which purpose two Surveyors were appointed by the governor. This of course proved a very tedious business from the weakness of the gangs at Sydney. Seldom more than four hundred bags each bag containing one hundred and sixty-four pounds were at first landed in a day; latterly this number was by great exertions got up to Somewhat more than five hundred in a day. It was nor however till the 21st of the month that she was cleared.  Having discharged her cargo she began the serious labour of ballasting and it being wished to expedite her preparations for Norfolk Island her ship's company were assisted with twelve convicts from the settlement and the occasional use of Such boats as could be spared to convey the ballast to the ship. [222] The governor was anxious to learn the state of that dependency not having heard from it since the return of the Queen transport early in the last December.  The maize being all got in it was hoped that the convicts would not find any new object for their depredations and that order and tranquillity would for a time at least be restored among them. But the houses of individuals soon became their prey and three or four daring burglaries were committed this month: I say daring burglaries as the houses which were broken into were either within the view of a centinel or within the round of a watchman. This however must not be otherwise understood than as a proof of the perseverance and cunning of these people who could find means to elude any vigilance that was opposed to their designs. An attempt to steal some of the sheep at Parramatta was also made by two notorious offenders who from being deemed incorrigible were not included in the pardon which the governor granted to the wretches in irons after his Majesty's birth-day but were ordered to be chained together for Some longer time. Being fortunately overheard by the person who lived in the inclosure and had the care of the Rock he Snapped a piece at them and finding it miss fire gave an alarm to the watch by whose activity they were apprehended two miles from the place. They were provided with every thing necessary for their design such as a tomahawk an iron kettle knives Spoons platters and a quantity of vegetables. It was found that with the assistance of the tomahawk they had divided the chain that linked them together and had secured round the leg the iron that remained with each so as not to be heard when they moved.  The different species of provisions which had been received from Calcutta were not much esteemed by the people. The flour or soujee from our not knowing the proper mode of preparing it for bread soon became sour particularly if not assisted with Some other grain; the dholl or pease were complained of as boiling hard and not breaking though kept on the fire for a greater length of time than the impatience of those who were to use it would in general admit of; and the rice though termed the best of the cargo was found to be full of husks and ill dressed. [223] Some pork also of which eight casks had been lent as an experiment was on being issued found to be for the most part putrid and in the language of surveyors of provisions not fit for men to eat. These circumstances together with the extreme minuteness of the Bengal breed of cattle excited a general hope that these settlements would not have to depend upon that country for supplies. To the parent country every one anxiously looked for a speedy and substantial assistance; and day after day used to pass in a fruitless hope that the morrow would come accompanied with the long wished-for arrival of ships.  The natives who lived among us assured us from time to time that the report formerly propagated of ships having been Seen on the coast had a foundation in reality; and as every one remembered that the Justinian after making the heads of Port Jackson had been kept at sea for three weeks a fond hope was cherished that the sun had shone upon the whitened sails of some approaching vessel which had been discovered by the penetrating eyes of our Savage neighbours at Botany Bay. In this anxiety and expectation we remained till the 26th when the long-wished-for signal was made and in a few hours after the Britannia store-ship Mr. William Raven master anchored in the cove after a passage of twenty-three weeks from Falmouth having failed from thence on the 15th of last February the day after the arrival of the Pitt in this country.  The Britannia was the first of three ships that were to be dispatched hither having on board twelve months clothing for the convicts four months flour and eight months beef and pork for every description of persons in the Settlements at full allowance calculating their numbers at four thousand six hundred and thirty-nine which it was at home Supposed they might amount to after the arrival of the Pitt. It was still a matter of uncertainty in England even at the departure of the Britannia whether the merchants of Calcutta had supplied this country with provisions; and under the idea that some circumstance might have prevented them this supply was ordered to be forwarded. The Kitty transport one of the three ships which were to contain these Supplies had sailed from Deptford at the time the Britannia passed through the Downs; her arrival therefore might be daily expected - and in her or on board of the other ship it was imagined that fifteen families of Quakers who had made proposals to government to be received in this country as settlers were to take their passage. [224]   It was with great pleasure heard in the colony that some steps had been taken toward prosecuting Donald Trail the master of the Neptune transport for his treatment of the convicts with which he failed from England for this settlement in the year 1790. The sickness and mortality which prevailed among them excited a suspicion that they had been improperly treated; and information upon oath was soon procured of many acts of neglect ill usage and cruelty toward them.  In consequence of the arrival of the Britannia the commissary was on the following day directed to issue until further orders the following weekly ration; viz.  To each man 4 pounds of maize  3 pounds of soujee  7 pounds of beef or in lieu thereof 4 lbs. of pork  3 pints of pease or dholl and  1/2 a pound of rice.  Two thirds of the man's ration was directed to be issued to each woman and to every child above ten years of age; one half of the man's ration to each child above two and under ten years of age; and one fourth of the man's ration to each child under two years of age.  Thus happily was the colony once more put upon something like a full ration of provisions; a change in our situation that gave universal satisfaction as at the hour of the arrival of the Britannia there were in the public store only twenty-four days salt provisions for the settlement at the ration then issued. A delay of a month in her voyage would have placed the colony in a state that must have excited the commiseration of its greatest enemies; a vast body of hard-working people depending for their Support upon one pound and a half of soujee or bad Bengal flour four pounds of maize one pound of rice and one quart of pease for one man per week without one ounce of meat! But with this new ration all entertained new hopes and trusted that their future labours would be crowned with success and that the necessity of sending out supplies from the mother country until the colony could support itself without assistance would have become so evident from the frequency of our distresses and the reduction of the ration that the journalist would no longer have occasion to fill his page with comparisons between what we might have been and what we were; to lament the non-arrival of supplies; nor to paint the miseries and wretchedness which ensued; but might adopt a language to which he might truly be said to have been hitherto a stranger and paint the glowing prospects of a golden harvest the triumph of a well-filled store and the increasing and consequent prosperity of the settlements. [225]   His excellency this month thought fit to exercise the power vested in him by act of parliament and by his Majesty's commission under the great seal of remitting either wholly or in part the term for which felons might be transported by granting an absolute remission of the term for which Elizabeth Perry had been sentenced. This woman came out in the Neptune in 1790 and had married James Ruse a settler. The good conduct of the wife and the industry of the husband who had for Some time Supported himself his wife a child and two convicts independent of the public store were the reasons assigned in the instrument which restored her to her rights and privileges as a free woman for extending to her the hand of forgiveness.  This power So pleasing to the feelings of its possessor had hitherto been very sparingly exercised; and those persons who had felt its influence were not found to have been undeserving. I speak only of such convicts as had been deemed proper objects of this favour by the governor himself; the convicts however who came out in the Guardian were emancipated by the King's command and of these by far the greater part conducted themselves with propriety.  Preparing roofs for new barracks bringing in bricks to the spot appointed for their construction and discharging the Atlantic and the Britannia were the principal works in hand at Sydney during the month. - At the settlements beyond Parramatta (which had lately obtained and were in future to be distinguished by the name of Toongab-be) the convicts were employed in preparing the ground for the reception of next year's crop of maize. At and near Parramatta the chief business was erecting two houses on allotments of land which belonged to Mr. Arndell the assistant surgeon and to John Irving (one of those persons whose exemplary conduct and meritorious behaviour both in this country and on the passage to it had been rewarded with unconditional freedom by the governor) each of whom had been put in possession the former of sixty and the latter of thirty acres of land on the creek leading to Parramatta; erecting chimnies for the different settlers at the ponds preparing roofs for various buildings sawing timber cutting posts and railing for inclosures and hoeing and preparing ground for maize. [226]     CHAP. XVIII. [...]   August. The Britannia was cleared and discharged from government employs on the 17th of this month. A deficiency appearing in the weight of the salt provisions delivered from that ship a survey was immediately ordered; and it appeared from the report of the persons employed to conduct it (and who from their situations were well qualified to judge Mr. Bowen a lieutenant in the navy and Mr. Raven the commander of the Britannia and a master of a man of war) that the casks of beef were deficient on an average thirty-six pounds and one-third and the tierces twenty-one pounds and one-third. It also appeared that the meat was lean coarse and boney and worse than they had ever seen issued in his Majesty's service. [227] A deception of this nature would be more severely felt in this country as its inhabitants had but lately experienced a change from a very short ration of salt provisions; and every ounce lost here was of importance as the supply had been calculated on a Supposition of each cask containing its full weight.  It having been covenanted as already mentioned by Messrs. Lamberr Ross and Company that only such part of the cargo as on its arrival here should be found to be in a merchantable state should be paid for the following quantity having been deemed merchantable by the persons appointed to take the survey was received into the store; viz. [...]   Eight casks of pork (as an experiment) from Lambert and Company; and two casks of rum containing one hundred and twenty-six gallons supplied at 3s. per gallon. Four casks of flour and four casks of soujee from Mr. Cockraine (sent likewise as an experiment) were also received into the store.  The unmerchantable articles consisting of soujee dholl and rice were sold at public auction; and though wholly unfit for men to eat yet being not too bad for stock were quickly purchased and in general went off at a great price. Several lots consisting of five bags of the soujee each bag containing about one hundred and fourteen pounds sold for 41. 14s. The whole quantity of damaged grain which was thus disposed of amounted to nine hundred and ninety-one bags and sold for 3731. 9S. making a most desirable and acceptable provision for the private stock in the colony. [...] [228] [229] [230]   Such as should be desirous of returning to England were informed that no obstacle would be thrown in their way they being at liberty to ship themselves on board of such vessels as would give them a passage. And those who preferred labouring for the public and receiving in return such ration as should be issued from the public stores were to give in their names to the commissary who would victual and clothe them as long as their services might be required.  Of those here and at Parramatta who had fulfilled the Centence of the law by far the greater part signified their intention of returning to England by the first opportunity; but the getting away from the colony was now a matter of some difficulty as it was understood that a clause was to be inserted in all future contracts for shipping for this country subjecting the masters to certain penalties on certificates being received of their having brought away any convicts or other persons from this settlement without the governor's permission; and as it was not probable that many of them would on their return refrain from the vices or avoid the society of those companions who had been the causes of their transportation to this country not many could hope to obtain the sanction of the governor for their return.  With very few exceptions however the uniform good behaviour of the convicts was still to be noted and commended.  September. The month of September was ushered in with rain and storms of wind thunder and lightning. At Parramatta and Toongabbe too as well as at Sydney much rain fell for several days. On the return of fine weather it was seen with general satisfaction that the wheat sown at the latter settlement looked and promised well and had not suffered from the rain.  Early in the month the criminal court was assembled for the trial of Benjamin Ingram a man who had served the term for which he was ordered to be transported. He had broken into a house belonging to a female convict in which he was detected packing up her property for removal. Being found guilty he received sentence of death; but on the recommendation of the court the governor was induced to grant him a pardon upon condition of his residing for life on Norfolk Island. With this extension of mercy the culprit was not made acquainted till that moment had arrived which he thought was to separate him from this world for ever. [231] Upon the ladder and expecting to be turned off the condition on which his life was spared was communicated to him; and with gratitude both to God and the governor he received the welcome tidings. He afterwards confessed that he had for some time past been in the habit of committing burglaries and other depredations; for having taken himself off the stores to avoid working for the public he was frequently distressed for food and was thus compelled to support himself at the expence perhaps of the honest and industrious. He readily found a rascal to receive what property he could procure for sale and for a long time escaped detection. This depraved man had two brothers in the colony; one who came out with him in the first fleet and who had been for some time a sober hard-working industrious settler having also served the term of his transportation; the other brother came out in the last year and bore the character of a well-behaved man. There was also a fourth brother; but he was executed in England. It was said that these unfortunate men had honest and industrious people for their parents; they could not however have paid much attention to the morals of their family; or out of four Come might surely have laid claim to the character of the parents.  The criminal court was again assembled on the 20th of this month for the trial of William Godfrey who was taken up on a suspicion of having seized the opportunity of some festivity on board of the Britannia then nearly ready for sea and taken half a barrel of powder out of the gun-room about nine o'clock at night. Proof however was not brought home to him; although many circumstances induced every one to suppose he was the guilty person.  This month was fixed for beginning the new barracks. For the private soldiers there were to be five buildings each one hundred feet by twenty four in front and connected by a flight brick wall. At each end were to be two apartments for officers seventy-five feet by eighteen; each apartment containing four rooms for their accommodation with a passage of sixteen feet. Of these barracks one at each end was to be constructed at right angles with the front forming a wing to the centre buildings. Kitchens were to be built with other convenient offices in the rear and garden ground was to be laid out at the back. [232] Their situation promised to be healthy and it was certainly pleasant being nearly on the summit of the high ground at the head of the cove overlooking the town of Sydney and the shipping in the cove and commanding a view down the harbour as well of the fine piece of water forming Long Cove as that branching off to the westward at the back of the lieutenant governor's farm.  The foundation of one of the buildings designed for an officer's barrack having been dug and all the necessary materials brought together on the spot the walls of it were got up and the whole building roofed and covered in in eleven days.  Their situation being directly in the neighbourhood of the ground appropriated to the burial of the dead it became necessary to choose another spot for the latter purpose; and the governor in company with the Rev. Mr. Johnson set apart the ground formerly cultivated by the late Captain Shea of the marines.  Several thefts were committed at Sydney and at Parramatta from which latter place three male convicts absconded taking with them the provisions of their huts intending it was supposed to get on board the Britannia. Rewards being offered Some of them were taken in the woods. It had been found that the masters of ships would give passages to such people as could afford to pay them from ten to twenty pounds for the same and the perpetrators of Some of the thefts which were committed appeared to have had that circumstance in view as one or two huts whose proprietors were well known to have amassed large sums of money for people in their situations were broken into; and in one instance they succeeded. On the night of the 22d the hut of Mary Burne widow of a man who had been employed as a game-killer was robbed of dollars to the amount of eleven pounds; with which the pillagers got off undiscovered.  On the 3rd the Britannia left the cove dropping down below Bradley's Point preparatory to failing on her intended voyage to Dusky Bay in New Zealand; and while every one was remarking that the cove (being left without a ship) again looked solitary and uncomfortable the signal was made at the South Head and at ten o'clock at night the Atlantic anchored in the cove from Norfolk Island where we had the satisfaction to learn the large cargo which the had on board was landed in safety although at one time the ship was in great danger of running ashore at Cascade Bay. [233] We now learned that the expectations which had been formed of the crops at Norfolk Island had been too Sanguine; but their salt provisions lasted very well. Governor King however wrote that the crops then in the ground promised favourably although he would not venture to speak decidedly as they were very much annoyed by the grub. This was an enemy produced by the extreme richness of the soil; and it was remarked that as the land was opened and cleared it was found to be exposed to the blighting winds which infest the island.  The great havoc and destruction which the reduced ration had occasioned among the birds frequenting Mount Pitt had so thinned their numbers that they were no longer to be depended upon as a resource. The convicts senseless and improvident not only destroyed the bird its young and its egg but the hole in which it burrowed; a circumstance that ought most cautiously to have been guarded against; as nothing appeared more likely to make them forsake the island.  The stock in the settlement was plentiful but from being fed chiefly on sow thistle during the general deficiency of hard food the animals looked ill and were as badly tasted. The Pitt however took from the island a great quantity of stock; barrow pigs and fowls pumkins and other vegetables; for which Captain Manning and his officers paid the owners with many articles of comfort to which they had long been strangers.  The convicts in general wore a very unhealthy cadaverous appearance owing it was supposed not only to spare diet but to the fatigue consequent on their traversing the woods to Mount Pitt by night for the purpose of procuring some slender addition to their ration instead of reposing after the labours of the day. They had committed many depredations on the settlers and one was shot by a person of that description in the act of robbing his farm.  Governor King having discovered that the island abounded with that valuable article lime-stone was building a convenient house for his own residence and turning his attention to the construction of permanent storehouses barracks for the military and other necessary buildings. [234]   The weather had been for some time past very bad much rain having fallen accompanied with storms of wind thunder and lightning. In some of these storms the wreck of his Majesty's ship Sirius went to pieces and disappeared no part of that unfortunate ship being left together except what was confined by the iron ballast in her bottom.  On board of the Atlantic came sixty-two persons from Norfolk Island among whom were several whose terms of transportation had expired; thirteen offenders; and nine of the marine settlers who had given up the hoe and the spade returned to this place to embrace once more a life to which they certainly were from long habit better adapted than to that of independent settlers. They gave up their estates and came here to enter as soldiers in the New South Wales corps.  Mr. Charles Grimes the deputy-surveyor arrived in the Atlantic being sent by Mr. King to state to the governor the situation of the settlers late belonging to the Sirius whose grounds had on a careful survey by Mr. Grimes been found to intersect each other. They had been originally laid down without the assistance of proper instruments and being situated on the side of the Cascade Stream which takes several windings in its course the different allotments being close together naturally interfered with each other when they came to be carried back. The settlers themselves Saw how disadvantageously they were situated and how utterly impossible it was for every one to possess a distinct allotment of sixty acres unless they came to some agreement which had their mutual accommodation in view; but this with an obstinacy proportioned to their ignorance they all declined: as their grounds were marked out So would they keep them not giving an inch in one place though certain of possessing it with advantage in another. These people proved but indifferent settlers; sailors and soldiers seldom bred in the habits of industry but ill brooked the personal labour which they found was required from them day after day and month after month. Men who from their infancy had been accustomed to have their daily subsistence found them were but ill calculated to procure it by the sweat of their brows and must very unwillingly find that without great bodily exertions they could not provide it at all. [235] A few months experience convinced them of the truth of these observations and they grew discontented; as a proof of which they wrote a letter to the judge-advocate to be submitted to the governor stating as a subject of complaint among other grievances that the officers of the settlement bred stock for their own use and requesting that they might be directed to discontinue that practice and purchase stock of them.  Very few of the convicts at Norfolk Island whole terms of transportation had expired were found desirous of becoming permanent settlers; the sole object with the major part appearing to be that of taking ground for the purpose of raising by the sale of the produce a sum Sufficient to enable them to pay for their passages to England. The settler to benefit this colony the bona fide settler who should be a man of some property must come from England. He is not to be looked for among discharged soldiers shipwrecked seamen or quondam convicts.  Governor King finding after trying every process that came within his knowledge for preparing and dressing the flax-plant that unless some other means were devised it never would be brought to the perfection necessary to make the canvas produced from it an object of importance either as an article of clothing for the convicts or for maritime purposes proposed to Mr. Ebor Bunker the master of the William and Ann who had some thoughts of touching at Dusky Bay in New Zealand to procure him two natives of that country if they could be prevailed on to embark with him and promised him one hundred pounds if he succeeded hoping from their perfect knowledge of the flax-plant and the process necessary to manufacture it into cloth that he might one day render it a valuable and beneficial article to his colony; but Captain Bunker had never returned.  Norfolk Island had been visited by all the whalers which Sailed from this port on that fishery. The Admiral Barrington and Pitt left with Mr. King eleven men and two female convicts who had secreted themselves at this port on board of those ships. [236]   October. The Britannia which had quitted the cove on the last day of September preparatory to her departure on a fishing voyage (a licence for which had been granted by the East-India Company for the space of three years) returned to the cove on the third of this month for the purpose of fitting for the Cape of Good Hope the officers of the New South Wales corps having engaged the master to proceed thither and return on their account with a freight of cattle and such articles as would tend to the comfort of themselves and the Soldiers of the corps and which were not to be found in the public stores. Mr. Raven the master let his ship for the sum of 2000l.; and eleven shares of 2001. each were subscribed to purchase the stock and other articles. The ship was well calculated for bringing cattle having a very good between-decks; and artificers from the corps were immediately employed to fit her with stalls proper for the reception and accommodation of cows horses &c. A quantity of hay was put on board Sufficient to lessen considerably the expence of that article at the Cape; and she was ready for Sea by the middle of the month. Previous to her departure on the 7th the Royal Admiral East-Indiaman commanded by Captain Essex Henry Bond anchored in the cove from England whence she had failed on the 30th of May last. Her passage from the Cape of Good Hope was the most rapid that had ever been made being only five weeks and three days from port to port.  On board of the Royal Admiral came stores and provisions for the colony; one serjeant one corporal and nineteen privates belonging to the New South Wales corps; a person to be employed in the cultivation of the country; another as a master miller; and a third as a master carpenter; together with two hundred and eighty-nine male and forty-Seven female convicts. She brought in with her a fever which had been much abated by the extreme attention paid by Captain Bond and his officers to cleanliness that great preservative of health on board of ships and to providing those who were ill with comforts and necessaries beyond what were allowed for their use during the passage. Of three hundred male convicts which she received on board ten only died and one made his escape from the hospital at False Bay; in return for whom however Captain Bond brought on with him Thomas Watling a male convict who found means to get on shore from the Pitt when at that port in December last and who had been confined by the Dutch at the Cape town from her departure until this opportunity offered of sending him hither. [237]   We had the satisfaction of hearing that the Supply armed tender made good her passage to England in somewhat less than five months arriving at Plymouth on the 21st of April last. It was however matter of much concern to all who were acquainted with him to learn at the same time that Captain Hunter who failed from this port in March 1791 in the Dutch Snow Waaksamheyd and who had anxiously desired to make a Speedy passage had been thirteen months in that vessel striving to reach England where he at last let go his anchor a day after the termination of Lieutenant Ball's more successful voyage in the Supply arriving at Spithead on the evening of the 22d of April last. His Majesty's ship Gorgon had been at the Cape of Good Hope but had not arrived in England when the Royal Admiral left that country.  We were also informed that the Kitty transport had failed with provisions and a few convicts from England some weeks before the Royal Admiral; and Captain Bond left at False Bay an American brig freighted on speculation with provisions for this colony and whole master intended putting to sea immediately after him.  The sick to the number of eighty were all immediately disembarked from the Indiaman; the remainder of her convicts were sent up to be employed at Parramatta and the adjoining settlement. At these places was to be performed the great labour of clearing and cultivating the country; and thither the governor judged it necessary at once to send such convicts as should arrive in future without permitting them to disembark at Sydney which town (from the circumstance of its being the only place where shipping anchored) possessed all the evils and allurements of a Sea port of some standing and from which if once they got into huts they would be with difficulty removed when wanted; they pleaded the acquirement of comforts of which in fact it would be painful though absolutely necessary to deprive them. At once to do away therefore the possibility of any attachment to this part of the colony the governor gave directions for their being immediately Sent from the ship to the place of their future residence and employment; and having no other thoughts they went with cheerfulness. [238]   There arrived in the Royal Admiral as a superintendant charged with the care of the convicts Mr. Richard Alley who formerly belonged to the Lady Juliana transport in quality of surgeon in the memorable voyage of that ship to this colony; a voyage that could never be thought on by any inhabitant of it without exciting a most painful Sensation. This gentleman went to England in the Snow with Captain Hunter whither the comforts of long voyages seemed to accompany him. Immediately on his arrival there he was appointed by the commissioners of the navy to come out in the Royal Admiral as surgeon and superintendant of the convicts embarked in that ship with an allowance of twelve shillings and sixpence per diem until his arrival in England exclusive of his half pay as surgeon of the navy.  It had always been an object of the first consequence that the people employed about the stores if not free should at least have been so situated as to have found it their interest to resist temptation. This had never hitherto been accomplished; capital and other exemplary punishments did not effect it; the stores were constantly robbed although carefully watched and as well secured as bolts locks and iron fastenings could make them. The governor therefore now adopted a plan which was suggested to him; and discharging all the convicts employed at the provision-store replaced them by others to whom he promised absolute emancipation at the end of a certain number of years to be computed from the dates of their respective arrivals in this country.  If any thing could produce the integrity so much to be desired this measure seemed the best calculated for the purpose; an interest was created superior to any reward that could have been held out a certain salary an increase of ration a greater proportion of cloathing or even emancipation itself if given at the time. To those who had no other prospect but that of passing their lives in this country how cheering how grateful must have been the hope of returning to their families at no very distant period if not prevented by their own misconduct! There were two in this situation among those placed at the stores Samuel Burt and William Sutton both of whom had conducted themselves with the greatest propriety since their conviction and who beheld with joy the probability that appeared of their being again considered and ranked in the class of honest men and good members of society; estimations that depended wholly upon themselves. [239]   As a store-keeper was a person on whom much dependence must necessarily be placed (it being his duty to be constantly present whenever the stores were opened and with a vigilant eye to observe the conduct of the inferior servants) at the strong recommendation of the officers under whom he had Served Serjeant Thomas Smyth was discharged from the marine detachment and placed upon the list of superintendants of convicts as a store-keeper. This appointment gave general Satisfaction; and the commissary now felt himself under all these arrangements more at ease respecting the safety of the stores and provisions under his charge.  On the night of the 10th a daring burglary was committed. Mr. Raven the master of the Britannia occupied a hut on shore which was broken open and entered about midnight and from the room in which he was lying asleep and close to his bedside his watch and a pair of knee-buckles were stolen; a box was forced open in which was a valuable time-piece and Some money belonging to Mr. Raven who fortunately waking in the very moment that the thief was taking it out at the door prevented his carrying it off. Assistance from the guard came immediately but too late - the man had got off unseen. In a day or two afterwards however Charles Williams a settler gave information that a convict named Richard Sutton the morning after the burglary had told him that he had stolen and se-cured the property which he estimated at sixty pounds and which he offered to put into his possession for the purpose of sale first binding him by a horrid ceremony and oath not to betray him. Williams on receiving the watch which proved a metal one worth only about ten pounds (and the disproportion of which to the value he had expected probably had induced him to make the discovery) immediately caused him to be taken into custody and delivered the property to a magistrate giving at the same time an account how he came by them. [240] All these circumstances were produced in evidence before a criminal court; but the prisoner proving an alibi that was satisfactory to the court was acquitted. With the evidence that he produced in his defence it was impossible to convict him; but the court and the auditors were in their consciences persuaded that the prisoner had committed the burglary and theft and that he intended to have employed Williams to dispose of the property; which the latter had undertaken and would have performed had the watch proved to have been a timepiece which the prisoner imagined he had been lucky enough to secure. Williams had he been put to prove where he was at the very time the house was entered had people ready to depose that he was on his way by water to his farm near Parramatta. This man had formerly been remarkable for propriety of conduct; but after he became a settler gave himself up to idleness and dissipation and went away from the court in which he had been giving his testimony much degraded in the opinion of every man who heard him.  The Britannia failed on the 24th for the Cape of Good Hope Mr. Raven taking with him Governor Philip's dispatches for England (in which was contained a specific demand for twelve months provisions for the colony) and the wishes as well of those whom he considered as his employers as of those who were not for the safe and speedy execution of his commission; as his return to the colony would introduce many articles of comfort which were not to be found in the public stores among the articles issued by government.  At Sydney and at Parramatta shops were opened for the sale of the articles of private trade brought out in the Royal Admiral. A licence was given for the sale of porter; but under the cover of this spirits found their way among the people and much intoxication was the consequence. Several of the settlers breaking out from the restraint to which they had been subject conducted themselves with the greatest impropriety beating their wives destroying their stock trampling on and injuring their crops in the ground and destroying each other's property. One woman having claimed the protection of the magistrates the party complained of a settler was bound over to the good behaviour for two years himself in twenty pounds and to find two sureties in ten pounds each. [241] Another settler was at the same time set an hour in the stocks for drunkenness. The indulgence which was intended by the governor for their benefit was most shamefully abused; and what he suffered them to purchase with a view to their future comfort was retailed among themselves at a scandalous profit; several of the settlers houses being at this time literally nothing else but porter-houses where rioting and drunkenness prevailed as long as the means remained it was much to be regretted that these people were so blind to their own advantage most of them sacrificing to the dissipation of the moment what would have afforded them much comfort and convenience if reserved for refreshment after the fatigue of the day.  The only addition made to the weekly ration in consequence of the arrival of the Royal Admiral was an allowance of six ounces of oil to each person; a large quantity nine thousand two hundred and seventy-eight gallons having been put on board that ship and the Kitty transport to be issued in lieu of butter; as an equivalent for which it certainly would have answered well had it arrived in the state in which it was reported to have been put on board; but it grew rancid on the passage and was in general made more use of to burn as a substitute for candles than for any other purposes to which oil might have been applied.  Toward the latter end of the month the convicts received a general serving of clothing and other necessary articles. To each male were issued two frocks made of coarse and unsubstantial osnaburgs in which there were seldom found more than three weeks wear; two pairs of trowsers made of the same flight materials as the frocks and open to the same observation as to wear; one pair of yarn stockings; one hat; one pair of shoes; one pound of soap; three needles; a quarter of a pound of thread and one comb.  The females received each one cloth petticoat; one coarse shift ; one pair of shoes; one pair of yarn stockings; one pound of soap; a quarter of a pound of thread; two ounces of pins ; six needles; one thimble and one pair of scissars.  These articles were supplied by commission; and Mr. Davison the person employed by government was limited in the price of each article which was fixed too low to admit of his furnishing them of the quality absolutely necessary for people who were to labour in this country. [242] The osnaburgs in particular had always been complained of; for it was a fact that the frocks and trowsers made of them were oftener known to have been worn out within a fortnight than to have lasted three weeks.  The month closed with a circumstance that excited no small degree of concern in the settlement: Governor Philip signified a determination of quitting his government and returning to England in the Atlantic. To this he was induced by perceiving that his health hourly grew worse and hoping that a change of air might contribute to his recovery. His Excellency had the satisfaction at the moment that he came to this resolution of seeing the public grounds wear every appearance of a productive harvest. At Toongabbe forty-two acres of wheat sown about the middle of last March looked as promising as could be wished; the remainder of the wheat from being sown six weeks later did not look so fine and abundant but still held out hopes of an ample return. The Indian corn was all got into the ground and such of it as was up looked remarkably well.    CHAP. XIX. [...]   November. On the 1st of November about eleven o'clock at night the Philadelphia brigantine Mr. Thomas Patrickson master anchored in the cove from Philadelphia. Lieutenant-governor King on his passage to this country in the Gorgon in the month of July 1791 had seen Mr. Patrickson at the Cape of Good Hope and learning at that time from the Lady Juliana and Neptune transports which had just arrived there from China that the colony was in great distress for provisions suggested to him the advantage that might attend his bringing a cargo to this country on speculation. [243] On this hint Captain Patrickson went to England and thence to Philadelphia from which place he sailed the beginning of last April with a cargo consisting chiefly of American beef wine rum gin some tobacco pitch and tar. He sailed from Philadelphia with thirteen hands; but in some very bad weather which he met with after leaving the African shore his second mate was washed overboard and lost it blowing too hard to attempt saving him.  The governor directed the commissary to purchase such part of the Philadelphia's cargo as he thought was immediately wanting in the Colony; and five hundred and sixty-nine barrels of American cured beef each barrel containing one hundred and ninety-three pounds and twenty-seven barrels of pitch and tar were taken into store; the expence of which amounted to £2829 s11.  Notwithstanding the great length of time Captain Patrickson had been on his voyage (from the beginning of April to November) his speculation did not prove very disadvantageous to him. A great part of his cargo that was not taken by government was disposed of among the officers and others of the settlement; and the governor hired his vessel to take provisions to Norfolk Island giving him 150£ for the run. Captain Patrickson had formed some expectation of disposing of his vessel in this country; but the governor having received intimation that the Kitty might be detained in the service as long as he found it necessary after her arrival did not judge it expedient to purchase the vessel.  On the 3d of the month three warrants of emancipation passed the seal of the territory: one to John Trace a convict who came out in the first fleet; having but three months of his term of transportation remaining that portion of it was given up to him that he might become a settler. The second was granted to Thomas Restil (alias Crowder) on the recommendation of the lieutenant-governor of Norfolk Island on condition that he should not return to England during the term of his natural life his sentence of transportation being durante vitae. [244] The third warrant was made out in favour of one who whatever might have been his conduct when at large in society had here not only demeaned himself with the strictest propriety but had rendered essential services to the colony - George Barrington. He came out in the Active; on his arrival the governor employed him at Toongabbe and in a situation which was likely to attract the envy and hatred of the convicts in proportion as he might be vigilant and inflexible. He was first placed as a subordinate and shortly after as a principal watch-man; in which situation he was diligent sober and impartial; and had rendered himself so eminently serviceable that the governor resolved to draw him from the line of convicts; and with the instrument of his emancipation he received a grant of thirty acres of land in an eligible situation near Parramatta. Here was not only a reward for past good conduct but an incitement to a continuance of it; and Barrington found himself through the governor's liberality though not so absolutely free as to return to England at his own pleasure yet enjoying the immunities of a free man a settler and a civil officer in whose integrity much confidence was placed.  On the 13th the Royal Admiral failed for Canton. Of the private speculation brought out in this ship they sold at this place and at Parramatta to the amount of £3600 and left articles to be sold on commission to the amount of £750 more.  Captain Bond was obliged to leave behind him one of his quartermasters and six sailors who ran away from the ship. The quartermaster had served in the same capacity on board of the Sirius and immediately after his arrival in England (in the snow) engaged himself with Captain Bond for the whole of the voyage; but a few days before the departure of the ship from this port he found means to Leave her and assisted by some of the settlers concealed himself in the woods until concealment was no longer necessary. On giving himself up he entered on board the Atlantic; but on his declaring that he did not intend returning to England the governor ordered him into confinement. [245] The Sailors were put into one of the Longboats to be employed between this place and Parramatta until they could be put on board a ship that might convey them hence.  It was never desirable that seamen should receive encouragement to run from their ships; they became public nuisances here; the masters of such ships would find themselves obliged to procure convicts at any rate to supply their places; indeed so many might be shipped or secreted on board as might render the safety of the vessel very precarious; and as the governor determined to represent the conduct of any master who carried away convicts without his approbation so he resolved never to deprive them of their Seamen. Under this idea a hut in which a seaman from the Royal Admiral was found concealed was pulled down and two convicts who had been secreted on board that ship were sent up to Toongabbe as a punishment as well as to be out of the way of another attempt.  On the 18th the Kitty transport anchored in the Cove from England after a circuitous passage of thirty-three weeks round by the Rio de Janeiro and the Cape of Good Hope. She twice failed from England. On her first departure which was in March last the had on board thirty female and ten male Convicts; but being obliged to put back to Spithead to stop a leak which the sprung in her raft port eight of her ten male convicts found means to make their escape. This was an unfortunate accident; for they had been particularly Selected as men who might be useful in the colony. Of the two who did remain the one was a brick-maker and the other a joiner.  When her cargo was landing it was found to have Suffered considerably by the bad weather the had experienced; the flour in particular an article which could at no time bear any diminution in this country was much damaged. The convicts had for a long time been nearly as much distressed for utensils to dress their provisions as they had been for provisions; and we had now the mortification to find that of the small supply of iron pots which had been put on board a great part were either broken or cracked having been literally stowed among the provision casks in the hold. [246]   There arrived in this ship two chests containing three thousand eight hundred and seventy ounces of silver in dollars amounting to £1001. This remittance was sent out for the purpose of paying such sums as were due to the different artificers who had been employed in this country. It was also applied to the payment of the wages due to the superintendants who had experienced much inconvenience from not receiving their salaries here; and indeed the want of public money had been very much felt by every one in the colony. When the marines who became settlers before and at the relief of the detachment were discharged for that purpose they would have suffered great difficulties from the want of public money to pay what was due to them had not the commissary taken their respective powers of attorney and given them notes on himself payable either in cash or in articles which might be the means of rendering them comfortable and of which he had procured a large Supply from Calcutta. These notes passed through various hands in traffic among the people of the description they were intended to serve and became a species of currency which was found very convenient to them.  The female convicts who arrived in the Kitty twenty-seven in number were immediately Sent up to Parramatta.  Government had put on board the Kitty a naval agent Lieutenant Daniel Woodriff for the purpose of seeing that no unnecessary delays were made in the voyage and that the convicts on board were not oppressed by the master or his people. This officer on his arrival stated to the governor his opinion that the master had not made the best of his way and that he had remained longer in the port of Rio de Janeiro than there could possibly be occasion for. He likewise stated several disagreements which had occurred between him and the master and in which the latter Seemed to think very lightly of the authority of a naval agent on board his ship. There was also on board this ship on the part of the crown a medical gentleman who was appointed for the express purpose of attending to such convicts as might be ill during the voyage; so extremely solicitous were the members of Administration to guard against the evils which had befallen the convicts in former passages to this country. [247]   At Parramatta a brick hospital consisting of two wards was finished this month; and the sick were immediately removed into it. The Spot chosen for this building was at some distance from the principal street of the town and convenient to the water; and to prevent any improper communication with the other convicts a space was to be inclosed and paled in round the hospital in which the sick would have every necessary benefit from air and exercise.  At the other settlement they had begun to reap the wheat which was (own in April last; and for want of a granary at that place it was put into stacks. From not being immediately thrashed out there was no knowing with certainty what the produce of it was; but it had every appearance of turning out well. The ear was long and full and the straw remarkably good.  December. On the 3d of this month the governor as one of his last acts in the settlement ordered one pound of flour to be added to the weekly ration which by means of this addition stood on his departure at  3 pounds of flour;  5 pounds of rice;  4 pounds of pork or 7 pounds of beef;  3 pounds of dholl; and  6 ounces of oil.  On the 7th the Philadelphia sailed for Norfolk Island having on board for that settlement Mr. Grimes the deputy surveyor; Mr. Jamieson who was to Superintend the convicts employed there in cultivation; Mr. Peat the master-carpenter (there being a person in that situation here of much ability); a convict who came out in the Royal Admiral to be employed as a master-taylor; two convicts sawyers and one convict carpenter the same who came out with his family in the Kitty; together with some provisions and stores. His excellency had always attended to this little colony with a parental care; often declaring that from the peculiarity of its situation he would rather that want should be felt in his own government than in that dependency; and as they would be generally eight or ten weeks later than this colony in receiving their supplies by reason of the time which the ships necessarily required to refit after coming in from sea he purposed furnishing them with a proportion of provisions for three months longer than the provisions in store at this place would last: [248]   and his excellency took leave of that settlement by completing as fully as he was able this design.  He was now about taking leave of his own government. The accommodations for his excellency and the officers who were going home in the Atlantic being completed the detachment of marines under the command of Lieutenant Poulden embarked on the 5th and at six o'clock in the evening of Monday the 10th Governor Phillip quitted the charge with which he had been entrusted by his Sovereign and in the execution of which he had manifested a zeal and perseverance that alone could have enabled him to Surmount the natural and artificial obstacles which the country and its inhabitants had thrown in his way.  The colony had now been established within a few weeks of five years; and a review of what had been done in cultivation under his excellency's direction in that time cannot more properly be introduced than at the close of his government.  Previous to the failing of the Britannia on the 24th of last October an accurate Survey of the whole ground in cultivation both on account of the crown and in the possession of individuals was taken by the surveyor-general and transmitted to England by that ship; and from the return which he then made the following particulars were extracted. [249] [...]   Of the sixty-seven settlers above enumerated one James Rule who had a grant of thirty acres at Parramatta went upon his farm the latter end of November 1789; but none of the others began to cultivate ground upon their own accounts earlier than the middle of July 1791; but many of them at a much later date. The eight marine Settlers at the Field of Mars took possession of their allotments at the beginning of February 1792. The conditions held out to settlers were to be victualled and clothed from the public store for eighteen months from the term of their becoming Settlers; to be furnished with tools and implements of husbandry; grain to sow their grounds and such stock as could be Spared from the public. [250] They were likewise to have assigned them the services of such a number of convicts as the governor should think proper on their making it appear that they could employ feed and clothe them. Every man had a hut erected on his farm at the public expence. At the time of the governor's departure many of them by their own industry- and the assistance he had afforded them were enabled to have one or two convicts off the store and employed by them at their farms; and Such as were not married were allowed a convict hutkeeper. In general they were not idle and the major part were comfortably situated.  At this time the quantity of land which had passed to settlers in this territory under the Seal of the colony amounted to three thousand four hundred and Seventy acres; of which quantity four hundred and seventeen acres and a half were in cultivation and the timber cleared from one hundred more ready for sowing which compared with the total of the public ground in cultivation (one thousand and twelve acres and three quarters) will be found to be by eleven acres more than equal to one half of it A striking proof of what Some settlers had themselves declared on its being hinted to them that they had not always been so diligent when labouring for the whole - "We are now working for ourselves". One material good was however to be expected from a tract of land of that extent being cultivated by individuals if at any time an accident should happen to the crop on the public ground they might be a resource though an inconsiderable one. Fortunately no misfortune of that nature had ever fallen upon the colony; but it had been at the beginning of this month very near experiencing a calamity that would have blasted all the prospects of the next season and in one moment have rendered ineffectual the labour of many hands and of many months. Two days after the wheat had been reaped and got off the ground at Toongabbe the whole of the stubble was burnt. The day on which this happened had been unusually hot and the country was every where on fire.   Had it befallen us while the wheat was upon the ground nothing could have saved the whole from being destroyed. From this circumstance however one good resulted; precautions against a similar accident were immediately taken by clearing the timber for a certain distance round the cultivated land. [251]   The flock belonging to the public was kept at Parramatta. It consisted of three bulls two bull calves fifteen cows three calves five stallions six mares one hundred and five sheep and forty-three hogs.  Of the sheep the governor gave to each of the married Settlers from the convicts and to each settler from the marines and from the Sirius one ewe for the purpose of breeding; and to others he gave Such female goats as could be Spared. This stock had been procured at much expence; and his excellency hoped that the people among whom he left it would see the advantage it might prove to them and cherish it accordingly.  His excellency at embarking on board the Atlantic was received near the wharf on the east-side (where his boat was lying) by Major Grose at the head of the New South Wales corps who paid him as he passed the honors due to his rank and situation in the colony. He was attended by the officers of the civil department and the three marine officers who were to accompany him to England.  At daylight on the morning of the 11th the Atlantic was got under way and by eight o'clock was clear of the Heads standing to the E. S. E. with a fresh breeze at south. By twelve o'clock the had gained a considerable offing.  A small river has been lately discovered by a boat I had occasion to send northward in pursuit of the deserters: it is about sixty-five miles from this part: on its south shore and near the water a considerable quantity of coal was discovered and specimens were brought hither. As soon as the public service will admit of my absence from hence I propose to go thither in a boat and examine this discovery myself after which your Grace shall be more particularly informed.  AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONDIGN PUNISHMENT  given to the Irish Rebels implicated in the recent Seditious Assemblies and Consultations which have been held in different parts of the Colony of New South Wales to the great danger of His Majesty's Government and the public peace; as narrated by -   JOSEPH HOLT FORMER GENERAL OF THE IRISH REBELS IN 1798  who was arrested on suspicion of being concerned in the present affair but was acquitted by the direct orders of His Excellency Governor King as herein narrated.  In a few days after my arrest there was nineteen men brought from Sidney jail before the governor to be examined and eighteen of them turned informers and everyone asked about me and not one man had the least thing against me. So we had a bad Clutch of Troblesome Raskils and what else cud we Expect. There was floging Everyday till some of them never got better of it till they died at last and some of them was so good as to bring Dr Harrel the priest in by their Information. He was in jail.  The six day of October 1800 we got orders to go in the boat - Mr Smith came to me and Brought me out of the prison and he and a few men went in the government Boat and when I was about ten miles from Sidney I saw the passage boat comming down and Mrs Holt and her young Child. I tould Mr Smith that I saw her and he ordered the boat to Row toward the passage boat to take Mrs Holt for to return back and came to parmatta. There all the prisoners were put into jail except the priest. He was left in a house with a gard with him. Mr Smith let me go with Mrs Holt on honour to call on him in the morning.  I did attend to the minute and we march'd up to towngabby where all the Government men was and this was the plan to give them the opportunity of seeing the punishment inflicted on several. There was one man of the Name of Morris Fitzegarrel and he was ordered to Recaive three Hundred lashes.  The way they floged them was theire armes pulled Round a large tree and their breasts squezed against the tree so the men had no power to cringe or stir. Father Harrel was ordered to lay his hand against the tree by the hand of the man that was floging. There was two flogers Richard Rice and John Jonson the Hangman from Sidney. Rice was a left handed man and Jonson was Right handed so they stood at each side and I never saw two trashers in a barn moove there stroakes more handeyer then those two man killers did.  The moment they begun I turn my face Round towards the other side and one of the Constibles came and Desired me to turn and look on. I put my hand in my pocket and pulled out my pen knife and swore I Rip him from the navil to the Chin. They all gather Round me and woud have ill used me but Mr Smith came over and ask'd them who gave them any orders about me so they wore oblige to walk off. I cud compare them to a pack of hounds at the death of hair all yelping. I turned once about and as it happened I was to leew'rd of the flogers and I protest tho' I was two perches from them the flesh and skin blew in my face as they shooke off the cats.  Fitzegarrel Recaiv'd his 300 lashes. Doctor Mason (I never will forget him) use to go to feel his pulls and he smiled and sayd "this man will tire you before he will fail - go on". [23] It is against the law to flog a man past 50 lashes without a Doctor and during the time he was geting his punishment he never gave as much as a word; only one and that was saying "Dont strike me on the Nick flog me fair." When he was let loose two of the Constibles went and tuck hould of him by the arms to help him in the Cart. I was standing by he said to them "let my arms go" struck both of them with his elbows in the pit of the somack and nock them boath down and then step in the Cart. I herd Doctor Mason say "that man had strength in nuff to bear two hundredd more."  Next was tyed up was paddy galvin a young boy about twenty years of age. He was ordered to get three hundred lashes. He got one hundred on the back and you cud see his back bone between his shoulder blades then the Doctor order him to get another hunder on his bottom. He got it and then his huckles was in such a Jelly the Doctor order him to be flog on the Calves of his legs. He got one hunder there and as much as a whimper he never gave. They asked him if he would tell where the pikes was hid he said he did not now and if he did he would Not tell. "You may as well hang me Now" he says "for you never will get any musick from me." So they put him in the Cart and sent him to the Hospital.  There was two more got one hunder each and they sung out from first to last. One of them was named Mick Fitzegarrild a shoemaker. Then three more was County Cork men live Near sir Henry Brown Hayes.  When the floging was over Mr Smith and I walked on to parmatta and went into the Hotell kept by James Larra a honest Jew. The table was soon furnished with a nice lampy and some hung beef - we took Dinner.  I was joined with the Company of my wife and Child and went in the boat. The land breese was in our favour and the tide also; the tide Runs up sixteen miles. We went down in one hour and forty minutes and then I was Braught up to Connal William Patterson Lieutenant governor and several others to Recaive the dreadful sentence pass on us. Several was ordered into Jail till they would be sent to Norfoulk Island.  The Connal turns to me and sayes "Mr Holt it is Governor King's orders that you must take charge of the Jail gauge and overseer them." I was standing by my wife look'd at him about one minute and said "with summisin to you sir I hope you will Deliver my answer to his Excellency. I have been Exempted by Governor Hunter and I have not Committed any fault since in this Colony and if Governor King has law and power to make me overseer of the Jail gange he has in his power to take my life. I will Comply with the latter before I will yild to the first."  The good ould Gentleman went Directly and tould the Governor what I sayed. My wife sayed "my dear you have a mind to loose your life by your unfortunate temper." I said "I did not care how soone for Dam the world I sooner be Dead that to be striveing to live." By this time the Connal came back and sade the Governor wanted me. "I will go sir to Recaive Death or worse punishment." I was conducted by the only sorgant in the room.  The Governor luck'd very earnest at me to see what sort of countenance I had and after some time he says "you are a very fond man of your family?"  "Yes your Excellency as a father and husband aught to be and trust sir you like me the better."  "Go home sir with your wife and Come to me and I will give you a Grant of Ground for them." I Bow'd and walking toward my wife I says "my dear you and I will be late home." The poor hart-broken Creature Cud hardly seport herself from been overjoyed; for too much Joy over ballanced as much in some measure as too much grief.  I went in and thanked Connal Patterson for all favours and went down to Henry Cables and got some wine and Rum and went in the boat and it was one o'clock in the morning before I Ratched Mr Coxe's house. I made the boats man put me and my wife a shore and when they heard my voice the Mistress and her Childer were up in a few minutes and shew'd every proof of affectin and love to me and wife. So after a short conversation I went home to Brush farm.  CHAP. XV. [...]   LEAVING Furneaux's islands the Norfolk proceeded toward the North coast of Van Diemen's land; and on the 1st of November the anchored for a tide at the largest of the Swan isles two small islands So named by Lieutenant Flinders when he was here in the Francis because a European. who belonged to the Sydney-cove had assured him that he had met with vast numbers of breeding swans upon them.  The isle at which the sloop anchored bore a great resemblance to Preservation Island being low sandy and barren but differed from it in the composition of its rocks or that substance which formed the basis of its Support. This had not any affinity to granite nor did Mr. Bass remember to have Seen any of a similar kind upon any part of New South Wales. It was of various colours but generally either a light brown or a Sort of grey. It Seemed to be lamellated but the lamellae were placed vertically sometimes radiated with a diameter of four or five feet and sometimes they were placed parallel Upon breaking the stone the fracture was vitreous or like that of glass and it scintillated on steel being applied. Rust of iron was visible in several parts the stone breaking easily in those parts into plates correspondent to the length and direction of the rust; but where that was not it broke with great difficulty. [160] On the first view the stone looked like a clay; but as it produced fire with steel there must have been a large portion of flint in it. It appeared to contain iron in rather a large quantity and probably some other metallic substances.  Notwithstanding the information. given by the European not a single Swan was found upon the island; but Several geese were breeding there and the sooty petrel possessed the grassy parts; the swans of the sailor in this instance therefore turned out to be geese. This bird had been seen before upon Preservation island and was either a Brent or a Barnacle goose or between the two. It had a long and slender neck with a small short head and a rounded crown ; a short thick arched bill partly covered with a pea-green membrane which soon shrivelled up and came away in the dried Specimens. Its plumage was for the most part of a dove colour set with black spots. It had a deep hoarse clanging and though a short yet an inflected voice. In size it was rather less than our tame geese and lived upon grass. The flesh was excellent.  Early in the morning of the first of November they left the Swan Isles steering to the westward along shore. At nine o'clock the North coast of Van Diemen's land lay extended from about S. E. by E. to West the nearest part of it being distant two and a half or three miles. Its general trending seemed to be about E. S. E. and W. N. W. with a Small island lying off the western extreme. The shores were chiefly beaches the front land was of a moderate height the back was mountainous. One ridge of mountains that bore south was very high and rugged and from the white patches in it was concluded to be rocky and barren.  If any judgment could be hazarded of the quality of the country at the distance the sloop was at it might be supposed from the beauty of the lower head-land to be somewhat above mediocrity. [161]   Extensive tracts of open ground that come down towards the Sea in gradual green slopes were varied by clumps of wood and large single trees.  A column of smoke that arose some few miles inland was the only sign of its being inhabited.  At noon the latitude was 400 44' 08" the peak of Cape Barren Island then. in fight. At this time they were two miles to the westward of the small island which was low and rocky lying about two miles and a half off a sharp Sandy point with which it was nearly connected by some lumps of rock that almost closed up the passage. A long curved line of ripple extended to the northward.  The aspect of the low land here became less pleasing the mountains approaching nearer to the Sea and the country appearing to be more wooded. The coast seemed inclined to a more Southerly direction and the western extremity which bore S. W. by W. appeared broken like Islands.  At five in the afternoon they anchored two miles and a half to the westward of the Small island it being calm and the tide of ebb Setting the vessel to the Northward.  They weighed at nine the next morning with an easterly wind and steered in towards a small break that presented itself in the bottom of an extensive but not deep bay or rather bight lying between the two extremes then in view. The break was not sufficiently distinct to have justified in itself alone a reasonable Supposition of an inlet but that it was corroborated by the direction of the ebb tide which while the sloop was at anchor was observed to come from the S. S. W. or directly out of the bight running at the rate of two miles and a half per hour. By noon it being ascertained that there was not any inlet they bore away to the Westward along the land.  Their distance from the shore did not exceed a mile and a half. The back country consisted of high hummocky mountains whole parallel edges were lying elevated one above another to a considerable distance inland. [162] The land in front was woody and bushy of a moderate height but sandy.  At three in the afternoon they ran through between a sandy point with shoal water off it and two islands. One of these named Waterhouse Isle is between two and three miles in length rather high but level and covered with large wood. The other is small low rocky and almost bare. The coast now trended to the S. S. W. the land sloping up gradually from the sea to a moderate height with more open than wooded ground and but little brush; but the soil appeared sandy and the grass but thinly grown. The hummocky mountains still retained their general figure in the more interior parts.  As they proceeded the shore no longer preserved any regular line of direction but fell back into sandy bights. Hauling off for the night a little to the westward of a small rocky and barren island lying about four miles from the land at six o'clock the following morning they came in with it again near where they had left it the preceding evening and began their course along the shore which trended to the S. S. W. in an irregular manner with a sandy country at its back.  At eleven o'clock they passed within a mile of a high grassy cape which is the seaward extremity of a ridge that riling up by a gentle ascent retreats and joins Some chains of lofty mountains. A small rocky island lay two miles from it to the W. S. W. At noon the latitude was 40° 55' 25' and the longitude 147° 16' 30".  Early in the afternoon a gap in the land situated at the back of a deep narrow bight which had for some time attracted attention began to assume the appearance of an inlet which they bore away to examine; and after running three miles they found they had shut in the line of the coast on each side and were impelled forward by a strong inlet of tide. Continuing their course for the gap some back points within the entrance loon became distinguishable and the rapidity of the flood tide was observed to increase with the increasing contiguity of the Shores. [163] When the sloop was on the point of entering the harbour which appeared to be fairly open before her the water shoaled suddenly and she struck the ground and lay fast; but fortunately the strong flood in a few minutes dragged her over into deep water and shot her into the entrance with uncommon velocity.  Having advanced within the entrance the harbour began to expand itself in a kind of large basin. Its Shores were broken into points and projections between Some of which the great strength of the flood tide led them to expect it would branch off into arms. The land lying immediately upon its borders was low but not flat; well wooded ; and those points near which the sloop passed were clothed with a very unusual degree of verdure. The sun being down the vessel was anchored for the night and the next day they proceeded with their researches.  They were employed during Sixteen days in the examination of this place ; and the result of the observations which were made by Mr. Bass in different parts of it and the neighbouring country are thrown by that gentleman into one general account.  This harbour or inlet which was named by the governor Port Dalrymple in compliment to Alexander Dalrymple Esq. takes its course from the S. E. between two chains of rounded mountains stretching inland from the sea with an almost imperceptible increase of elevation; and after gradually approximating each other seemed to unite at the distance of between thirty and forty miles in a body of rugged mountains more lofty than themselves. These two chains in their relative positions formed an acute angle being at their greatest distance asunder as measured along the lea coast only sixteen miles.  Being limited in point of time (twelve weeks having been deemed by the governor sufficient for the execution of this service  the apprehension of losing a wind favourable for the prosecution of the principal object of the voyage that of failing through the strait deterred them from attempting to reach the head of the river; but it was hardly to be doubted that its principal source proceeded from some part near the point of union of the two chains of mountains. [164] Allowing this supposition a great part of its stream must be perfectly fresh; for at the place where they ended their examination which was not more than half the whole supposed distance or length of the river it had become half fresh half salt although its breadth was from half a mile to a mile and a half and its depth eight or nine fathoms.  The country which Mr. Bass had an opportunity of observing was a certain portion of that lying within the angle formed by the two chains of mountains and more especially of the parts which lay contiguous to the water rather than of those situated in the vicinity of the chains.  The quality of the ground taking it in the aggregate was much superior to that of the borders of any of the salt water inlets of New South Wales Western Port excepted (seen by Mr Bass on his first excursion in the whale boat). The vegetable mould was however found to be of no great depth and was sometimes perhaps advantageously mixed with small quantities of land.  The best of the soil was found upon the sides of sloping hills and in the broad vallies between them. Some parts that were low and level had a wet and peat-like surface bounded by small tracts of flowering shrubs and odoriferous plants that perfumed the air with the fragrance of their oils. These retained in general the appearance of those in New South Wales while they were in reality very different. The rich and vivid colouring of the more northern flowers and that soft and exquisite gradation of their tints for which they are so singularly distinguished hold with those here but in a less eminent degree. The two countries present a perfect similarity in this that the more barren spots are the most gaily adorned. [165] The curious florist and scientific botanist would find ample subject of exultation in their different researches in Port Dalrymple.  Except in these places the grass grows not in tufts but covers the land equally with a short nutricious herbage better adapted possibly to the bite of small than of large cattle. The food for the latter grows in the bottoms of the vallies and upon the damp flats. A large proportion of the soil promised a fair return to the labours of the cultivator and a lesser ensures an ample reward; but the greater part would perhaps be more advantageously employed if left for pasturage than if thrown into cultivation; it would be poor as the one but rich as the other.  Water was found in runs more than in ponds and though not abundant was far from being scarce.  The west side of the river furnishes the largest quantity of the best ground because the mountains on that side are at a greater distance than those on the east. The country lying near the west arm is chiefly rather flat and might be converted to many useful purposes both in agriculture and in pasturage for which last it is probably well calculated. If it Should ever be proposed to make a settlement here this part seems to merit very particular attention.  The best land seems to be that fine hilly country which lies at the back of an island named Middle-Island; but access to it is not easy on account of a large shoal extending along its front which is dry at low water as far out as the island itself. The shape of the land is very pleasingly variegated with hill and valley; the soil is in general a rich black mould shallow and even sometimes a little stoney upon the hills but in the vallies is of abundant depth and richness. A close coat of grass of a uniform thickness over-spreads it every where. It appears to be watered only by swampy ponds which in many places are at some distance from each other; but it is hardly to be doubted that wells sunk in the vallies would furnish water sufficient for all domestic purposes. [166]   In failing up the river the points and shores present an appearance of fertility that astonishes an eye used to those of the rocky harbours of New South Wales. They are mostly grassed as well as wooded close down to the water side the wood perhaps thin; the grass every where thick every where a dark luxuriant vegetation that either from the thinness of the wood or the gradual rounding of the hills and points is visible to a very considerable extent of ground.  The tides run so uncommonly rapid that if the port were colonized and the principal town built as it no doubt would be near the entrance the produce of the villages and farms scattered along its banks might be brought to market with the greatest ease expedition and certainty.  The heavy timber is chiefly gum tree of various species; of which two are different from any that have been yet seen in this country. Nothing new was observed in the quality of the wood; but from the few trees that were felled it was thought to be more found at heart than they are usually met with. The she oaks were more inclined to spread than grow tall. The Smaller trees and shrubs resemble with Some variety those of the continent. The tree producing the yellow gum is of a very diminutive size; but unlike that of Cape Barren Island it bears a reed correspondent to itself. These were going into flower and their length was only from nine inches to two feet.  The few rocky shores of the river presented nothing remarkable being generally either of a rough iron-stone or a soft grid-stone. [167]   The grey kangooroo of a very large size abounded in the open forest; the brushes were tenanted by the smaller black kind or as it is named by the natives of Port Jackson the Wal-li-bah.  The plumage of the parrots forms a gloomy contrast with the rich lustre of those near the settlement their colours being rather grave than gay. The melancholy cry of the bell-bird (dil boong after which Ben-nil-long named his infant child) seems to be unknown here. Many aquatic birds both web-footed and waders frequent the arms and coves of the river; but the black swans alone are remarkable in point of number. Mr. Bass once made a rough calculation of three hundred swimming within the Space of a quarter of a mile square; and heard the "dying Song" of some scores; that song So celebrated by the poets of former times exactly resembled the creaking of a rusty sign on a windy day! Not more than two thirds of any of the flocks which they fell in with could fly the rest could do no more than flap along upon the Surface of the water being either moulting or not yet come to their full feather and growth which they require two years to attain. They swam and flapped alternately and went along surprisingly fast. It was Some times a long chase but the boat generally tired them out. When in danger and speed makes no part of their escape they immerse their bodies So far that the water makes a passage between their neck and back and in this position they would frequently turn aside a heavy load of shot. They seemed to be endowed with much Sagacity; in chase they soon learned the weakest point of their pursuers and instead of Swimming directly from them as they did at first always endeavoured in the most artful manner to gain the wind which could only be prevented by anticipating their movements and by a dexterous management of the boat.  The swan is said to feed upon fish frogs and water-slugs; but in the gizzards of many that at different times and in different places were examined by Mr. Bass nothing ever appeared but small water plants mostly a kind of broad leaved grass and some little sand. [168] To their affection for their young he had seen Some lamentable Sacrifices; but of their fierceness at least when opposed to man or their great strength he had seen no instance.  Among other reptiles were found the Snake with venomous fangs and some large brown guanoes.  This country is inhabited by men; and if any judgment could be formed from the number of huts which they met in about the same proportion as in New South Wales. Their extreme shyness prevented any communication. They never even got sight of them but once and then at a great distance. They had made fires abreast of where the sloop was at anchor; but as soon as the boat approached the shore they ran off into the woods. Their huts of which Seven or eight were frequently found together like a little encampment were constructed of bark torn in long stripes from some neighbouring tree after being divided transversely at the bottom in Such breadths as they judge their strength would be able to disengage from its adherence to the wood and the connecting bark on each side. It is then broken into convenient lengths and placed slopingwise against the elbowing part of some dead branch that has fallen off from the distorted limbs of the gum tree; and a little grass is sometimes thrown over the top. But after all their labour they have not ingenuity sufficient to place the slips of bark in such a manner as to preclude the free admission of the rain. It is somewhat strange that in the latitude of 4j0 want should not have Sharpened their ideas to the invention of Some more convenient habitation especially since they have been left by nature without the confined dwelling of a hollow tree or the more agreeable accommodation of a hole under the rock.  The single utensil that was observed lying near their huts was a kind of basket made of long wiry grass that grows along the shores of the river. The two ends of a large bunch of this grass are tied to the two ends of a Smaller bunch; the large one is then spread out to form the basket while the smaller answers the purpose of a handle. [169] Their apparent use is to bring shell fish from the mud banks where they are to be collected. The large heaps of muscle-shells that were found near each but proclaimed the mud banks to be a principal Source of food. The most scrupulous examination of their fire places discovered nothing except a few bones of the opossum a Squirrel and here and there those of a small kangooroo. No remains of fish were ever Seen.  The mode of taking the opossum Seemed to be similar to that practised in New South Wales except that it is probable they use a rope in ascending the tree; for once at the foot of a notched tree about eight feet of a two inch rope made of grass was found with a knot in it near which it appeared to have broken.  A canoe was never met with and concurring circumstances shewed that this convenience was unknown here; nor was any tree ever observed to be barked in the manner requisite for this purpose; though birds bred upon little islands to which access might be had in the smallest canoe. Those made of Solid timber seemed to be wholly out of the question. The roughness of the notches left by the stone hatchet upon the bark of the trees bore no very favourable testimony to its excellence. They were rather the marks of a rough than of a sharp-edged tool and seemed more beaten than cut which was not the case with the marks left by the mo-go or stone hatchet of New South Wales.  Hence from the little that has been Seen of the condition of our own Species in this place it appears to be much inferior in some essential points of convenience to that of the despised inhabitants of the continent. How miserable a being would the latter be his canoe taken from him his stone hatchet blunted his hut pervious to the smallest shower of rain and few or no excavations in the rocks to fly to! But happiness like every thing else exists only by comparison with the stage above and the stage below our own. [170] The circumstances which occasioned this difference between the people of two countries So near to each other and so much alike in their natural productions must remain hidden from our observation until perhaps Some permanent European settlement shall be made in Van Diemen's land.  The range of the thermometer taken in various parts of the port was at night from 490 to 52° and at noon from 58° to 64°.  On the 20th of November they left Port Dalrymple with a light breeze at N. E. and proceeded very slowly to the westward. At day-light the following morning the wind shifted to the W. by N. which drove them back to Furneaux's islands where the gale continuing at welt they were kept until the 3d of December when they were enabled to proceed to the westward. The land here trended to the W. N. W. as far as was visible through the haze which allowed them only to distinguish that it was high and uneven. At noon the latitude was 400 58' and the longitude 146° 44'. Their progress was slow and unavoidably at too great a distance from the shore to form any just idea of the country; but what was seen of it appeared high and mountainous the mountains forming into hummocks and low peaks to which a few large shapeless knobs added a great singularity of appearance. On the haze clearing away and the shore being distinctly Seen it appeared rocky but wooded nearly down to the water's edge. Here and there were seen spaces of open ground Some of which sloped toward the sea and had a few large trees growing irregularly upon them. A remarkable peaked mountain Some few miles inland might have been thought from its shape and height to have been once a volcano. A very singular lump of high level or table land lay at a few miles to the westward in the coast line; and at some distance beyond it a point appeared with three knobs of land lying off it resembling islands. This land was named Table Cape.  To the extreme eastern point of this land a fine easterly breeze had brought them at day-light of the 6th; when they found that what they had on the preceding evening taken to be islands were three lumps or ridges of the point itself lessening in bulk as they advanced toward its seaward extremity. [171] The very uncommon figure of this point may perhaps be best conceived by comparing it to a Spear with several barbs. It was extremely barren and rocky. Beyond the point the coast trended more northerly but fell back into an extensive bay with a sandy beach in its rear. The western point of this bay was formed by a high sleep and round bluff named Circular Head that might easily be taken for an island but was a peninsula. The land behind was of moderate height and rose gradually from the sea. It was clothed in a poor coat of either grass or short brush; among which were seen Some dwarf gum trees that appeared to be in a sickly and dying state apparently for want of sufficient soil to expand in.  Towards noon soon after passing Circular Head the outermost land in sight stretched so far to the northward that the course to clear it was N. N. W. It formed like two hummocks and in steering for it they were compelled to leave a large bight unexamined. The coast at its back was too distant to form any judgment of it except in the general outline. Its westernmost part Seemed broken and intersected like islands and gaps; but as the wind blew fresh and directly into it they passed on.  Nothing new presented itself on the following day but Some small flights of sooty petrels.  On the 8th being threatened with a gale they came to anchor under the land off a Small beach on its N. E. part where the S. W. wind could not molest the vessel. Here Mr. Bass landed to examine the country but found it impenetrable. The tall sturdy brush wood grew So close that their dogs could hardly make their way through it. Large patches appeared to have been burnt many months ago but the small brush and creeping vines only were destroyed; the closeness of the blackened saplings was still irresistible. A few starved gum trees erected their sickly heads above the brush and the whole wore an aspect of poverty which the sandy soil confirmed. [172] And yet this place was inhabited by men as was shewn by the old fire places strewed round with shells of the sea ear. The rocks were composed of quartz probably a Species of granite but much unlike that which formed Furneaux's Islands.  Leaving this place on the 9th they steered for the outermost land in sight which bore to the southward of west and was distant three or four leagues. After rounding the Seaward end of the land under which they had anchored its shores fell back and at last discovered to them that it was an island of from fifteen to twenty miles in circuit and situated between four and five from the main. It was with the greatest astonishment that they recollected the fire places and sea shells which they had the preceding evening seen upon the island. That the inhabitants of this part of Van Diemen's land should possess canoes capable of crossing over four or five miles of open sea while those of Port Dalrymple were without any Seemed highly improbable. The island itself was certainly unequal to the maintenance of any settled inhabitants and yet there were unequivocal vestiges of men upon it. Long and frequent reflection upon facts in themselves So contradictory had never produced any rational solution of the difficulty. This island took the descriptive name of Three Hummock Island.  For several hours during the early part of the morning a vast stream of sooty petrels issued from the deep bight which had been left unexplored and passed the vessel on their way to the westward. There must have been some millions of birds. Thence they were well assured there was at least one island in that bight if not more than one as they had imagined. .  Having passed within a mile of a pointed part of the main which in height and starved vegetation very much resembled Three Hummock Island towards noon they came up with some land which proved to be a Small island high and very steep; and a long swell which had just before made its first appearance broke violently upon it making a furious surf on all sides. [173] Its Summit was whitened over with birds. With Some difficulty a landing was effected at the foot of a chasm filled up with loose stones; and after a slight rencontre with Some Seals that stood above they reached the top. The birds they found were albatrosses innumerable. The Spread of their wings was from seven to nine feet. Their colour was more white than black and the appearance of their visitors did not occasion much disturbance among them even when they approached close to them. This was the season of their breeding. The females fat upon nests not more than a foot and a half apart built of muddy earth bound with coarse grass raised about four inches from the ground and formed into a concavity of nearly that depth with a diameter of five or six inches. One young bird only was in each nest: it was of the size of a small pullet but at that time covered with a beautifully white down. The shapeless lump at some distance resembled a ball of cotton. Some nests held an addled egg of a dingy white colour and equal in size to that of a goose. The nests were so near each other and the birds so conscious of the great strength of their sharp bills that in going through them the voyagers were obliged to make use of their seal clubs to procure themselves a passage. Even the young ones spouted plentiful mouthfuls of a not inodorous oil upon them.  The island which obtained the name of Albatross Island was a mere mass of stone without any other vegetation than a few tufts of coarse grass. Besides albatrosses it afforded shelter to a few scores of hair seals and the large gull. The latitude was 40° 24' the longitude 145° 02'.  Several other islands were Seen to the Southward and the coast of the main teemed trending in the same direction. A deep bight lay at the back of these islands with points and openings visible in its most distant part. There was reason to believe that the Sea here had a communication through into the unexplored bight to the eastward of Three Hummock Island; in which case the pointed part of the main whole vegetation bore so great a resemblance to that of Three Hummock Island would also be an island. [174] They passed sufficiently near to determine that they were high steep and difficult of access. Their tops and sloping parts were grown over with either coarse grass or short brush ; but not any trees appeared. The largest might be seven or eight miles in circuit the smaller were mere masses of rock of various sizes; and the whole cluster in number about twelve including Three Hummock Island obtained the name of Hunter's Isles.  A fresh gale at E. N. E. and a heavy swell from the S. W. drove the vessel fail to the southward and westward; and on the 11th the gale having moderated they stretched in for the land a large ex-tent of which was indistinctly visible through a light haze that hung about the horizon. At noon the latitude was 41° 13' and the longitude 148° 58'. With a fresh breeze at N. N. E. they bore away along the shore which trends to the S. E. by E. and was distant three or four miles.  From a shore of beach with short rocky points at intervals the land rose gradually to a considerable height the aspect of which was barren and brushy and the soil sandy. Several short reefs of rocks lay in front of the beaches and broke the long swell into a surf of a tremendous appearance.  Dreading a gale of wind from the west which was threatening and might have proved fatal to their little vessel they hauled out to the S.S.W.; but the weather remained moderate.  On the following morning the wind flew round to the northward and they continued their route along the shore. Early in the forenoon they passed a singularly formed point with a number of lumps of rock lying some two or three miles off it to the S. W. It resembled an artificial pier or mole with warehouses upon it and a light-house on the end next the water. Large masses of detached oblong rocks gave the appearance of warehouses and a remarkably long one standing upon its end that of the light-house. [175]   Their latitude at noon was 42° 02' and the longitude 145° 16'; the coast still trended to the S. S. E. and the land began to change that uniformly regular figure which it had hitherto preserved. It was becoming mountainous and uneven but was still barren. [176]     CHAP. XVI. [...]   M R. Bass and his fellow voyager Lieutenant Flinders did not hesitate now to think that they had passed through the strait and from the Pacific had entered the southern Indian ocean; for what within the extent of a vast sea could give birth to the monstrous swell that was rolling in before their eyes? and the coast was evidently trending towards the S.W. cape.  Mr. Bass says (with all the feeling and spirit of an explorer) that he already began to taste the enjoyment resulting from the completion of this discovery which had been commenced in the whaleboat under a complication of anxieties hazard and fatigue known only to those who conducted her ;" modestly sharing the praises to which he alone was entitled with those who accompanied him.  It was worthy of remark (Mr. Bass says) that the northern shore of the strait from Wilson's Promontory (Seen in the whale-boat) to Western Port resembled the bluff bold shore of an open lea with a Swell rolling in and a large Surf breaking upon it; while the southern shore or what is the coast of Van Diemen's land appeared like the inner shore of a cluster of islands whose outer parts break off the great weight of the sea. [177] The cause of this is immediately obvious on recollecting that the swell of the Indian ocean enters the strait from the southward of west. The greater part of the Southern shore lies in a bight whole western extreme is Hunter's isles and the N. W. Cape of Van Diemen's land. Now as the swell comes from the Southward as well as the westward it must after striking upon the northwest part of the southern shore evidently run on in a direction Somewhat diagonal with the two sides of the strait until it expands itself upon the northern shore where both swell and surf are found. But to the southward of this diagonal line the swell must quickly take off and totally disappear long before it can reach the shore to make a Surf. Hence arises the difference.  That the swell of the Indian ocean comes by far the greater part of the way from the southward of west can hardly be doubted since it is well known that the prevailing winds are from that quarter.  Early in the afternoon (of the 11th) a piece of land stood out from the line of the coast like an island but it was loon found to be joined to the main by a sandy beach. The shore beyond it looked rugged and craggy and the land equalled the most sterile and stoney that had been seen. At night the vessel stood off to the westward from abreast of a pyramidal rock lying close to the main. At day-light the following morning they came in again with the land at the same place and ran along the shore with a fresh breeze at N. W. the coast trending in a waving line to the S. S. E.  Towards noon the coast began to rife into chains of lofty mountains which ran along in nearly the same line as the coast. The latitude was 43.° 07'. the longitude 145.° 42'. A large Smoke that got up astern of the vessel was the first sign of inhabitants that had been seen upon this west coast the appearance of which was miserably barren. [178]   On the morning of the 13th they found that they had been carried in the night to leeward of a break in the land which had been Seen the preceding evening and had the appearance of being the entrance to a harbour. The north point of this imaginary inlet was named Point .St. Vincent. The coast here trended to the eastward the land of which was mountainous and steep to the sea. Some islands were in fight a-head lying near the land.  At 8 in the evening they passed the S. W. cape of Van Diemen's land hitherto known as that of New Holland. It is a narrow piece of land projecting from the higher land at no great distance with two flattish hummocks that gave it some little resemblance to the Ram Head near Plymouth. Having passed the Cape they hauled up and went between the islands which are Be Witt's Tiles and the main. At sunset they were about a mile and a half from the South Cape.  The south west and south Capes lie nearly east and west of each other and are distant about fifteen leagues. The intermediate coast forms the southern boundary of Van Diemen's land; but if taken upon the more extensive Scale of the whole southern hemisphere it appears as the South point of New Holland to be of equal respectability with the extremity of Terra del Fuego and of the Cape of Good Hope the South points of the continents of America and Africa.  The relative Situations of these three points when viewed upon a chart drawn on the plane of the equator or upon an artificial globe are particularly striking. They will be found to lie at nearly equal distances from each other in the circumference and each extending itself so directly towards the South that if continued on in the same line they would certainly meet Somewhere near the pole. The effect that is produced upon the whole globe by this peculiar disposition of three of its most prominent points Seems indeterminable. [179]   Like that of Terra del Fuego the extremity of Van Diemen's land presents a rugged and determined front to the icy regions of the south pole; and like it seems once to have extended further south than it does at present. To a very unusual elevation is added an irregularity of form that justly entitles it to rank among the foremost of the grand and wildly magnificent scenes of nature. It abounds with peaks and ridges gaps and fissures that not only disdain the smallest uniformity of figure but are ever changing shape as the point of view shifts. Beneath this strange confusion the western part of this waving coast-line observes a regularity equally remarkable as the wild disorder which prevails above. Lofty ridges of mountain bounded by tremendous cliffs project from two to four miles into the sea at nearly equal distances from each other with a breadth varying from two miles to two and a half. The bights or bays lying between them are backed by Sandy beaches. These vast buttresses appear to be the southern extremities of the mountains of Van Diemen's land; which it can hardly be doubted have once projected into the sea far beyond their present abrupt termination and have been united with the now detached land De Witt's Isles.  If a corresponding height of similar strata were observable on the islands and on the main it would amount to a proof that they were originally connected; but this proof was wanting. The same kind of strata appeared in both; but as far as could be determined in passing hastily by the necessary correspondence seemed to be deficient. They did not land upon either the islands or the main; but two kinds of rock one with strata and the other without were plainly discernible. That without strata formed by far the largest part; it appeared whitish and shining was certainly a quartz and probably a granite. The layers of the rock with strata were of various dark colours and perfectly distinct.  It was evident that land so much exposed to the violence of extensive oceans must have undergone some very material changes by the incessant attrition of their vast waves. [180] Two of the isles either from this or a more sudden cause have so far deviated from their centre that their parallel strata form angles of between sixteen and eighteen degrees in one instance and in another between twenty-five and thirty degrees with the horizontal line. But it is difficult to explain by the action of water how a large block of the white stone without strata is caused to overhang an almost perpendicular corner of one of the islands which beneath that block consists of the dark coloured stone lying in strata.  De Witt's Isles (so named probably by Tasman) twelve in number are of various sizes. The two largest are from three to four miles in circuit. Their sides are steep but their height is inferior to that of the main. The largest is the lowest. The Smaller isles are little more than large lumps of rock of which that named by Captain Cook the mew stone is the southernmost. Their aspect like that of the main bespeaks extreme sterility; but Superior to the greater part of it they produce a continued covering of brush; and upon the sloping sides of some of their gullies are a few stunted half dead gum trees.  They could not account for the vestiges of fires that appeared upon the two inner large islands; the innermost in particular which lay at some distance from the nearest point of the main was burnt in patches upon different parts of it. It must have been effected either by lightning or by the hand of man; but it was So much unlike the usual effects of the former that with all its difficulties they chose to attribute it to the latter cause.  A great smoke that arose at the back of one of the bights shewed the main to be inhabited; but they could not suppose the people of this place to be furnished with canoes when those of Adventure Bay in their neighbourhood were unprovided with them. Nothing therefore was left to their choice but to allow that they might transport themselves over either upon logs of wood or by swimming across: and as the most probable reward of such an exertion would be the capture of birds whilst breeding or the Seizure of their eggs the utility of spreading fires in facilitating such operations is obvious. [181]   The south cape may be easily distinguished from any other projection in its vicinity. Besides being the southernmost it is a promontory making like a foreland and sloping very gradually as it runs towards the sea where it ends in a perpendicular cliff.  About sunset the fresh N.W. wind died away suddenly; and a strong Squall from the westward with thunder lightning and heavy rain soon carried them round the south cape and by dark brought them off what was formerly called Storm-Bay where they hauled to the wind with the sloop's head up the bay intending in the morning to proceed by this Storm-Bay passage into the Derwent river.  The night was squally and by day light the next morning (the 14th) it was found that the vessel had drifted across the mouth of Storm-Bay or more properly Storm-Bay-Passage. Tasman's-head its eastern point bore N. E. distant three miles. Being too far to leeward to fetch up the passage and the gale continuing they bore away round Tasman's -head and hauled up along shore for Adventure-Bay.  Nothing remarkable was observed about Tasman's-head except two Small islands lying off it at the distance of half or three quarters of a mile; and close to them were the two conical basaltic rocks named by Captain Furneaux the Friars. The vegetation upon the innermost of the two small islands had been burnt in a manner similar to that on the De Witt's isles. If it were possible to account for Those fires in any other way than by the agency of man it would be more satisfactory than to Suppose that people always believed to be without canoes had crossed over from a rather steep and rocky head to an island equally rocky but more steep. [182]   Having passed Fluted Cape a fine piece of basaltes and Penguin island they fetched up under Cape Frederick Henry the north point of Adventure Bay; but as the wind blew strong directly off it and the sloop was light and leewardly they bore away round the Cape Frederick Henry hauling upon the north side of it into the bay of that name purposing to go into the Derwent river discovered a few years since by Mr. Hayes master of the ship Duke of Bengal: but finding that they were likely to lose ground by tacking they stood into Henshaw's bay (so named by Hayes) and were greatly surprised to find that instead of its being a mere shallow bight as laid down in Mr. Hayes's chart it extended many miles to the northward. The whole now bears the name of Frederick Henry Bay; that given by Hayes is lost. In this very extensive bay they remained a week traversing and measuring various parts of its shores.  The Surrounding country was found to be miserable presenting but very little that was fit even for pasturage and none good enough for cultivation except near a shallow lagoon on the west side on the border of which were seven or eight hundred acres of low ground of a black mould rather Sandy which might be cultivated with great advantage. Contiguous to the best part was a large fresh water Swamp overgrown with reeds and bulrushes.  In the evening of the 21st they entered the mouth of the Derwent.  In passing between two islands the heads of the Sea-weed which from its size is named the Gigantic were shewing Themselves above the Surface in six or eight fathoms water: a diminutive plant when compared with those of the kind Seen in higher latitudes but of vast magnitude in comparison with the generality of Sea-weeds.  On their various movements in the Derwent Mr. Bass is silent confining his narrative to a general account of what he learned and Saw of the neighbouring country. [183]   If the Derwent river have any claim to respectability it is indebted for it more to the paucity of inlets into Van Diemen's land than to any intrinsic merits of its own. After a sleepy course of not more than twenty-five or twenty-seven miles to the N. W. it falls into Frederick Henry Bay. Its breadth there is two miles and a quarter and its depth ten fathoms. A few hundred yards above its mouth it is joined on the west side by the Storm-Bay-Passage and this union makes an island of that flip of land which is Adventure Bay. This island the Derwent river and the Storm-Bay-Passage were the discovery of Mr. Hayes of which he made a chart; wherein it was found by the minute examination of the whole scene which it now underwent that the smallest runs had been magnified into rivers and coves into bays and ports. Such glaring errors could not be Suffered to exist; but the name where it was possible was retained though the geographical term was necessarily altered.  This dull lifeless stream the Derwent is So little affected by the tides that its navigation is extremely tedious with a foul wind. It takes its way through a country that on the east and north sides is hilly on the west and north mountainous. The hills to the eastward arise immediately from the banks; but the mountains to the westward have retired to the distance of a few miles from the water and have left in their front hilly land similar to that on the east side. All the hills are very thinly Set with light timber chiefly short the oaks; but are admirably covered with thick nutritious grass in general free from brush or patches of shrubs. The Soil in which it grows is a black vegetable mould deep only in the vallies frequently very shallow with occasionally a Small mixture of sand or Small stones. Many large tracts of land appear cultivable both for maize and wheat but which as pasture land would be excellent.  The hills descend with such gentle slopes that the vallies between them are extensive and flat. Several contain an indeterminate depth of rich soil capable of supporting the most exhausting vegetation and are tolerably well watered by chains of small ponds or occasional drains which empty themselves into the river by a cove or creek. [184]   One mountain to the west lying about three miles from the water and so remarkably conspicuous as to be seen from every part of the Derwent and its vicinity Mr. Bass ascended; and he was much surprised to find it abounding with fine tall gum-tree timber uncommonly straight.  The shore on the east side of the river proceeding up is covered with a good but shallow soil and lightly wooded; cultivable for the greater part with any kind of grain and the whole fit for pasturage though perhaps not sufficiently watered for large cattle which require much drink.  On the west side the country rises too suddenly into stoney hills to be in general so good as in most other places. It would however afford tolerable pasturage; and a few patches of eighty or one hundred acres each were excellent arable land.  The shore here as in many other parts of the river exhibited signs of internal or subterraneous disturbance. The strata of cliffs were broken and disjoined lying sloping in different directions. Near a small point Several pieces of petrified wood and lumps of stone of every kind and every Size were enveloped or rather stuck into the matter of the rock which although in colour much like a yellow tinged clay yet had the usual rough porous Surface peculiar to substances that have been in a state of fusion. It was here as in other places hard but did not Scintillate with steel and was divided by lines of a still harder iron-tinged stone into squares and parallelograms of various Sizes. From one of these intersecting lines Mr. Bass took a Small lump of this ferruginous stone that Seemed to have bubbled up and to have hardened in the form of an ill-shaped bunch of Small grapes. Some of the neighbouring cliffs for Several yards were formed into basaltic columns. [185]   In walking across one of the steep heads between two Small bays he met with a large deep hole in the ground that appeared to have been occasioned by the falling-in of the earth which had formerly occupied its space. Its extent was about twenty-two yards by seventeen; its depth perhaps Sixty feet. The sides were not excavated but rather smooth and perpendicular. They were rocks of the same yellow tinge as those of the shore. A little surf that washed up within it shewed a communication with the river by a narrow subterraneous passage of some ten or sixteen feet in height and according to the distance of the hole from the edge of the cliff about thirty-five yards in length. Appearances seemed to agree that the period at which this earth fell in could not be very remote.  Continuing on the west side from Point William to Shoal Point (places named by Mr. Hayes) the land is too stoney upon the hills for cultivation but is proper for pasturage. The vallies are as usual adapted to grain.  The land round Prince of Wales's Cove is rather level and frequently clayey: the worst of it produces excellent food for cattle even up to the foot of the high mountain lying at its back. Being a stiff close soil it is perhaps adapted to the growth of grape vines rather than of grain. About three hundred acres of open ground called by Mr. Hayes King George's Plains (could this have been in derision?) seem well calculated for this purpose and for this only.  The land at the head of Risdon creek on the east side seems preferable to any other on the banks of the Derwent. The creek runs winding between two steep hills and ends in a chain of ponds that extends into a fertile valley of great beauty. For half a mile above the head of the creek the valley is contracted and narrow; but the soil is extremely rich and the fields are well covered with grass. Beyond this it suddenly expands and becomes broad and flat at the bottom whence arise long grassy slopes that by a gentle but increasing ascent continue to mount the hills on each side until they are hidden from the view by the woods of large timber which overhang their summits. [186] With this handsome disposition of the ground the valley extends several miles to the S. E. in the figure of a small segment of a circle. The tops of its hills though stoney produce abundance of tall timber which as it descends the slopes diminishes in size and thins off to a few scattered the oaks and gum trees interspersed with small coppices of the beautiful flowering fern.  The soil along the bottom and to some distance up the slopes is a rich vegetable mould apparently hardened by a small mixture of clay which grows a large quantity of thick juicy grass and some few patches of close underwood.  Herdman's Cove (so named by Lieutenant Flinders from the surrounding country) above Risdon Creek has a large tract of good pasture land lying at its head. The country which is unusually thin of timber is finely rounded into grassy hills of various moderate ascent. The soil consists of more brown earth than black vegetable mould; upon the sides and tops of the hills it is frequently Roney; but in some of the vallies rich and fine and capable of profitable cultivation. A chain of ponds intersecting the hills afforded an almost continual stream of fresh water into the head of the Cove.  As it was not supposed that the sloop could proceed above Herds-man's Cove Mr. Bass and his companion went up the river in her boat imagining that one tide would enable them to reach its source; but in this they were mistaken falling as they believed several miles short of it. Where the returning tide met them the water had become perfectly fresh; the stream was two hundred and thirty yards in breadth and in depth three fathoms. It was wedged in between high grassy hills that descended to the river upon a quick slope and had a grand appearance. But the only cultivable land that they saw was some few breaks in the hills and some narrow flips that were found at their foot close to the water's side. [187]   In their way up a human voice saluted them from the hills; on which they landed carrying with them one of several swans which they had just shot. Having nearly reached the summit two females with a short covering hanging loose from their shoulders suddenly appeared at some little distance before them snatched up each a small basket and scampered off. A man then presented himself and suffered them to approach him without any signs of fear or distrust. He received the swan joyfully seeming to esteem it a treasure.  His language was unintelligible to them as was theirs to him although they addressed him in Several of the dialects of New South Wales and some few of the most common words of the South Sea Islands. With some difficulty they made him comprehend their with to see his place of residence. He pointed over the hills and proceeded onwards; but his pace was slow and wandering and he often stopped under pretence of having lost the track; which led them to suspect that his only aim was to amuse and tire them out. Judging then that in persisting to follow him they must lose the remaining part of the flood tide which was much more valuable to them than the sight of his hut could be they parted from him in great friendship.  The most probable reason of his unwillingness to be their guide seemed his not having a male companion near him; and his fearing that if he took them to his women their charms might induce them to run off with them - a jealousy very common with the natives of the continent.  He was a short slight made man of a middle age with a countenance more expressive of benignity and intelligence than of that ferocity or stupidity which generally characterised the other natives; and his features were less flattened or negro-like than theirs. His face was blackened and the top of his head was plaistered with red earth. His hair was either naturally short and close or had been rendered so by burning and although short and stiffly curled they did not think it woolly. [188] He was armed with two ill made spears of solid wood.  No part of their dress attracted his attention except the red silk handkerchief round their necks. Their fire arms were to him objects neither of curiosity nor fear.  This was the first man they had spoken with in Van Diemen's land and his frank and open deportment led them not only to form a favourable opinion of the disposition of its inhabitants but to conjecture that if the country was peopled in the usual numbers he would not have been the only one whom they would have met. A circumstance which corroborated this supposition was that in the excursions made by Mr. Bass into the country having seldom any other society than his two dogs he could have been no great object of dread to a people ignorant of the effects of fire arms and would certainly have been hailed by any one who might have seen him.  They fell in with many huts along the different shores of the river of the same bad construction as those of Port Dalrymple but with fewer heaps of muscle shells lying near them. The natives of this place probably draw the principal part of their food from the woods; the bones of small animals such as opossums squirrels kangooroo rats and bandicoots were numerous round their deserted fire-places; and the two spears which they saw in the hands of the man were similar to those used for hunting in other parts. Many trees also were observed to be notched.  No canoes were ever seen nor any tree so barked as to answer that purpose. And yet all the islands in Frederick-Henry Bay had evidently been visited. [189]   Besides the Small quadrupeds already mentioned they observed the grey and red kangooroo but not in any numbers and once they heard the tread of an emu.  The feathered tribes were apparently similar to those of Port Dalrymple. Here again they daily ate their swan the flocks of which even exceeded those that they had before met with.  The most formidable among the reptiles was the black snake with venomous fangs and so much in colour resembling a burnt stick that a close inspection only could detect the difference. Mr. Bass once with his eyes cautiously directed towards the ground stepped over one which was lying asleep among some black sticks and would have passed on without observing it had not its rustling and loud hiss attracted his attention the moment afterwards.  He determined on taking him alive in order to try the effect of his bite upon a hawk which was at that time in the sloop. In the contest he turned round and bit himself severely; in a few minutes after which he was mastered. His exertions however were still vigorous and Mr. Bass expected as he began to recover himself that they would increase; but in less than ten minutes he died. Having never before known a snake of this size to be killed by a few very slight blows with a stick so rotten as scarcely to bear the weight of its own blow he was at a loss to conceive how death had so suddenly succeeded So much vigour in an animal so tenacious of life. Was it possible that his own bite could have been the cause? When three hours afterwards the skin was stripped off the flesh for Some distance round the marks of his teeth was found inflamed and discoloured.  The account of the Derwent river being now closed and the whole of what was learned of Van Diemen's land related it may not be improper says Mr Bass to point out the manner in which this country and New South Wales appear to differ in their most essential quality that of their soil. [190]   In adjusting their comparative fertility the contrasted disposition of their soils is much more prominent than any inequality in their quantity. They are poor countries; but as far as the eye of discovery has yet penetrated into either the cultivable soil of the latter is found lying in a few distinct patches of limited extent and of varying quality; while the soil of the former being more equally spread those spots of abundant richness or large wilds of unimproveable sterility are much less frequently seen.  Although Van Diemen's land seems to possess few or none of those vast depths of soil with which the happiest spots of New South Wales are blessed; yet it seldom sickens the heart of its traveller with those extensive tracts which at once disarm industry and leave the warmest imagination without one beguiling project.  In point of productive soil Mr. Bass gives the preponderance to Van Diemen's land.  In one particular which to the inhabitants of a civilized country is of the utmost importance both countries are but too much alike: each is amply stored with water for the common purposes of life; but deficient in those large intersections of it which in other more fortunate countries so much facilitate the operations of man and lead commerce to the door of even the most inland farmer.  Two rivers only Port Dalrymple and the Derwent are known to descend from Van Diemen's land; and by Point St. Vincent possibly there may be a third. But two rivers or even three bear but a Scanty proportion to the bulk of the island.  On the 3d of January they left the Derwent and proceeded to the northward coasting the east side of Frederick-Henry Bay which was for the most part high and steep to the sea. The figure of the shore between what is now called Cape Basaltes and Cape Pillar exhibited one of those great works of nature which seldom fail to excite surprise: it was all basaltic. The cape is a vast high wedge which projects into the sea surmounted by lofty single columns. [191]   After passing Cape Pillar some islands came in sight to the northward; but they did not fetch them owing to the wind hanging in that quarter. On the following day they reached within five or six miles of one of them which in its general appearance bore Some resemblance to Furneaux's Islands. This groupe must be either Maria's or Schouten's islands or both; but it was not determined to which they belonged.  On the 7th having until that day had but indistinct views of the land they Saw Cape Barren Island. They did not pass through the channel or passage which divides Furneaux's Islands but discovered why Captain Furneaux named the place the Bay of Shoals.  Early on the morning of the 8th they were among the islands lying off the Patriarchs. They were three in number; the largest of which was high rocky and barren with a basis of granite which like that of Preservation Island laid Scattered about in large detached blocks. Mr. Bass landed upon the outermost and found it well inhabited. The various tribes had divided it into districts. One part was white with gannets breeding in nests of earth and dried grass. Petrels and penguins had their under-ground habitations in those parts of the island which had the most grass. The rocks of the Shore and blocks of granite were occupied by the pied offensive shag and common gull; geese red-bills and quails lived in common and the rest was appropriated to the seals who seemed to be the lords of the domain. Mr. Bass remarked with surprise that though the principal herd scampered off like sheep as is usual on the first approach yet the males who possessed a rock to themselves where they fat surrounded by their numerous wives and progeny on his drawing near them hobbled up with a menacing roar and fairly commenced the attack while the wives seemed to rest their security upon the superior courage and address of their lord; for instead of retreating into the water in the utmost most consternation they only raised themselves upon their fore fins as if ready for a march keeping their eye upon him and watching the movements of his enemy. [192]   The Seal is reckoned a stupid animal; but Mr. Bass noticed many signs of uncommon Sagacity in them; and was of opinion that by much patience and perseverance a seal might be trained to fish for man; in which there is nothing at first sight more preposterous than the attempt to make a hawk his fowler.  The seal appeared to branch off into various species. He did not recollect to have seen them precisely alike upon any two islands in the strait. Most of them were of that kind called by the scalars hair Seals; but they differed in the shape of the body or of the head the situation of the fore fins the colour and very commonly in the voice as if each island spoke a peculiar language.  Having collected as much stock as was necessary they stood to the northward and on the 12th reached Port Jackson.  On delivering the account of this voyage to the governor he named the principal discovery which was the event of it Bass Strait as a tribute due to the correctness of judgment which led Mr. Bass in his first visit in the whale boat to suppose that the south-westerly winds which rolled in upon the shores of Western Port could proceed only from their being exposed to the Southern Indian Ocean.  The most prominent advantage which seemed likely to accrue to the Settlement from this discovery was the expediting of the passage from the Cape of Good Hope to Port Jackson; for although a line drawn from the Cape to 44° of south latitude and to the longitude of the south Cape of Van Diemen's land would not sensibly differ from one drawn to the latitude of 40° to the same longitude; yet it must be allowed that a ship will be four degrees nearer to Port Jackson in the latter situation than it would be in the former. But there is perhaps a greater advantage to be gained by making a passage through the strait than the mere saving of four degrees of latitude along the coast. [193] The major part of the ships that have arrived at Port Jackson have met with N. E. winds on opening the sea round the South Cape and Cape Pillar and have been so much retarded by them that a fourteen days' passage to the port is reckoned to be a fair one although the difference of latitude is but ten degrees and the most prevailing winds at the latter place are from S. E. to S. in summer and from W.S.W. to S. in winter. If by going through Bass Strait these N.E. winds can be avoided which in many cases would probably be the case there is no doubt but a week or more would be gained by it; and the expence with the wear and tear of a ship for one week are objects to most owners more especially when freighted with convicts by the run.  This strait likewise presents another advantage. From the prevalence of the N. E. and easterly winds off the South Cape many suppose that a passage may be made from thence to the westward either to the Cape of Good Hope or to India; but the fear of the great unknown bight between the South Cape and the S. W. Cape of Lewen's land lying in about 35° south and 113° east has hitherto prevented the trial being made. Now the strait removes a part of this danger by presenting a certain place of retreat should a gale oppose itself to the ship in the first part of the essay; and should the wind come at S.W. the need not fear making a good stretch to the W.N.W. which course if made good is within a few degrees of going clear of all. There is besides King George the Third's Sound discovered by Captain Vancouver situate in the latitude of 35° 03' South and longitude 118' 12' east; and it is to be hoped that a few years will disclose many others upon the coast as well as the confirmation or futility of the conjecture that a still larger than Bass Strait dismembers New Holland. [194]   The vessel that has the credit of having first circumnavigated Van Diemen's land was built at Norfolk-Island of the fir of that country which was found to answer extremely well. Being only five-and-twenty tons in burthen her comforts and accommodation must have been very inconsiderable but great when compared with those which could have been found in a whale boat. Yet in a whale boat did Mr. Bass as has been already shewn run down the eastern coast of New South Wales from Port Jackson to the entrance of the strait. Captain Flinders has not the gratification of associating this gentleman with him in his present expedition he having failed on another voyage and a different pursuit. [195]     CHAP. XVII. [...]   We must now return to the other concerns of the settlement from which we have been so long absent.  Some pleas of debt having been decided by the civil magistrates to relieve them from that duty and enable them to attend to that only of the justice of the peace an order was issued declaring that such pleas belonged to the court of civil jurisdiction solely as was clearly expressed in the letters patent for establishing that court; but they were at the same time requested to use their utmost endeavours as far as their influence as magistrates could be effectual in recommending the settling of trifling debts by arbitration and thereby prevent much vexatious litigation.  Agricultural concerns wore as unpromising an appearance in this as in the last month. The governor in a visit which he made to Parramatta found that the pasture over the whole country had been entirely burnt up; in consequence of which the grazing cattle were in great distress; and from the lamentable continuance of the drought the maize was every where likely to fail: a misfortune that would ruin the stock of hogs and reduce the settlement considerably in the article of bread. [196]   That he might ascertain what quantity of grain he had to depend on all those who cultivated ground were directed to give in by a certain time a return of the wheat and other grain in their possession.  By the Diana whaler which arrived from Norfolk-Island in-formation was received that the wheat harvest had been more productive there than usual; but the maize was likely to fall short from a similar want of rain.  Wheat at this time bore a high price in Norfolk-Island the settlers who had railed refusing to sell it on account of the high rate of wages at less than fifteen shillings per bushel.  On the night of the 24th the acting commissary's house was broken into and robbed of articles to a considerable amount. The thieves appeared to have got in at the office window and loosened the bricks of a partition wall; by which Opening they got into the store-room and forcing the locks off the chests and trunks carried away every thing that they could manage.  One evil among others which attended the frequent arrival of ships in the port was the ready market which these plunderers found for disposing of their stolen goods; the seamen not hesitating to become the purchasers on leaving the place.  The criminal court of judicature was assembled at the close of the month; when one man a serjeant of the New South Wales corps was condemned for forgery but recommended to the governor's mercy by the court; another was condemned for a burglary and a third Sentenced to receive a severe corporal punishment for having shot a native (man) at Botany Bay. Could the evidence of Some of these people have been taken it was supposed that he would have been capitally convicted in which case he would certainly have suffered the governor being determined to put that article of his Majesty's instructions in force which in placing these people under the protection of the British Government enjoined the punishing any injury done to their persons or property according to the degree and nature of the offence. [197]   When this man was brought out to be punished several of the natives were assembled for the purpose; and he received in their presence as much of his sentence as he could bear they witnessing his sufferings with the most perfect indifference.  The weather was exceedingly hot during the whole of January.  February. Deplorable was the catalogue of events that presented itself in this month: executions robberies and accidents.  On the 8th a prisoner who had been condemned to die by the last court suffered the Sentence of the law. The recollection of his untimely end and his admonitions from the fatal tree could not have departed from the minds of those who saw and heard him when another court Sent another offender to the same tree and for the same crime. Samuel Wright had been once before respited at the gallows. On the morning of his execution the wretched man attempted to cut his throat; but as he only very slightly wounded himself it may be supposed that he merely hoped by delaying the execution to gain time to effect an escape.  Before this court was brought part of a nest of thieves who had lately stolen property to the amount of Several hundred pounds; but none of them were capitally convicted being sentenced either to be transported to Norfolk-Island or corporally punished.  It might be supposed that these executions and punishments would have operated as a check to the commission of offences; but they appeared to be wholly disregarded and enormity had not yet attained its full height.  On the night of the 11th between the hours of eleven and twelve the public gaol at Sydney which cost so much labour and expence to erect was set on fire and soon completely consumed. [198]   The building was thatched and there was not any doubt of its having been done through design. But if this was the fact it will be read with horror that at the time there were confined within its walls twenty prisoners most of whom were loaded with irons and who with difficulty were matched from the flames. Feeling for each other was never imputed to these miscreants; and yet if several were engaged in the commission of a crime they have Seldom been known to betray their companions in iniquity.  To complete this catalogue of offences a few days after some Irish convicts with their faces blackened attacked the house of an industrious man (one of the missionaries) whom they Severely wounded in Several places and plundered of all his property.  Were it not evident that certain punishment awaited the conviction of offenders it might be supposed that a relaxation of the civil authority had begotten impunity; but far otherwise was the fact: The police was vigilant the magistrates active and the governor ever anxious to support them and with incessant diligence endeavouring to establish good order and morality in the Settlement. But much was the depravity of these people from the habitual practice of vice that they were become alike fearless of the punishments of this or of the world to come.  Notwithstanding the Settlement had before it the serious prospect of wanting grain and the consequent destruction of much useful flock it was known that several people had erected stills and provided materials for the purpose of distilling Spirituous liquors; a pernicious practice which had long been forbidden by every officer who had had the direction of the colony. Former orders on this subject were now repeated and persons of all descriptions were called upon to use every means in their power in aid of the civil magistrate to Seize and destroy such stills and materials as they might find.  Presuming on the late inefficient harvest the Settlers requested again to be Supplied with Seed wheat from the store but were refused. [199]   It was well known that they sold for Spirits to the last bushel of their crop and left their families without bread. Then they pleaded poverty and distress and their utter inability to repay what they had borrowed. When seed has been lent them they have not unfrequently been seen to sell it at the door of the store whence they had received it!  On the last day of the month a man belonging to the military was found dead sitting upright against the outside of the barrack paling. It was known that he had been much intoxicated the preceding night ; and it was supposed that being unable to reach his hut he had sat himself down and falling asleep passed from this life without a struggle.  The great drought and excessive heat had affected the water. Such ponds as still retained any were reduced So very low that most of them were become brackish and scarcely drinkable. From this circumstance it was conjectured that the earth contained a large portion of salt for the ponds even on the high grounds were not fresh. The woods between Sydney and Parramatta were completely on fire the trees being burnt to the tops and every blade of grams was destroyed.  To defeat as much as possible the intentions of those who were concerned in Setting fire to the gaol a strong and permanent building of stone with very Substantial walls was begun in this month and was well calculated to defy every Such attempt in future.  March.] The dry weather which had So long prevailed to the great detriment of the cultivated and pasture grounds was succeeded by rain for two or three days which greatly refreshed the gardens that were nearly wholly burnt up and every where revived the perishing vegetation. At the Hawkesbury however an accident occurred which although not to ruinous to the colony at large as the drought proved most destructive to the settlers in that district. This river suddenly and in the course of a very few hours swelled to the height of fifty feet above its common level and with much rapidity and power as to carry every thing before it. [200] The government store-house which had been erected at the first settling of this part of the country was not out of the reach of this inundation and was swept away with all the provisions that it contained. Many of the inhabitants were taken off from the ridges of their houses by a few boats which they fortunately had among them just in time to save their lives; for most of the dwellings were inundated and the whole country appeared like an extensive lake. Many hogs other live stock poultry with much of the produce of the last unfortunate harvest and the domestic effects of the people were hurried away by the torrent. Fortunately only one life was lost.  This was a most Serious calamity; and no cause having appeared to indicate an approaching overflow of the river the settlers were not prepared for such a disaster. It was Said that the natives fore-saw it and advised the inhabitants; but this wanted confirmation. if true the trait was a favourable one. There could however be no doubt that unperceived by our people a heavy fall of rain had taken place in the interior of the country among the mountains and which from the parched state of the land for Such a length of time had in no part been absorbed but ran down the Sides of the hills as from mountains of solid rock filling all the low grounds and branches of the river which being in form Suddenly Serpentine could not give vent so fast as the waters descended.  It was hoped and believed that this uncommon inundation would in the end prove highly beneficial to the grounds so overflowed causing them for a season or more to produce with Such abundance as to recover the lots which the sufferers had sustained. In a few days this extraordinary collection of water had found its way to the Sea and the river regaining its usual level the Settlers set about new cropping their grounds; for which purpose they made application for seed wheat that certainly could not be refused; their other application for bedding and clothing it was not so easy to comply with from the poverty of the public stores in these articles. [201]   This fertile Spot had in Some seasons produced from fifteen to twenty thousand bushels of wheat and might justly be termed the granary of New South Wales.  To relieve the inhabitants in Some degree from the contemplation of these distresses the Rebecca a whaler came into the Cove from the Cape of Good Hope bringing authentic accounts of Lord Nelson's memorable and brilliant victory over the French fleet at the Mouth of the Nile This decisive battle was announced to the settlement in a public order and by a discharge of all the artillery in the colony.  The master of the Rebecca having brought out a few articles for sale chartered the Nautilus to take them to Norfolk Island thinking to find a better market for them there than at this place where the late unsuccessful harvest had neither filled the granary of the public nor the pocket of the settler. She failed with this cargo in the course of a few days.  On the 9th the Britannia whaler came in from sea to repair some damages which she had sustained in bad weather. She had been rather successful in her fishery having procured twenty-five tons of spermaceti oil since her departure; and the master reported that had the weather been more moderate he should have been enabled to have more than half filled his ship.  The criminal court was only once assembled during this month; when one man was condemned to death for a burglary and another transported for fourteen years to Norfolk-Island.  The civil court was also assembled for the decision of private causes in which it was engaged during a week. [202]   Among other public works in hand were the raising the walls of the new gaol laying the upper floor of the wind-mill and erecting the churches at Sydney and Parramatta. Most of these buildings did not advance So rapidly as the necessity for them required owing to the weakness of the public gangs; and indeed scarcely had there ever been a thorough day's labour much as is performed by a labouring man in England obtained from them. They never felt themselves interested in the effect of their work knowing that the ration from the store whatever it might be would be issued to them whether they earned it or not; unlike the labouring man whose subsistence and that of his family depends upon his exertions. For the individual who would pay them for their services with spirits they would labour while they had strength to lift the hoe or the axe; but when government required the production of that strength it was not forthcoming; and it was more to be wondered that under such disadvantages so much rather than that So little had been done. The convicts whose services belonged to the crown were for the most part a wretched worthless dissipated Set who never thought beyond the present moment; and they were for ever employed in rendering that moment as easy to themselves as their invention could enable them.  Of the settlers and their disposition much has been already said. The assistance and encouragement which from time to time were given them they were not found to deserve. The greater part had originally been convicts; and it is not to be supposed that while they continued in that state their habits were much improved. With these habits then they became freemen and settlers; the effect of which was to render them insolent and presuming; and most of them continued a dead weight upon the government without reducing the expences of the colony.  These expences were certainly great and had been considerably increased. The settlement was at this time much in want of many necessary articles of life; and when these were brought by speculators and traders who occasionally touched there they demanded more than five hundred per cent above what the Same articles could have been sent out for from England with every addition of freight insurance &c. [203] They saw the wants of the colony and availed themselves of its necessities.  April. On the first of this month the criminal court met for the trial of a Soldier belonging to the regiment who had a few days before stabbed a seaman of the Reliance who insulted him when centinel at one of the wharfs at Sydney. The man died of the wound; the Soldier being called upon to answer for his death proved to the satisfaction of the court that it had been occasioned by the intemperance of the seaman and he was accordingly found to have committed a justifiable homicide.  This accident was the effect of intoxication to which a few days after another victim was added in the person of a female who was either the wife or companion of Simon Taylor a man who had been considered as one of the few industrious settlers which the colony could boast of. They had both been drinking together to a great excess; and in that state they quarrelled when the unhappy man in a fit of madness and desperation put an untimely end to her existence. He was immediately taken into custody and reserved for trial.  To this pernicious practice of drinking to excess more of the crimes which disgraced the colony were to be ascribed than to any other cause; and more lives were lost through this than through any other circumstance; for the settlement had ever been free from epidemical or fatal diseases. How much then was the importation of Spirits to be lamented! How much was it to be regretted that it had become the interest of any set of people to vend them!  Several robberies which at this time had been committed were to be imputed to the same source.  A new enemy to agriculture made its appearance in this month. A destructive grub-worm was discovered in several parts of the cultivated ground; and at the Hawkesbury a caterpillar had commenced its ravages wherever it found any young grain just shooting out of the earth. [204] This occasioned some delay in Sowing the government ground.  It having been for several days reported that the crews of two boats which had been permitted to go to Hunter's River for a load of coals had been cut off by the natives the governor ordered his whale boat to be well armed and to proceed thither in quest of the boats and their crews; Sending in her Henry Hacking a person on whom he could depend.   At ten o'clock this morning the New South Wales Corps and inhabitants attended at the place of execution and Robert Jillet the criminal under sentence of Death and James Hailey left the Gaol; Jillet appeared at first little affected at his Situation; but when the cart reached the Provision Store for robbing of which he had been convicted he burst into tears as he also did at the upper end of Pitt's Row when passing by the avenue which led to his former habitation. here the recollection of his family overwhelmed him with an anguish which if possible heightened as he approached the intended place of execution. Hailey had read several passages of Scripture to him on the way to which the Criminal paid much attention but afterwards upbraided him in harsh terms declaring that he had not assisted in concealing the cask found in the cooper-age (the circumstances of which are stated in the trial of the prisoner in our last week's paper). When arrived at the awful Spot the prisoner got out of the cart and was received by the Rev. Mr. Marsden who had attended him while under sentence and who now emphatically performed the duties of his function. Jillet again ascended the cart and after he had been delivered over to the executioner his Reprieve was received and published by the Provost Marshal. Convulsed with unspeakable joy and gratitude for so unexpected an extension of mercy he fell motionless and for some moments continued in a state of insensibility; when he recovered he was taken back to his late confinement.  James Hailey late cooper at His Majesty's Stores now heard his sentence read in pursuance of which he received 200 lashes under the gallows; an example by which we earnestly trust others may be deterred from the commission of such offences. [146]   The Store attendants at Sydney Parramatta Castle-Hill and Hawkesbury were indiscriminately ordered to attend on the occasion to be spectators of the punishment.  To the Printer of the Sydney Gazette  SIR  By an attentive perusal of a Moral Contemplation contained in your Publication of last Week I feel it my duty to assist the exertions of AMICUS however feeble my capacity.  A consciousness of the blessings we enjoy may truly be considered as indispensible to human happiness; though we oftentimes regard with thankless indifference those comforts to have hoped for which might in all probability at a former period have been considered a presumption; whence it may be generally inferred that ambition is subservient more to our immediate circumstance than to the dominion of reason and that we sometimes sacrifice the blessings of composure and tranquillity to indulging in the anticipations of unbridled fancy. [100]   From the word ambition may be understood a desire to be or perhaps only to be considered as moving in a sphere or being possessed of qualities to which we may not reasonably pretend. These qualities may be briefly distinguished into natural and accidental; the first existing in the mind the latter derived from the possession of riches both of which are capable of improvement and of being applied to the general advantage of society few are stimulated to obtain a rank with the former; but many supposing the latter within their reach perpetually devote themselves to hope doubt and fear alternately and in pursuit of a shadow lose the substance altogether. ...  Society may be compared with a magnificent structure which step by step ascends to its most elevated and exalted pinnacle the symmetry of which is equally dependent upon all its parts; in either of these if an imperfection be discovered it must for the benefit of the whole be rooted out. To the human mind the allusion may also be applied as a single blemish must disfigure and if not eradicated in time destroy the fabric. Most of our evils originate in discontent of our circumstances and situations to alter or AMEND which recourse is too frequently had to a precipitancy by which we are enveloped in surrounding storms.  It may fastidiously be argued that contentment is not indiscriminately attainable to every rank in life; but to so shallow a presumption it may be answered that the blessing exists only in the mind in which it assumes an angel shape that can minister consolation in the most humble retreat.  The labouring orders in this Colony are amply furnished with the materials requisite to contentment in the exercise of industry and the consequent reward to all that are deserving. The fields and forests alike present resources and their comforts are lessened or increased by their frugality oeconomy and perseverance. These are essential qualities easy of attainment and principally constitute the duties of the poor.  PHILO  On the evening of Saturday the 7th instant a Celebration of Nuptials took place on the Rocks at which a numerous group of congratulants assembled to greet the enamoured TOUCHSTONE and his beloved AUDREY. - Compliments at an end the circling planet of the board was briskly courted and a fidler [sic] with his merry crowd received a universal welcome: the merry dance commenced and the fair bride led down the Country Bumpkin which was performed in character. The Cheshire rounds and Irish trot were also gone through with equal success after which a contest for the BREECHES ensued but was determined in favour of Madam Beatrice and the ladies at parting withdrew in triumph.  On Monday evening a grand serenade of CULINARY instruments waited on the new-married pair which in harmony came little short of marrow-bones and cleavers. The musicians demanded a fee imposed by custom and which being complied with the YOUNG couple were left to their domestic QUIET.  MARRIED.  Yesterday se'nnight by the Rev. Mr Dixon of the Church of Rome Henry Simpson shipwright to Catharine Rourke of the Rocks Widow.  SYDNEY June 26 1803.  The following melancholy account has been given by John Place who now lies in a very weak state in Parramatta Hospital of an attempt made by him and three of his fellow prisoners to escape from this Colony to China.  Place who appears to be the only survivor resigned himself to despair and death and was when found within a few hours of eternity.  John Place declares that he John Cox William Knight and John Phillips all prisoners that came in the Glatton formed a resolution to attempt their escape. They formed this determination in consequence of having heard people say on board the Glatton and while at work at Castle-Hill that they could get to China by which means they would obtain their liberty again. Being all married men (except one) they were very anxious to return to their families.  On the seventh of May they left Cornwallis place at the Hawkesbury resolved to pass the mountains and took with them only their week's rations which they received on the Saturday but consumed by the Wednesday following.  After travelling for seventeen days in hopes of passing the mountains they at last despaired of accomplishing that object and they resolved (if possible) to return. During this time they had found nothing to subsist on but wild-currants and sweet-tea leaves and had been oppressed with hunger for twelve days.  Being asked in what direction they went Place says that they travelled the whole of the seventeen days with the sun on their right shoulder and found great difficulty in ascending some of the mountains.  Before they set off to return John Phillips left them to gather some berries and they saw him no more; they heard him call several times but could render him no assistance and conclude he perished.  After travelling for upwards of twenty days all (except Phillips) reached within five miles of Richmond-Hill when William Knight unable to proceed any further lay down where Place says he must have died.  On the same day Place and Cox made the river above Richmond-Hill and in attempting to cross the fall the current carried them down. One was carried to one side of the river the other to the opposite side and with difficulty pulling themselves ashore by the branches of the trees. Cox had only his shirt and shoes on Place saw him lain along the bank where being very weak and the night extremely cold he supposes he died.  Place also lay down despairing of life and was found on the following day by a man who with some of the natives was in quest of kangaroos. He was then too weak to walk alone but was led by the natives to the nearest hut.  The above awful admonition will deter all others who now do or shall in future entertain any idea of regaining their liberty by a similiar act in which nothing but inevitable death must be the final event. It should be needless to add that CHINA DOES NOT LAY BEYOND THE MOUNTAINS.  UNEXAMPLED INHUMANITY of the Sealer CHARLES of Boston.  SYDNEY 27th of December 1803  The Schooner Governor King Messrs. Kable and Underwood with 37 Tons of Oil and about 700 Skins arrived at this port yesterday from King's Island.  In his way hither Mr. Moody Master of that vessel touched at Kent's Group where the sealer Charles of Boston Captain Percival then lay to refit. Mr. Moody relates that the greatest violence was offered by the Americans to the schooner's people some of whom were treated with unexampled inhumanity.  The crew of the Governor King consisted only of nine men besides the master; seven of these were landed for the purpose of sealing and when upon return to the vessel they were met on the beach by the people of the Charles armed and drawn up in a double rank through which they were ordered to run down to one of the American's boats with threats of the worst of consequences upon a refusal to comply.  The others not observing with the readiness insisted on were immediately seized their hands bound behind and thrown into the boat headlong with some severe blows. They were then conveyed to a small island destitute of water where they continued six hours before Mr. Moody who had remained on board discovered their distressed situation; and then was not permitted to release them but upon express condition that the Governor King should be under way before a boat was dispatched to take them on board. To which demand he was compelled from his Own inferiority in strength and number to accede without hesitation or demur.  One of his people Mr. Moody declares to have been so violently beaten about the head with a pistol for refusing to submit to being bound as that some of the splinters of the stock remained in his head until the vessel was entirely clear of the Group.  Mr. Moody further states that upon his offering to remonstrate against so unprincipled a conduct and urged the protection afforded by our Government to of Boston.  the Trade the master of the Charles descended to scurrility presumptuous and unbecoming in any individual let his circumstances be what they might.  In justification of this act of violence the master of the Charles alleged that he had landed his freight in order to careen his ship and therefore would not suffer his property to be exposed to casualty by permitting a lot of depredators to remain upon the Island.  But to such a vindication we must observe that there could be no actual necessity for so rigorous a proceeding as with an armed ship and more than triple the complement of men it would have been as easy to protect his property in cases of real emergency as to commit so unpriviledged and unprovoked a violence upon a few defenceless people.  In another instance also has Captain Percival shown himself altogether regardless of those observances which as a subject of the United States of America enjoying an uninterrupted Trade to the Islands in the Straits where he had procured a freight of upwards of 300 tons of oil he undoubtedly should have not lost sight of.  An interference with our Colonial concerns it was his duty to avoid; but on the contrary he chose to take away some of the most useful people from the gangs for which he could not avail himself of necessity as a plea; his ship being already more than sufficiently manned. This proceeding has been highly prejudicial to the interests of our own Adventurers.  Such is the veneration for the American Character that we should willingly have passed over in silence an outrage committed by a few inconsiderate individuals but from the very material considerations that we should have exposed ourselves to censure as being unconscious of our duty to the Colonial Trader who although incompetent to retaliate violence and insult may when apprised endeavour to avoid a treatment to which he could only submit with unavailing resentment and regret.  AN ANIMAL whose species was never before found in the Colony is in His Excellency's possession. When taken it had two Pups one of which died a few days since. [...] This creature is somewhat larger than the Waumbut and although it might at first appearance be thought much to resemble it nevertheless differs from that animal. The fore and hind legs are about of an equal length having five sharp talons at each of the extremities with which it must have climbed the highest trees with much facility. The fur that covers it is soft and fine and of a mixed grey colour; the ears are short and open; the graveness of the visage which differs little in colour from the back would seem to indicate a more than ordinary portion of animal sagacity; and the teeth resemble those of a rabbit. The surviving Pup generally clings to the back of the mother or is caressed with a serenity that appears peculiarly characteristic; it has a false belly like the opposum and its food consists solely of gum leaves in the choice of which it is excessively nice.  ON TUESDAY the 15th ultimo Fifteen Labouring Men fled from the Agricultural Settlement at Castle Hill after having committed many acts of violence and atrocity. They at first forcibly entered the dwelling-house of M. Declamb which they ransacked and stripped of many articles of plate wearing apparel some fire and sidearms provisions spirituous and vinous liquors a quality of which they drank or wasted in the house. They next proceeded to the farm houses of Bradley and Bean at Balkham Hills. Mrs Bradley's servant man they wantonly and inhumanly discharged a pistol at the contents of which have so shattered his face as to render him a ghastly spectacle in all probability during the remainder of his life In Mrs Bean's house they gave aloose to sensuality equally brutal and unmanly. Resistance was of no avail for their rapacity was unbridled. Numerous ravages however could not long escape the certain tread of Justice.  Two of the depredators were taken into custody upon the second day after their flight near the Hawkesbury road by Mr Jamieson junior assisted by A. Thomson. Chief Constable at Hawkesbury and a party of the Military who had been dispatched in pursuit of them. Upon these men were found several articles of property that had been taken from the dwelling-house of Mr Declamb; as were also two musquets. On the day following they underwent an Examination before a Magistrate by whom they were fully committed and sent to Sydney under an escort.  On the 23rd ultimo Eleven more of the desperadoes were secured by a party of the Military and Constables between Hawkesbury and the Mountains. Information had been given of their haunt by a body of natives shortly after they had broke into the house of a settler where they had stopped to grind a quantity of wheat at a steel mill having previously secured the family and afterwards stripped the house of all such provisions as they could conveniently carry off together with two stands of arms. They were also taken before a Magistrate fully committed and brought to Sydney under a sufficient guard. [228]   Justice to the Prisoners at large in the Colony requires that we should here observe that this banditti is entirely composed of Irish prisoners brought by the Hercules and Atlas.  PIRATICAL SEIZURE OF THE COLONIAL VESSEL CUMBERLAND.  In the beginning of September 1797 a boat named the Cumberland the largest and best in the colony belonging to government was on her passage to the Hawkesbury whither she was carrying a few stores taken possession of by a part of the boat's crew; being at the same time boarded by a small boat from the shore the people in which seized and put off to sea first landing the coxswain and three others who were unwilling to accompany them in Pitt Water in Broken Bay. Those men proceeded overland to Port Jackson where they gave the first information of this daring and piratical transaction. Two boats well manned and armed were immediately dispatched after them under the command of Lieutenant Shorthand of the Reliance.  One of these boats returned in a few days without having seen any thing of them; but Lieutenant Shortland proceeded with the other a whale boat as far as Port Stephens where he thought it probable they might have taken shelter; but on the 19th having been absent thirteen days he returned without discovering the smallest trace of them or the boat. His pursuit however had not been without its advantage; for on his return he entered a river which he named Hunter river about ten leagues to the southward of Port Stephens into which he carried three fathoms water in the shoalest part of its entrance finding deep water and good anchorage within.  The entrance of this river was but narrow and covered by a high rocky Island lying right off it so as to leave a good passage round the north end of the island between that and the shore. A reef connects the south part of the island with the south shore of the entrance of the river. In this harbour was found a very considerable quantity of coal of a very good sort and lying so near the water side as to be conveniently shipped.  The month of October opened with a repetition of the vexatious circumstances that marked the opening of the preceeding month. In the night of the 2nd a boat was taken from Parramatta by some people who got unobserved out of the harbour. The three men who were put on shore from the Cumberland at the time she was seized upon from an unwillingness to accompany them being in this party it was supposed they were connected in some way with those who were in that boat and whom they might know where to find. An armed boat from the Supply was immediately dispatched after them; but in three days returned as unsuccessful as Lieutenant Shorthand had unfortunately been in his search.  From this circumstance there was reason to suppose they had stood off from the land; in which case as the weather since their departure had been unusually bad the wind blowing a gale from the southward with much rain and their boat being a very bad one it was probable they had perished.  In these two boats 15 convicts had made their escape from the settlement; six of whom had been transported for life; six others were from Ireland of whose term of transportation no account had been sent out; and of the remainder one had to serve until the 23rd of May 1799 another until the 2nd of April 1801 and the third until the 15th of April 1804.  Whatever might be the fate of these people the evil was of great extent; since all that could be known of them to their fellow prisoners was that they had successfully effected their escape. Had Bryan and his party who went off with one of the King's boats in the year 1791 instead of meeting with the compassion and lenity which were expressed in England for their sufferings been sent back and tried in New South Wales for taking away the boat and other thefts which they had committed it was probable that others might have been deterred from following their example.  At half past eleven o'clock on Sunday night 4th of March 1804 an express was received by HIS EXCELLENCY from Captain ABBOT Commanding Officer at Parramatta with intelligence that the Prisoners at Public Labour at Castle Hill and the Settlers' men were in a state of Insurrection and had already committed many daring Outrages.  Sydney was instantaneously alarmed the Military and Inhabitants were under Arms; the Captain Officers Marines and Ships Company of His Majesty's Ship CALCUTTA came on shore in ten minutes after the alarm was given and by the Governor's Orders all Horses throughout the Town were held in requisition.  At a quarter past Twelve Lieut. Hobby brought in an account of the outrages committed at Castle Hill stating that the Insurgents were in great force and advancing towards Parramatta in different directions. His EXCELLENCY gave Orders for the necessary measures to be promptly adopted and leaving His Honor the LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR in Command at Sydney got on Horse-back and proceeded unattended towards Parramatta but was overtaken near Major Johnston's by the Provost Marshal four Troopers and several confidential Persons mounted. One of the Troopers was despatched to the Major from His Excellency requesting him to take Command of a Company of the New South Wales Corps then on their march from Sydney; the Governor with his small retinue proceeding onwards to Parramatta where he arrived without interruption at 4 in the morning when he received information from Capt. Abbot that a great body of Insurgents all armed were at the Park Gate at the West Entrance to Parramatta.  Major JOHNSTON with the Detachment arrived at Parramatta Barracks at 5 o'clock; and after himself Officers and Soldiers had taken a hasty refreshment they proceeded to Government House for Orders. From the imperious necessity of putting an immediate & effectual stop to the progress of the Insurgents the Governor issued a Proclamation declaring Martial Law.  As information was received that the Insurgents were in several bodies Major Johnston with QuarterMaster Laycock & 25 Non-Commissioned Officers and Privates of the New South Wales Corps accompanied by a Trooper and several of the Constables & Inhabitants at half-past 6 proceeded by way of Toongabbee; Lieutenant Davis with an equal number of Soldiers proceeded along the Castle Hill Road that place being appointed for the Rendezvous in case nothing should occur to make those Officers alter the directions they were under.  Major Johnston on arriving at Toongabbee received information that a considerable Body were on their way to the Hawkesbury. Notwithstanding the fatigue of his small Detachment in marching up from Sydney and the distance they had gone since they immediately ran in good Order with their followers and after a pursuit of Seven Miles farther Major Johnston and a Trooper who had preceded the Detachment came up with the rear of the Insurgents at 11 o'clock whose numbers have since been ascertained to be 233 men armed with Musquets Pistols Swords &c and a number of followers which they had taken from the Settlers.  After calling to them repeatedly they halted and formed on the rise of a Hill. The Major and Trooper advanced within pistol shot and endeavoured to persuade them to submit to the Mercy that was offered them by the Proclamation which they refused. The Major required to see their Chiefs who after some deliberation met them halfway between the Detachment and the Insurgents when by great presence of mind and address the Major presented his Pistol at the head of the Principal leader (Philip Cunningham) and the Trooper following his motions presented his Pistol also to the other leader's head (Wm. Johnston) and drove them into the Detachment without the least opposition from the body of the Insurgents.  Major Johnston immediately ordered QuarterMaster Laycock to advance with the Detachment &c and cut the body to pieces which immediately filed off and fled in all directions pursued by the Detachment and followers; several shots were fired by the Insurgents without effect. As the pursuit was along the Road and on each side in the Woods the number of dead are not yet ascertained; nine Bodies were found about the Road and several were known to be killed in the pursuit through the Woods. A number were overtaken and made Prisoners among whom was the Leader (Philip Cunningham) who to all appearances was left dead on the Road.  The pursuit continued on to the Hawkesbury where the Detachment arrived at 4 in the afternoon with several Prisoners after a forced march or rather running 35 Miles. Lieutenant Davis being joined by Lieutenant Brabyn with a reinforcement of thirty Soldiers joined the Major at 9 o'clock that night Philip Cunningham the principal leader who was carried among the wounded to Hawkesbury being still alive and very properly considered by Major Johnston as a proper object to make an immediate example of by virtue of the Martial Law that then existed and the discretionary power given him by His Excellency and after taking the opinions of the Officers about him directed him to be publicly executed on the Stair Case of the Public Store which he had boasted in his march he was going to plunder.  As the principal Body was dispersed the Detachment returned to Parramatta on Wednesday morning with a great number of Prisoners taken in Arms; and on Thursday morning received His Excellency's personal Approbation and Thanks for their animated and Soldier-like Conduct & great perseverance in the fatigues they had undergone. [31]   Seventy of the Insurgents armed with musquets of which they had stripped the Settlers commanded by Humes having missed joining the main body were concealed about the Castle Hill Road which occupied the attention of the Detachment and Association at Parramatta. After the defeat the Insurgents took advantage of the Proclamation which extended Grace to those who gave themselves up in 24 hours & great numbers were constantly coming in and delivering themselves up from noon on Monday and others were brought in Prisoners with their Arms by Lieutenants Davis and Brabyn's Parties.  It appears that the conspiracy had been in agitation upwards of a Month but unlike all other attempts of the kind was kept a profound secret until two days previous to its breaking out. Capt Abbot and the Rev Mr Marsden then received information which they transmitted to Head Quarters; but as so many things of the kind had been in agitation before and never could be brought to a point no other notice was taken of it than using common precautions.  Every arrangement that was made by these infatuated people sufficiently evinced that some persons yet unknown but not unsuspected at Parramatta and Sydney had the principal direction of these plans and were only waiting the success of Cunningham's exertions.  The alarm began at Castle Hill about 8 o'clock on Sunday night where there are upwards of 200 Irish Prisoners (sent here for Seditious Practices in Ireland) by setting a House on fire and ringing the Bell when Cunningham appeared as the avowed leader vociferating the cries of "DEATH OR LIBERTY!" and assuring those who were joining him (and others who say they were compelled) that Sydney and Parramatta was in their possession that they had nothing to do but obey his orders and plunder the Settlers of their Arms (for which purpose parties were sent off in different directions) and after being united to march to Hawkesbury where they were assured of their force being augmented to 1100 men with which they were to return to Castle Hill on Tuesday morning to breakfast march to Parramatta for the possession of which two well known disaffected persons were to be answerable. After planting the Tree of Liberty at Government House they were to proceed to Sydney the possession of which was also supposed secured by three disaffected characters and then embark on board the Ships which would also be ready to receive them.  Such a tale joined to the principles of the body he was haranguing removed all doubt & such was the activity of the different Parties that every Settler in the wide extended range from the Field of Mars round by Parramatta Baulkham and Seven Hills Prospect Hill and Toongabbee were completely stripped of their Arms and Ammunition by Six in the Morning which in their contest with Major Johnston ammounted to 136 Musquets fourteen Pistols and a great number of swords bayonets on poles and pitch-forks; and there is little doubt that if any of the prompt measures that were adopted on the exigence of the moment had been omitted the Banditti would have increased their numbers and strength considerably at the Hawkesbury where they were going Seconded the Plans of their concealed directors and given confidence to those who were then wavering or waiting for the Insurgents' success. What added greatly to the check given by the main body being routed was the circumstance of 50 armed men under Humes and 70 under Johnston having lost themselves.  Several parties of Settlers and others now pursued the Insurgents in all directions; and from Monday noon to Friday evening upwards of 300 were taken or gave themselves up most of whom were dismissed and sent to their respective labour with a caution and reprimand. Ten of those who were selected from upwards of 200 men as being most forward including the two leaders Johnston and Humes were tried on Thursday at Parramatta by General Court Martial when they were all sentenced to be hanged - Johnston and Humes to be hung in Chains.  A part of the sentence was carried into execution at 6 o'clock Thursday evening upon Humes Charles Hill and John Place who acknowledged the justice of their sentence. Humes gave much important information respecting the secret Contrivers. On Friday morning Johnston Harrington and Neale were executed at Castle Hill Johnston giving similiar information to Humes's and asserted that those engaged in the late tumultuous proceedings were the victims of a very few who contrived and abetted in secret the Horrors which have deprived several of their lives in undertaking the enormous Crimes they were about to perpetrate. On Saturday Brannan and Hogan suffered at Sydney Burke and M'Cormick being Reprieved. Five others received Corporal Punishment; and about thirty were ordered to different Gaol gangs.  Thus ended the sudden Insurrection of the deluded Objects of the Artful designs of some unknown but not unsuspected Miscreants who now lament their diabolical schemes miscarrying. They did not expect the great assistance given to His Excellency's measures which the exigency of the moment required or the absurdity of the seditious designs when opposed to the steady Exertions of preserving Loyalty which has so generally prevailed in the late Event.  On Friday afternoon Major JOHNSTON'S Detachment marched into Sydney where they were received by the Regiment and dismissed amidst the congratulations of their Comrades and Spectators; and on Saturday morning His EXCELLENCY arrived at Sydney after repealing Martial Law in the Interior.  On his arrival at the Regimental Parade he was received by Lieut-Colonel PATERSON at the head of the New South Wales Corps under arms and received the Military Honours due to his Situation.  THE LADY BARLOW OVERSET BY TEMPEST.  Sydney Saturday October 20 1804  The dreadful thunder-storm from the south-west at about half-past one o'clock last Tuesday afternoon was the worst tempest experienced in this Colony; although it did not exceed 35 minutes yet every low situation was simply deluged by the rain while the humble cottage was almost afloat. The lightning was excessively vivid and from the close succession of the thunder there was considerable apprehension of its consequences but only one serious accident was occasioned by the violent blast.  We are extremely concerned to report that the very fine vessel Lady Barlow Captain M'Askill was overset and sunk at the King's outer Moorings in five fathoms and a half water but happily only one of her people a lascar was lost.  It was first considered as the dreadful accident immediately succeeded a remarkably vivid flash of lightning that it had struck and penetrated through the vessel's hull but it has since transpired that the real cause of the disaster was the violent initial wind which caught the unfortunate vessel broadside on and bore her over on her beam-ends.  Assistance was immediately rendered both from the shore and from other vessels in the port. His Excellency Governor King went off in a whale-boat and tendered to the captain every possible aid. Captain Farrell of the Fair American had already hove abreast of the ship then lying upon her broadside her weather side nearly level with the surface of the water.  The Investigator commanded by Lieutenant Houstoun by His Excellency's order was warped along-side of the Lady Barlow; the Government punt attended to take in such of the cordage and other rigging as should necessarily be cut away. Tackles were lashed to the masts of the Fair American and passed round those of the Lady Barlow to prevent any more unfavourable change in her position as no effort to raise her could then be effectual as she could not be released from her mooring chain.  She continued thus during the night but by the evening of the following day owing to the activity and prodigious perseverance used her masts were raised several feet and supported by the Investigator. Between the hours of 11 and 12 in the forenoon of Thursday we had the satisfaction to behold her upright though full of water sustained by the two vessels above mentioned.  To effect this desirable circumstance every prompt and effectual assistance was given by every indivual in the Settlement whose aid could be servicable on so melancholy an occasion.  The loss occasioned by the unfortunate event cannot be readily estimated; but we are extremely concerned to state that Captain M'Askill's loss is very considerable indeed. The whole of the provisions have also perished as well as the whole private property belonging to the officers and other individuals. Much of the oil recently put onboard by Mr. Campbell has been washed out and vast quantities floated in by the tides.  A young woman was nearly lost by drowning. She happened more by good luck than any other cause to be seated near one of the larboard ports when the ship heeled; and presenting herself at the porthole she was dragged out by a seaman humanely disposed to save her life at the hazard of his own - but finding himself unable to support both her and himself after swimming a short distance he then surrendered her to the destinies. Fortunately Mr. Harris was nearby in his boat and by timely interposition this Gentleman rescued the young woman from her watery fate.  It was extremely providential that the disaster happened at the moment when the crew were upon deck and the convict working hands who had been chiefly employed in the holds in the forenoon were on shore to dinner.  Cock-a-Doodle-Doo! A COCKFIGHT IN THE BRICKFIELDS.  I'll back my ginger to make a hit  My fine - my true GAME COCK;  The Swells can't do me in the pit;  I'm down to every lock!  I'm up to all your knowing rigs  Ye biddies queer and flash;  I'm company for scamps and prigs  Sometimes for men of cash.  A numerous concourse of persons assembled in the Brickfields on Thursday last August 8th 1805 to become spectators of a Cock-fight.  This was in decided opposition against the laws of the Magistracy; but even so amongst the number were several citizens whose character and conditions in life should have bettered their curiosity which could only be gratified in defiance to the present wholesome regulations.  The only circumstances however that can be advanced in extenuation of disorder were the unstudied effusions of loyalty that were enthusiastically reiterated during the pendency of the feathered contest.  The champion within the lists was no less than Bone-a-part a powerful party-coloured pile; his antagonist Sir Sidney a ginger of true English breed.  At setting to they were considered but as birds; until by the fluctuating accident of war they were represented to the infatuated imagination as the representatives elect of Nations whose trophies were to be affected by the issue; and if they themselves were conscious of their own importance the combatants engaged with unexampled bravery.  The genius of combat toward the conclusion inclined to the side of Bony but his antagonist unable to own a conqueror in one renovated exertion laid him at his feet. The painful shackles of suspence were broken and plaudit "sounded through the echoing hall."  Scarce was the battle ended when the appearance of a military party attended by constables by order of the Superintendant of Police gave birth to a scene the most grotesque that can possibly be imagined.  In an instant the cocks in reserve were left to settle their own disputes; the setter to set off; the heelers took to their heels; the owners disclaimed their property; and the betters thought proper to decamp without adjusting their accounts.  In beating a retreat many took into Mr. Harris's inclosures and hoping for the best pressed forward until they became as fixed as statues in the centre of the Blackwattle Swamp. They were indebted to the servants of the above Gentleman assisted by the Constables for their deliverance.  All that were secured were escorted in and lodged in gaol where they remained until they found bail for their appearance when called upon for breaking the peace; and John Cooper the proprietor of the house at which the turmoil had been held was ordered by the Superintendant of Police to find bail for his good behaviour (in keeping an orderly house) for twelve months.  The cocks found on the field of battle amounting to six in number were ordered to the Orphan School.  The day following a number of idle people assembled at Mr. Laycock's farm (formerly Boxley's) for the renewal of the sport supposing themselves out of the reach of the Magistracy; and having finished the cock-fight concluded the day's amusement by burning down the house.  VORACIOUS SWINE FATAL ACCIDENT  Of all useful animals swine are the most remarkable for voracity; and common observation may almost excite astonishment that from the very heedless mode in which they are at all hazards permitted to range in Sydney equally serious accidents to that below do not frequently occur. To enumerate the ravages of swine so far as they extend to property alone would be unfeeling and contemptible when with an aching eye we contemplate so doleful an event which occurred on Monday last.  On that day an infant of Sarah Pearce in the Brickfield's experienced a fate the most distressing that can possibly be imagined.  The mother on returning home with the little creature in her arms placed it on the bed in order that she might herself go in search of two other children but unhappily after which she closed the door and secured a young pig also within the house.  After a short interval she returned and supposing the child to be asleep paid no immediate attention to it. Some moments after to her utter astonishment and horror she accidently approached the bed and there witnessed a spectacle the horrors of which are not to be conceived. The pig had by some means mounted the bed and was then in the very act of devouring the child.  The mother's shrieks brought the neighbours to bear witness of the calamity but alas! too late to render assistance to the babe; whose face was torn to pieces and devoured; the hands of the ill-fated innocent were also mangled and destroyed owing it is probable to its incompetent resistance.  The voracious animal was shot immediately that the accident was discovered; and was afterwards burnt by the order of the Coroner. [...]   Shame on the indecent miscreant!  If detection alight upon his contemptuous crime he shall be shunned and pointed at.  BATTLES BY THE BLACKS  Although eighteen years have passed since the foundation of this Colony the Blacks in the immediate vicinity of Port Jackson still carry on their tribal warfare to the death.  SYDNEY 26th January 1806.  Yesterday a contest nearly proved fatal to Bennelong who in flying from an otherwise inevitable destruction received a spear in his hip. In spite of the assiduous training given to Bennelong by Governor Phillip and his introduction to civilizing habits during his visit to England Bennelong still remains the compleat savage given over to intemperance.  The recontre yesterday was for the purpose of inflicting punishment on Blowit the murderer of Musquito and on little Pigeon likewise who had taken an active part against the deceased.  Their assailants were Bennelong Cathai Cole-by Nanbury Wilhamanan and old White: a spear from the latter of whom striking the upper area of Blow it's shield carried away the wood and penetrated in a descending direction nearly about an inch below the left eye through the nose making a ghastly wound. Nearly at the same instant Pigeon received a spear through the leg.  Friends of these unfortunates were near at hand and Colinjong likewise esteemed for his friendly disposition towards his European acquaintances advanced with a poised spear towards Bennelong. At the instant he was about to throw he received a barbed weapon in the breast from Nanbury who was concealed in a thicket. In a few seconds Colinjong expired and Nanbury and Coleby immediately fled; but Bennelong also pursuing the same course was overtaken by his adversaries two attacking from the front and two pressing in from behind. Those in front at length obliged him to stand and he Scarcely warded off their spears when turning with surprising agility he caught also the spears from his two hindmost opponents.  Numbers were now coming up to assault him: flight was his only hope of security and how he Contrived to escape with a single wound was a matter of astonishment to all present.  The remainder of the evening was devoted to the funeral rites of poor Colinjong who it is believed will be interred today in one of the bays near Woola-Moola.  It will be recalled that on Thursday the day after Christmas last a desperate contest also took place among the natives when the opposing tribes from Broken Bay and that living between Sydney and Botany Bay made battle near the Military Barracks. The cause of the dispute was the latest love affair of Wilhamanan a native remarkable for his manly courage as well as for his outrageous manners and who recently succeeded in taking away by force the wife of a native of the Broken Bay tribe.  For a long time the warriors were prevented from conducting their war by the curiosity of the crowds of spectators including most of the soldiers of the New South Wales Corps who pressed in upon all sides. But as several Officers and Gentlemen commanded that no interruption or interference should be offered to their customs the battle shortly after commenced and in a few seconds the field groaned beneath the weight of numbers falling under the waddy whose aperient powers furnished in a twinkling of an eyelid an unpleasant spectacle of fractured heads and half-expiring veterans.  In the initial shower of spears which the combatants dodged with great dexterity a private of the New South Wales Corps received one by accident in the foot.  Their mode of assault and defence with the waddy is certainly entitled to remark: for notwithstanding the most violent rage and impetuosity yet the head is the only part guarded; every other part of the body being left open to the blow of the antagonist who never avails himself of the advantage but hammers at the head of him who endeavours to confer a lasting obligation on his own. The contest was truly spirited while it lasted.   January  Gardening: Potatoes should now be planted both in the garden and field for a general crop for the winter consumption: this is the best season of the year for planting this valuable root as these potatoes will come into use in the middle of winter and beginning of spring when cabbages turnips &c. generally run to feed: Dry wheat stubble where the land is light or new ground is the best to plant them in: The sets should be the produce of the preceding winter crop; and when planted should have a covering of light manure; for if they be planted without dung they will greatly impoverish the ground: but if manured be of very essential service to it. - Carrots may also be sown this month for a general crop; the ground should be dug very deep and broke very fine. If the ground is light sow the seed in a clam day and tread it in. Carrots may be sown for table use at several seasons of the year; [14] and Lettuces; Radishes and small Sallad for a constant supply may be sown every month.  Agriculture: The farmer should now be diligent in cleaning his Maize and breaking up the ground he intends to sow with Wheat and Barley. Experience has shewn that no certain crop can be produced if the ground is not ploughed or broken up two or three months before seed time. The longer it is exposed to the influence of the sun and air the better it will be prepared for the reception of the seed. as the summer heat will tend to kill the weeds meliorate the soil and give the farmer a greater probability of reaping the reward of his toils. Should he neglect to plough or hoe his ground till near seed time the weeds will overrun it and greatly impoverish the land; their destruction will be much more laborious and difficult; and should the autumn prove wet they may prevent him from sowing the ground he intended.  Sheep: In the beginning of this month the Ram should be sent to the old Ewe Flocks in order that they may bring forth in winter. Winter lambs will always be found much stronger and hardier sheep that those lambed in summer; they will also be ready to wean the latter end of August or the beginning of September when the spring will afford them plenty of grass; so that the young lambs will feel no check when taken from the mother. Young ewes lambed last May and June should be selected into a separate flock and kept from the ram till March: if they are suffered to remain with the flock many of them will lamb in June at the time the old ewes do. Young ewes generally rear their first lambs with difficulty; on that account they should not lamb before spring when the weather is warmer and the grass better.  February  Gardening: Ground should now be prepared for Cabbages and Turnips; at the latter end of the month should there be any gentle showers some turnips may be sown. [15] Cabbages may be sown every three months for a constant supply; all sorts of sweet herbs should be slipt this month. Trees of every kind should now be budded but the tops of the budded flocks should not be cut off till September following; when such buds as look well will make vigorous shoots. Peaches may be budded upon their own stocks or upon plumbs almonds or apricots. The English Mulberry upon the cherry or Cape; but they will take better upon the former. Oranges will succeed well upon lemons. It is better to bud all tenden [sic] trees in summer than to graft them in spring.  Agriculture: Those farmers who intend to sow turnips for sheep should now manure and prepare their land; turnip ground should be cleared from all weeds and brought by digging or ploughing and harrowing into the best state for cultivation. This is also the proper season for sowing winter barley here commonly called Cape barley as green food for horses cows sheep and hogs. It will be ready for feeding in the beginning of April or sooner: one acre of winter barley will yield an incredible quantity of green food which may either be mowed and given to cattle or fed off with any kind of stock; it will continue in constant vegetation whether cut or fed for three or four months. - This is also the best month to prepare the ground for wheat by ploughing or breaking it up with the hoe. When the ground is turned over in dry hot weather the weeds are easily destroyed - an important object the experienced farmer never loses sight of. - Ground should always if possible be turned up in dry weather to kill the weeds.  March  Gardening: This is the proper season for planting Strawberries all the runners and leaves should be cut close off before planting as this will strengthen hem greatly and they will get new leaves before the winter: they may be either kept in clumps or suffered to run over the beds: [16]   by the former method they will grow to a larger size but by the latter they are less apt to contract filth. As soon as the strawberries are cut and planted a sprinkling of fresh earth should be thrown over the beds; and when the weather is dry they should be plentifully watered two or three times a week. Strawberries require much air and ought therefore to be thinned in order to a free circulation. (When sowed in beds the method found best to succeed is the following: When the bed is well prepared plant the rows for the largest kinds (such as the Chilies and Carolinas) two feet asunder also allowing one foot between each plant in the same row. The smaller kinds do not require to de kept so far a-part; so that 18 inches between the rows and 8 from plant to plant will be generally sufficient). - This is likewise the proper season for sowing Onions for immediate use; but for a general crop they should not be sown till the latter end of April of beginning of May as they will run too much to feed if the season should be favourable. - The Fruit Trees should now be examined and all the branches broken by the fruit lopped off as well as dead limbs. Peach trees in particular will require a deal of trimming as many of their limbs will be broken down.  Agriculture: From the middle of this month to the end of April all forest land should be sown with Wheat. As the late Maize is not ripe enough to gather in March some farmers sow their wheat among the standing maize: this is very bad husbandry and ruinous to the farmer: It would be much more to his interest to let his maize stand until it is ripe; then clean and prepare his ground for the next season and only sow such land with wheat as is ready and well prepared. - Turnips should be sown for a general crop the first week in this month should the weather admit and they will be ready to give to the sheep in the beginning of May: One pound of seed is sufficient for an acre. During the time of their growth they will want hoeing twice or three times to thin them and keep them clean. - Turnips should be sown for a general crop the first week in this month should the weather admit and they will be ready to give to the sheep the beginning of May: [17] - One pound of seed is sufficient for an acre: during the time of their growth they will want hoeing twice or three times to thin them and keep them clean. - Turnips for domestic use may be sown at any time between March and September.  Sheep: The ram should be put to the young ewe flock this month; one not more than 18 months old would be better than an older ram.  April  Gardening: Asparagus haulm should now be cut down within two inches of the bed and carried off the ground: all the weeds are to be cut up with a sharp hoe; then some good rotten dung must be spread over the beds and laid in equal thickness on every part: the alleys dug one spade deep and the earth spread upon the whole. The feed of small sallad may also be sown now - onions may be sown this month for a general crop and cabbage feed lettuces &c.  Agriculture: The farmers settled upon the banks of the Hawkesbury and Nepean should consider that from the middle of April to the end of May is their best season for sowing Wheat. Early sown wheat generally yields better is a much more certain crop and not so subject to the caterpillar smut rust and blight to which late wheat is always liable. Forward wheat is too near maturity to be much injured in the beginning of November when the close hot sultry weather with scarce a breath of air sets in the season the caterpillar smut rust and blight most prevail. The farmer should guard as much as possible against every danger to which his crop is exposed while in the field; and the best precaution is early sowing. - Oats may now be sown for a general crop; three bushels are sufficient for an acre. Peas and beans may likewise be sown in the field. [18]   May  Gardening: Small sallad herbs may be sown all this month for a constant supply: about the end of this month the leaves of artichokes should be cut down and the plants earthed up. - Onions may also be sown on rich land for a general crop if the weather is moist. All kinds of fruit trees excepting ever-greens should now be pruned; and such branches as are cut off should be taken close to the tree that the wounded part may soon heal which will prevent the wet from injuring the tree.  Agriculture: The farmer is to continue to sow wheat all this month as before directed and to finish sowing before June; spring barley should also be sown at this season upon all forest land: Three bushels of barley is sufficient for an acre or two and a half if well cleaned.  Sheep: The ewes that were put to the ram last January will begin to drop their lambs towards the end of this month; those that are weak thro' age or poverty should have a few turnips given to them a fortnight or three weeks before they lamb which will greatly assist them and enable them to bring up their lambs. If they have no turnips or some other substitute many of them will die the nights being long and the grass bad in the woods at this season. Ewes that are in good condition will want no more than common care before they lamb.  June  Gardening: This is the proper season for transplanting all kinds of fruit trees except ever greens shorten the roots and trim them; the roots of a tree when planted should spread like a man's open hand and should not be put more than three inches below the common surface. When the hole is filled up let the earth be gently trodden round the plant. Layers may be made and cuttings planted from hardy trees. [19]   Agriculture: Spring Barley should be sown this month upon all rich land; the ground must be made fine by ploughing harrowing and rolling before it is sown. Barley is a tender plant and will not bear sowing upon rough ground because it would be buried too deep when harrowed in which will prevent its coming up: three bushels of seed per acre will be sufficient or two and a half if well cleaned.  Sheep: This will be the principal lambing season; Ewes and lambs will now require the constant care of the shepherd; and it will be prudent in the sheep farm to put all the ewes into one flock as they drop their lambs under the care of an attentive man: Let them be fed twice a day with turnips till the lambs get strong and able to follow the other flock as it is a great injury to young lambs to drive them into the woods with the strong flock for the first ten days. Those who wish to preserve their lambs and ewes must spare no expence especially if the weather be wet stormy and cold. Much may be done for their welfare in the severest seasons by MAN's care; for sheep are so delicate that they will not do well without assistance from Man.  July  Gardening: Fruit trees that were not transplanted last month must now be removed. - Stocks to bud and graft upon must now be transplanted. - Cabbage seed may now be sown for table use in spring. - Ground must now be prepared for a general crop of Potatoes both in the garden and field. - Carrots may also be sown; they will thrive best in an open situation and upon light sandy ground well dug. - Strawberries should now be cleaned and have their spring dressing: the runners must be cut off from the plants and the beds cleaned from weeds: the ground must then be loosened and a little fresh earth or fine dung laid between the rows; this will make the plants strong and produce large fruit. [20]   Agriculture: Potatoes planted in January should now be dug and laid for use in spring: They should be dug in cloudy weather and bruised as little as possible; they should not be exposed to the sun but laid under cover to dry as they will rot if dried in the sun. Potatoes being always valuable in spring when other vegetables run to feed too much care cannot be taken of the winter crop.  Sheep: Must be attended as in the preceding month.  August  Gardening: Cucumbers and Mellons should now be sown; and ever greens transplanted: as those trees are found to be very tender the work must be done with great care; they should be carefully dug round taken up with a ball of earth and placed in the ground with the ball where they are to remain; ever greens will not bear to have their roots exposed to the air like the trees that cast their leaves. The nursery will now want cleaning and the young trees prepared for grafting. The weeds must now be cut down and destroyed or they will give much trouble the next month. The gardener should carefully examine all the fruit trees cut off every decayed branch and open the ground about the roots of those trees which appear sickly and stunted. Vines must be cut early this month and their cuttings planted when new vineyards are to be made.  Agriculture: Potatoes must now be planted for a general summer crop; and the largest and finest potatoes should be chosen for seed; very rotten manure is not so good for potatoes as fresh stable dung and old thatch: if the ground be rich and light the potatoes will be much better in quality without any dung tho' not so plentiful a crop. Turnip ground must now be cleaned broke up and prepared for grass and clover; and as land cannot be made too fine for grass seed there should be no weeds nor any large clods left. By repeated rolling and harrowing the ground will be pulverised the weeds destroyed and the soil prepared for the reception of the seed. [21] Eight pounds of Dutch clover and two bushels of clean rye grass seed will be sufficient for an acre. - Ground may this month also be ploughed for maize as this will kill the weeds which if left to grow in September will be very strong and greatly impoverish the ground: weeds should never be suffered to ripen their seeds.  Sheep: The young ewes that were put to the ram in March will now begin to drop their lambs: turnips being nearly expended they should have the best pasture the Farmer can give them. If possible some open ground that has been in cultivation should be reserved for them. What food they pick up in open ground will be more nourishing than the grass in the woods and will help them to give more milk to the lambs; as the days are getting longer and warmer and the grass better there will not be much danger of their doing well if they are attended to and fed.  September  Gardening: This is the proper season to graft fruit trees; the scions which are intended for grafts should be cut off a fortnight or three weeks before & the ends which are cut stuck in the ground till they are wanted for use; the tops of all the trees which were budded last February must now be cut down within about 8 inches of the bud; this wood above the bud is left on to tie the young shoot to that it may not be broken off by the wind. No shoots must be suffered to grow but the eye that was budded all others must be rubbed off as soon as they appear.  Agriculture: Ground should now be got ready for planting with maize which may be planted with safety when the bud of the English Mulberry breaks and not before. [22] This will shew the state of the soil and atmosphere and that no danger is to be apprehended from the frost maize being a tender plant that will not bear the frost. - Grass or clover may be sown either in autumn or spring; it will be better to sow them the first week in this month if the weather be favourable and a prospect of gentle rains; they will grow well after turnips if the ground is properly cleaned and made fine.  Sheep: Some of the early winter lambs may be weaned the latter end of this month; they should be kept in a flock by themselves for three months and fed upon the best pastures; the strong wether lambs may then be turned into the old wether flock as they will be able to travel with them; the female lambs had better be still kept by themselves till March and no ram suffered to come near them; when they will be old enough to breed: they will then drop their lambs in August the safest season for young ewes to lamb when both spring and warm weather are at hand.  October  Gardening: All the young trees that were grafted in the beginning of last month should now be examined and all young shoots broke off excepting one or two both from that grafts and stocks; the clay must be taken off and the bandages loosened; the ground between the rows of all kinds of young trees should be kept clean from weeds or they will not the trees of their proper nourishment. [sic] - Apricots and Peach Trees should now be examined and where the fruit is set too thick as will be the case in favourable seasons they must be reduced to a moderate quantity: this should be done with care and the fruit only that is proper to remain selected and left upon the trees. [23] The tops of onions will also want breaking down this month where they are forward to prevent their running to seed.  Agriculture: The farmer should now plant as much of his maize this month as possible in order that he may finish planting before his harvest sets in: He should also clean and earth up his potatoes. If this work is not done how he will not have time to attend to it when his wheat is ripe; and by that means his future crop will be greatly injured. Maize and potatoes are such very essential articles of food as well as almost certain crops that the farmer cannot be too anxious and diligent in their cultivation; as should his other crops fail these will furnish him with the certain means of support for his family.  Sheep: Lambs dropped from the middle of October to the end of December will require particular care and attention in the proprietor. These summer lambs will always be found very weak and delicate; and if they receive no more than common care many of them will die after weaning in March or April. They should be assisted with better food that [sic] what the woods produce in order to enable them to endure the winter season which is very trying to summer lambs. - Turnips and artificial grasses are the best food that can be given to them; and where these cannot be obtained the lambs should have a little maize twice a day for some time after they are weaned.  November  Gardening: Trees that were inoculated last Summer will now want the young shoots tying; either to the top of the stock or else a stake must be driven in near to them to which the shoot must be tied to prevent the wind from breaking it off. [24] - Budded and grafted trees will want constant attention. - All other shoots but such as grow from the eye of the bud or from the graft must be taken off that the graft or bud may receive all the nourishment the flock can afford. - Ever Greens may now be propagated by layers; layer must only be made from the young shoots of the same summer's growth: If proper shoots are chosen and these properly laid many of them will be well rooted by the following March and in a condition to be separated from their mother plant. - Cabbage Lettuce and Turnip may be sown for the use of the table.  Agriculture: About the middle of this month the harvest becomes pretty general thro' the Colony; the farmer should have his staddles [sic] and thatch ready for his stacks that his labourers may have nothing to attend to but the securing of the grain the moment it is ready to cut. No wheat ought to be stacked upon the ground as the moisture which arises from the earth ascends thro' the stack & tends much in this warm climate to increase the weevils which prove very destructive to the wheat. He should be also very diligent in securing his wheat as soon as it is ready to stack for fear of rain for if he trusts too much to the weather he is liable to great risque: when wheat is cut and afterwards wet with rain the straw becomes so very brittle that it will not bear to be handled the first warm day and the wheat shells very much from whence great loss arises.  Sheep: If the weather be warm the farmer may begin early in this month to shear his strong sheep; but should the season be wet it would be better to defer this work till the weather is fine and dry. Wet is at all times very injurious to sheep and particularly newly shorn. - Lambs that were dropped in April or May may also be shorn but it would be prudent not to shear them till the end of December. [25]   December  Gardening: Cauliflower; Brecoli and Carrot Seed may now be sown and the ground prepared for planting potatoes next month. Peach Trees should be thinned of their fruit where they are too thick: Ever Greens may also be propagated by layers as directed last month.  Agriculture: This month must be employed principally in getting in and securing the harvest. Many as soon as their wheat or barley is reaped immediately plant their stubble ground with maize: this is very bad husbandry; a practice that can never answer for any length of time. The farmer who strives to grow one crop of wheat and another of maize upon the same ground in one year does not consult his own interest; by this mode of cultivation he greatly impoverishes his ground puts himself to an additional expence of labour and risques the success of both his following crops; the farmer plants his stubble ground in December. If the frost happens [hppens] for one night in April the whole of his maize is probably destroyed before it comes to maturity. Should no accident happen to his crop of maize yet it will not be fit to gather till the proper season for sowing wheat is over. Many it is true sow their wheat on thir [sic] corn ground when full of rubbish and weeds as the seed time is too far advanced to permit them to prepare their ground for wheat when the maize comes off: this custom tends eventually to deceive and ruin the farmer for this reason; a farmer seldom calculates upon the probable quantity of gram [sic] his farm may produce but upon the number of acres he has in cultivation: he does not take into his estimate that 10 acres sown at a proper season and on land in good cultivation will produce more than 30 sown at an improper season and on land in bad cultivation. Upon this mistaken principle he lives above his income and contracts debts with a false hope of liquidating them in harvest; when to his own and his creditors disappointment his crop has failed.  Sheep: On the first of this month the Rams should be put to the Ewes in order to that bringing forth their Lambs in the latter end of April or beginning of May which is the best season if any artificial food be prepared for the Ewes; for as the nights are long and cold they will require some assistance of this kind. Should the Sheep Farmer not think it an object to prepare Turnips and other food for his Ewes the Ram should not be put to the Flock till the first of March; and his Ewes will then lamb nearer Spring and stand a better chance of bringing up their Lambs as the weather will be warmer and the days getting longer.  WARNING  Voracious Sharks in Port Jackson.  Sydney January 12th. 1807.  The presence of voracious and monstrous sharks cruising in the waters of Port Jackson should be only too well-known to parents of thoughtless children and those that indulge in acquatic pursuits to require further warning; but such is the case.  Yesterday a man swimming in Cockle Bay was attacked by a shark which severely wounded him on the wrist. His account of the circumstance states his having seen the voracious animal advancing towards him but was unfortunately too far beyond his depth to enable him to regain the shore in time to avoid the danger the very consideration of being exposed to which almost deprived him of all power of avoiding it.  The shark quickly gained upon him and an immediate painful death seemed unavoidable. He soon found himself in the pursuer's grasp but when seized upon he gave a hideous roar excited equally by pain and terror; when the shark forsaking his hold for a moment afforded him an instant's respite which brought him within the reach of safety.  Previous cases that can be recalled shew that even boating parties are not immune from the risk of a dreadful demise.  On October 11th. 1805 some people who were at work in North Harbour were suddenly surprised by the shouts of terrible distress vociferated by a native whom they observed to be paddling for the shore with every exertion of which the human frame can be conceived capable.  The author of his terrors was a prodigious shark which escorted him with voracious attention and had once struck the little wretched vehicle that scarcely separated him from his apparently devoted prey. The poor fellow had been successful in collecting a little pile of fish; and these he one by one administered to the appetite of his pursuer by which happy artifice he reached the shore at the very instant that his whole stock was expended.  He appeared thoroughly sensible of his obligation to the providence that had preserved him and declared in amazement that ten yards further he must have sacrificed himself.  In February 1804 an angling party consisting of three men one of whom had a young daughter in the boat which was moored off George's Head above 150 yards from the shore were surprised with a visit from a shark of such enormous size as to be mistaken for the head of a sunken rock whose summit rose nearly to the surface of the water.  But terror and trepidation were aroused when the voracious monster whose bulk was probably magnified by fear appeared close alongside the little boat and eagerly seizing the baited hooks plunged and darted with a strength and velocity that threatened momentarily to dislodge the tremblers who had no other expectation than to be hurled out to the mercy of the furious assailant.  The formidable creature at length seized the killick rope within his ponderous jaws and forced the bow down even with if not below the water's edge but happily the line snapped the boat recoiled and for several seconds continued to vibrate as if conscious of the threatened danger.  The shark was however seen no more and this circumstance which was far from being unwelcome or unpleasant was attributed to by one of the survivors its having swallowed the iron 56 lb. weight by which the boat was moored and which the acquatic spoiler required time to digest.  Monstrous Offence of Child Murder.  SYDNEY Monday June 15 1807  The horrible case which we are about to relate is all the more remarkable for the fact that from the first institution of the Colony until the present moment such a crime of child-murder has never before disgraced humanity in these parts.  It appears that on Wednesday night the horrid crime - the murder of a male infant was discovered in the following manner: - A young man in charge of a gentleman's house had the day before perceived what he considered to be the shell of an egg floating in the privy and the day following his attention was more minutely attracted by the second appearance of the same kind; which induced him from mere motives of curiosity to inspect more closely in to the reality of what he saw; when dreadful to relate these appearances proved to be the little naked elbows of an unfortunate innocent whom he naturally conjectured to have been devoted at the very moment of its birth to a short existence by one whose duty it was to have cherished and preserved it.  The little body was taken from its loathsome place of concealment an Inquest was summoned on Thursday morning whose verdict was wilful murder against the mother of the babe.  At this very period a young woman whose name is Sermon was at the house on a friendly visit and in a dangerous state of illness. On her suspicion fell. Several Gentlemen of the Faculty inspected the body and declared that the child which had every appearance of having been a fine infant was born alive.  The suspected woman was then visited by one of the Gentlemen in whose presence she acknowledged herself the wretched parent and made a confession of her guilt; but such was her dangerous state of illness as to prevent her immediate removal to prison; wherefore it was determined that she should remain where she was until sufficiently recovered to undergo the necessary forms essential to the ends of justice.  From her incautious conduct it would scarcely be thought she had any wish to preserve her own life; the morning after her delivery which had taken place between 7 and 8 in the evening she rose at an early hour and went bare-headed and thinly clothed to a surgeon from whom she received some medicine saying she laboured under severe dysentery.  From this she contracted a cold and was confined to a bed of anguish in which the excruciating pains of bodily affliction must have been slight when compared with the dreadful sensation which her mind endured from the conscious guilt of the most abominable of crimes the dread of detection and the fear not only of punishment but of the infamy and detestation that must for ever accompany her memory.  In this state she continued until two o'clock Saturday morning; when she expired.  The remains of this depraved woman who confessed herself the murderess of her poor infant were interred that night at the place of execution and the shouts and revilings of a number of spectators who expressed a regret that she had not survived to atone for her monstrous offence by public execution.  This unhappy victim to depravity did not appear to exceed four or five and twenty years of age; she was tall slender and of pleasant and obliging manners.  Government House Sydney New South Wales 25 February 1807  Sir  I have without any opportunity until now by the Lady Nelson to answer them received Your letters of the 27 Dec last of the 1st and of the 7th Instant.  I wrote to you by the news schooner but am surprised you have not acknowledged the receipt of the Dispatch & therefore fearful some accident may have suppressed to her; by this opportunity I send a duplicate.  In your second Paragraph you state that altho you had permission for the building a vessel yet the persons clearly understood that such permission was subject to my approval. - had you prevented the vessel being begun to be built before my approval was obtained then all would have been right; but you allow the act to be done which is unlawful & then ask to legalize the proceeding. This is surely contrary to my spirit of your Instructions and must be avoided in future;   With respect to the Harvest it can only be lamented; but surely the Corn being blighted is no proof there is a want of change of seed as whatever wheat had been sown would have survived the same injury: however we shall send you what we can but you must bear in mind that the sufferings of want of the Poor People here have been far beyond what has been felt at Norfolk Island. - as the other settlements are likewise in peak distress I have to attend to them also; therefore you will see the necessity of growing potatoes & every substitute for bread & husbanding[?] the little grain I now send you.  In your fourth paragraph you state that you have been obliged to have recourse to the Salted Pork intended for the settlements & of your issuing mutton; but as you have omitted to send me a state of the settlement including all provisions belonging to the Crown; I am prevented from knowing exactly what you have; but no doubt you will be economical in the use of government stock & purchase nothing but what is absolutely necessary.  By your fifth Paragraph you state you have gained a peak advantage by striking off the store 3 Men 3 Women & 57 Children however[?] it appears they might and should have been put off before & to circumstances of this nature I have to call your particular attention and to lessen the expence Government is at by every means in your favour.  With respect to your 7th Paragraph I have to desire you will inform the settlers that I have received their memorial and acceded to their request and therefore do authorize you to take their wheat until the next wheat harvest 10 / per Bushel maize at 5 / per Bushel & Pork at 6[?] per lb. provided they are always ready & willing on all occasion to comply with the demands you may make for the support of government People.  In Stanfield's case in your 8th paragraph I will not interfere more than by sending Governor King's answer thereto; or in any Case during his or former Governors administration the regular rules of Law & equity must decide them [?] the Patent emurn which you hold for the administering the Government of the Island.  The sentences of the Men which you require are sent herewith.  Your additional representation of the failure of the crops by your letter of the 1st Instant adds to my [?] & as I have already stated send you the present relief which lies in my power.  In your second Paragraph you state that Mr. Kayes offers you for Government 16.000 lbs of Pork on condition of the said quantity being delivered from these stores to his agent. You will naturally suppose this cannot be complied with and I have to request you will not suffer such a quantity or any to be sent from the Island while you feel the alarming symptoms of want which you so strongly depict to me - then again I feel your remissness in not sending me the state of the Island.  By your 3rd Paragraph you state that you have sent vouchers for the purchase of swines flesh & mutton between the 11th of September and 31 of December 1806 for the use of the Crown and requesting the necessary order to draw for the amount.  In answer to this I have to inform you that in consequence of your letter of the 4th of October last I gave you an order to draw & liquidate the vouchers then sent between the 13 August & 30 September 1806. But as these take in one month of the time which you now request to draw for I cannot grant you permission until this error is accounted for and cleared up.  In your last paragraph you say you have allowed three free Men to return to this Colony. To this I have to direct that in future no persons are to be permitted to leave the Island but with a List stating who & what they are and upon what account they come here which List is to be signed & approved by Yourself.  Your letter of the 7th is fully answered by my preceding paragraphs and I hope the supplies now sent you will be a seasonable relief which with what you have already may enable you to go to full allowance.  I have now only to inform you that the 4th & 5th paragraphs of my letter No. 3 of the 20th Oct last respecting the power I gave you to send salted Pork to the Derwent or Port Dalrymple is hereby annulled & rendered of no Effect; and in place thereof any quantity that can be purchased according to my letter of the 30th December last is to be reserved for my disposal.  Mr. Commissary Palmervill herewith send you an account of what we have been able to procure.  I request you will send me a state of the Island on all opportunities.  I am Sir Your most obedient humble Servant  An Open Letter to MAJOR JOHNSTON of the New South Wales Corps.  NEW SOUTH WALES 7th JULY 1808.  "Sir  "I shall not make any apology for writing to you through the medium of a newspaper thinking the compliment would be of very little use; but before I enter upon the chief design of my letter I shall explain the reason why I have not addressed you with the rank of Lieut - Governor else you might imagine I was void of civility and paid no respect to men in office. The manner in which you have obtained this rank fully convinces me it is fictitious and consequently what you are not entitled to.  "When His Excellency the Governor sent for you instead of waiting on him instantly at so critical a juncture you delayed the time and when you made your appearance it was not in the manner he expected to see you. It is evident you lurked behind the curtain while every preparation was making necessary for your appearance upon the stage. On the person on trial being committed to prison on a charge of having escaped from justice the soldiers became the more outrageous and now both the gaol and Government House are threatened with destruction.  "The business now being ripe to gratify your mistaken zeal you are sent for post haste. On your arrival as an officer and commander of the troops you ought to have used every exertion in restoring public tranquility; but instead of making the least effort you became the ringleader of the faction headed the mutinous soldiers marched them up to Government House with flying colours and a band of music took possession of it confined the Governor seized his papers and proclaimed martial law. This was the manner in which you waited upon His Excellency. You are pleased to call it an ARREST; but I am very much mistaken if the Attorney-General does not make use of a different term.  "I have another important question to ask about this ARREST. How came Captain John Macarthur who was committed to prison to be so soon at large and accompany you in this hazardous enterprise ? It must be by a gross violation of the law. But what must occur in the minds of a candid and disinterested public when I say the very man who the Governor was prosecuting for a breach of order is appointed Secretary to the colony and entrusted with His Excellency's papers? Common-sense would have told you this was wrong.  "Now the phrensy of party bigotry blazed forth in illuminations bonfires burning effigies roasting sheep and in all manner of riotous dissipation. The minds of the vulgar were now poisoned with prejudices artfully circulated and the tongue under no restraint but that of its own faction. Some of His Majesty's subjects were exposed to the grossest insults with the danger of their lives. This scene of wild extravagance sanctioned by such usurpation is a sure forerunner of oppression decay of public credit the unprotection of individuals and their property. It also betrays an imbecile mind and leaves a remarkable and odious stigma upon your conduct.  "When the licentious and extravagant mirth began to abate the mind of course was more at liberty to inquire into the cause and it was soon whispered that the Government bills given during your administration were not likely to be duly honored. This was a blow upon public credit and a scarcity of money was soon a general complaint. At length it was plainly seen to every one that the Colonial Secretary was in possession of the command and that you had been made a tool of in the business to answer his ambitious views. This so incensed some of the settlers as to make the attempt of getting Captain John Macarthur dismissed; but finding it would be at the hazard of a prosecution they gave up their hopes as fruitless.  "The motley crowd which were encouraged instead of being instantly suppressed and the numbers you have let loose upon the public would evidently open a source for the greatest evils; and from this I may attribute the numerous thefts and robberies which have of late been committed. Nothing can show a specimen of worse management than a number of convicts seizing the Brig HARRINGTON in the harbour and escaping from the colony. It is neglect of so foul a nature as not only to violate the laws of nations but to insult both justice and commerce. By the office of Judge-Advocate being vacant owing to your having set aside the legal one and the one you had appointed being dismissed and quitted the colony the rabble of the vulgar had imbibed a notion let them commit almost any crime there would be no capital punishment which greatly lessened your authority.  "If you have no other charges against the Governor and better founded than those which have been circulated though numerous your cause is very weak. They are rather the frailties of human nature than crimes cognizable by the law. But why was not his conduct represented to that power to which he is amenable? Did you think the country would be totally ruined by the length of time that would elapse before an answer could be received and that it was a duty incumbent upon you to interfere or were you not urged from motives foreign to the general interest of the colony? Can you say with a clear conscience that you have taken no advantage of His Excellency's former misfortunes ?  "You have not been content in dispossessing the Governor but have dismissed other officers and subverted the Government in some instances apparently on purpose for your partisans to accumulate wealth. Before this unfortunate circumstance took place I always understood you to be a well - disposed good - natured man - a cheerful companion and an idol of the soldiers and the lower order of society. The manner in which you besieged Government House will be a sarcasm upon the New South Wales Corps to an unknown generation."  A Complete Narrative of Events Concerning THE PIRATICAL SEIZURE of the Brig HARRINGTON.  Sydney August 20 1809  Intelligence has been received by the LADY BARLOW of the capture in the Indian Seas of the snow HARRINGTON which was taken piratically from this Port the 17th of May 1808. The account states that she was fallen in with by the PHOENIX frigate on her way to Manila and Stewart and other pirates taken out but many others remaining on board the HARRINGTON in custody. Unfortunately the HARRINGTON went on shore on the coast of Luconia and these pirates once more effected their escape.  It will be recalled that the HARRINGTON was missed from her anchorage in Farm Cove on Monday morning 17th May 1808 being directly in view of her owner Captain William Campbell's residence close by. Between 8 & 9 o'clock the captain reported this extraordinary circumstance to His Honor the Lieutenant Governor who issued immediate orders for a search to be made to discover whether any of the Government gangs were absent; the result of which was that one Robert Stewart and several others had not joined their work that morning. The pirate Stewart was formerly an officer in the Royal Navy and a determined Man who had frequently endeavoured to leave the Colony in open boats. In consequence he had been put to labour in the Gaol gang but was liberated a short time previous to the piracy.  Upon further enquiry it next appeared that a vessel had been seen at daylight from South Head standing off from which joint circumstance no further doubt was entertained of the Harrington being taken away by a body of desperadoes. A small vessel called the HALCYON was manned about 9 o'clock and with ten privates of the New South Wales Corps commanded by Sergeant Windsor was towed out to pursue the delinquents accompanied by a fleet of boats filled with other parties of military and a number of officers and inhabitants who volunteered on the occasion.  But so dead was the calm that then prevailed within the Heads that it was dark before the HALCYON could make any kind of progress and the small boats were obliged to put back; the HARRINGTON then being out of sight for many hours. Between 3 & 4 o'clock in the afternoon Mr Fisk chief officer of the vessel arrived with the hands in two boats who jointly reported that about 10 o'clock on Sunday night while the vessel was riding at two anchors the ship's company in bed within the steerage Mr Fisk was awakened in his cabin by two men at his bedside one of whom held a pistol to his head and commanded him to be silent on pain of instant death. That others had proceeded in the same manner to the steerage; unshipped the ladder and menaced all with instant death the first that should offer to make any alarm.  Mr Fisk also reported that the villains appeared to be very numerous and frequently struck the deck with butt-ends of fire-locks that they cut away both anchors and towed the vessel out; and that about 7 in the morning when upwards of twenty miles at sea they had ordered him and the crew to go on deck one by one in which order they were put into two boats and sent away from the vessel; and that after being eight hours on the water they at last reached shore.  Stewart appeared to be the leader in the desperate affair; and it was at first supposed that the number of pirates exceeded 30 but it has since transpired that the number was in excess of 50. The commander of the HARRINGTON Captain Campbell who was also nominally the owner had intended to sail during that week to the Feejees and in consequence had provided all necessaries for that voyage of which fact the pirates must have been aware.  As the steps for pursuit were ineffectual the PEGASUS was on the following Tuesday taken up for the purpose of following the pirates. But as she had only her standing rigging up much exertion was necessary before she was ready for sea. The emergency of the case rendered the need of all Government aid and on Wednesday afternoon she put out having on board Captain Symonds Captain Ebor Bunker with his first and second officers Captain Graham and Captain Campbell Mr Fisk and part of the HARRINGTON'S crew; the military detachment consisting of 20 privates a corporal and Sergeants Johns and Bradley of His Majesty's New South Wales Corps. All the officers here mentioned were well acquainted with navigation in the South Seas and that fortunate circumstance and advantage over the pirates combined with the factors that the HARRINGTON had neither anchors boats nor a timepiece on board led the pursuers to hope that they would over-haul the vessel. [51]   It was supposed that the pirates' intention was to run away to the Bay of Islands to commit there further enormities by attempting to seize the American brig ELIZA which had sailed thither on the 22nd of April previous in order that they might obtain the urgent needs above mentioned; and at the same time to have made themselves masters of the specie that Captain Corey had taken from Sydney as part of his cargo.  The PEGASUS took with her only six weeks provisions for 50 people but her cruize was extended to nine weeks and she had on board 58 men who thus felt severely the scarcity of provisions. After calling at the Bay of Islands she had called at Tongataboo and New Caledonia but without hearing any intelligence of the HARRINGTON. The uneventful Cruize had been without profit and had cost the Government upwards of £1000.  The snow HARRINGTON was a well-known vessel in Sydney of 182 tons burthen coppered and armed. She had been owned originally by the House of Chace Chinnery & Company of India and had arrived in the Colony in 1800. The vessel had been employed by her Owners in Commercial Speculations between Madras Sydney and South America; and while employed on such Speculations in Bass's Straits had discovered King's Island. During the vessel's last voyage to South America she had been provided with a Letter of Marque from the Presidency of Fort Saint George against France and Holland and had sailed from Sydney in April 1804 with the Ostensible intention of procuring Seal Skins at Masafuero &c.  On the HARRINGTON'S return from that Voyage to Sydney on 4th March 1805 it was found that Captain Campbell and his crew had captured a Spanish Merchant Brig named the SAINT FRANCISCO AND SAINT PAULO with her cargo and a Cruizer belonging to the King of Spain named the ESTREMINA Commanded by Don Antonio Jose Del Campo Ensign in the Spanish Royal Navy out of the Ports of Coquimbo and Caldera on the Coast of Peru.  The Officers and Crew of the Brig had been turned on Shore and those belonging to the King of Spain's Cruizer having only four guns had run the vessel on shore and left her after setting her on Fire which was extinguished by the HARRINGTON'S Crew and the vessel was afterwards got off. The HARRINGTON had also taken from the shore at Guasco a quantity of Copper in pigs which transactions took place without any Knowledge of Hostilities existing between England and Spain but on the contrary every local Reason to suppose that no such Event was then known in that part of the World.  If Captain Campbell had deceived himself into a belief that War did exist when he took these vessels it was certainly his duty to direct them to Sydney in order to shelter himself from any suspicion of Piracy. Instead of that Conduct when he learned at Norfolk Island that no Hostilities had commenced between the two Nations in June 1804 he ordered his prizes to Kent's Group at the East Entrance of Bass's Straits to await his orders and where they were for some time concealed. A small boat arrived from Jervis's Bay with such indirect information as to lead the Governor to believe the ESTREMINA was there waiting for directions from Captain Campbell.  Accordingly the LADY NELSON Commanded by Lieutenant Symmonds was sent to bring these vessels to Sydney. On the 9th of April he returned with the ESTREMINA the English Colours she was under in Jervis's Bay being replaced by those belonging to the King of Spain. She was caused to salute the Fort on her arrival and that salute was returned with an equal number of Guns. The Spanish Brig was brought up to Sydney by H.M.S. BUFFALO.  As a result of these transactions the HARRINGTON was detained in Sydney to await the verdict if the taking of the Spanish ships was an Act of Piracy or not; and orders to release the HARRINGTON back to Captain Campbell were received at the end of 1806. In the meantime the announcement that war had been declared between the two Nations had reached Sydney and the two Spanish vessels were taken possession of by the Officers and Crew of H.M.S. BUFFALO and claimed as their lawful prizes. This claim was upheld by the Vice-Admiralty Court at Sydney and the prizes were sold by auction.  During the HARRINGTON'S detention the firm of Chace Chinnery & Company had failed and on the 30th of March 1807 Captain Campbell had departed in the HARRINGTON ostensibly to the Port of Madras for the benefit of the owner's creditors. Instead he proceeded to the Feejees for a Cargo of Sandalwood and from thence to China where he procured a valuable Cargo in exchange. But as he could not clear out for this Colony he sailed to Malacca for that purpose and brought the cargo which was consigned to Mr McArthur; and the HARRINGTON arrived at this Port on the 30th of March 1808.  The entire circumstances relating to the Piratical Capture of the HARRINGTON are mysterious. There was the doubt as to her proper ownership; and why was the vessel lying a little without the Cove fully equipped and ready for Sea but without a guard or watch? Why was her absence not reported earlier? Now that intelligence has been received that the vessel has been unexpectedly destroyed these circumstances will perhaps never be known.  It is high time that some fresh Governor should have arrived here before this as such doings was never known - pardons to the worst of characters Croppeys and thieves. Here a man or woman robs next day turns King's evidence transports those that he sold the things for fourteen years and saves himself.  Land-.-. three thousand acres given to Mr. Riley four thousand acres to another favorite as well as eight hundred Government sheep and 70 bullocks; not a Government's hutt (save six or seven) but is given away to favorites. Forty thousand gallons of spirits besides were given away to the civil and military officers since Bligh has been deposed and not anything to the peaceable industrious individual.  The officers and favorites have been finely enriched by this republican Government. Johnston and the rest of the military squad were not satisfied because he (Governor Bligh) would not let them have as much spirit to trade as old King did so that made them determine to depose him. Mr. Gore the Provost Marshall transported; Mr. Palmer the Commissary imprison'd; Cheeseman an old man 80 hanged because he had bought stolen property. Mr. Gore would not plead so judge (Captain Kemp) said in the Court:  "I transport you W'm Gore like a damn'd rascall as you are for seven years to the Coal River!"  This was a fine sentence for a man wearing His Majesty's commission. Paterson gets drunk at Government House at Parramatta and Foveaux is left at Sydney to do as he likes and he gives pardons grants and leases to the whores and greatest thieves 'till there is nothing left for any other Governor (when he arrives) to give. There is now two Lieutenant-Governors here - Paterson - but F. is king and supreme; P. is only a cypher. F. took people out of a church at Norfolk Island and hung them without a trial so he and his whore were sent here to inhabit Government House while His Honor old Paterson lived and got drunk in his barrack.  The Orphan School - a bawdy house ever since the new master (Hoskins) his wife and three stout boys (his sons) sent out from England to be its master and Betsy Wyne (a notorious street-walking strumpet and a prisoner for life) put in by the cobbler (Hoskins the master) as a teacher and the former good master and mistress put out. This was the business of The Rev. Samuel Marsden the horse-shoe maker; I mean King Marsden.  And here is a fellow one Crook a shopkeeper a missionary who keeps a shop yet was chaplin and read the absolution and had more favour shown him than any clergyman for he was miserably poor; but these two Honors and the two Lieutenant-Governors have set this fellow (who was a gentleman's servant) up chaplain to the 102nd. - His Majesty's LOYAL corps!  The officers sold their permits for spirits at £2 per gallon and let others draw it from the stores. The investment by the SINCLAIR the officers and shopkeepers only had and they sold the check. Sieves drawn out at 8s. per sieve were sold at two guineas each. Oh it has been charming times in Sydney-town!  Hang half this worthy set and it will be justice for they have been the greatest robbers. Johnston's woman a Jewess offered to sell since he went 1000 weight of kidney fat - taken out of Government bullocks - at 2s. 6d. per pound. This she saved during his government. These are proper peculations and I hope such delinquents will be brought to condign punishment.  NEW SOUTH WALES 13th. October 1809  The Massacre of the Crew of the BOYD  These are to certify that during our stay in this harbour we had frequent reports of a ship being taken by the natives in the neighbouring harbour of Wangarawe and that the ship's crew were killed and eaten.  In order to ascertain the truth of the report as well as to rescue a few people who were said to be spared in the general massacre Mr Berry accompanied by Mr Russell and Matingaro (a principal chief of the Bay of Islands who volunteered his service) set out for Wangarawe with three armed boats on Sunday the 31st of December 1809 and upon their arrival found the miserable remains of the ship BOYD Captain John Thompson which the natives (after stripping of everything of value) had burnt down to the water's edge.  From the handsome conduct of Matingaro they were able to rescue a boy woman and two children the only survivors of the shocking event which according to the most satisfactory information was perpetrated entirely under the direction of that old rascal Tippahee who has been so much and undeservedly caressed at Port Jackson.  This unfortunate vessel (intending to load with spars) was taken three days after her arrival. The natives informed the master on the second day they would shew the spars. Next day in the morning Tippahee arrived from Tippanah and went on board. He staid only a few minutes and then went into his canoe but remained alongside the vessel which was surrounded with a number of canoes which appeared collected for the purpose of trading; and a considerable number of the natives gradually intruding into the ship sat down upon the deck.  After breakfast the master left the ship with two boats to look for spars. Tippabee waiting a convenient time now gave the signal for massacre. In an instant the savages who appeared sitting peaceably on deck rushed on the unarmed crew who were dispersed about the ship on their various employments.  The greater part were massacred in a moment and were no sooner knocked down than cut to pieces while still alive. Five or six of the hands escaped up the rigging. Tippahee now having possession of the ship hailed them with a speaking trumpet and ordered them to unbend the sails and cut away the rigging and they should not be hurt. They complied with his commands and came down.  He then took them ashore in a canoe and immediately killed them. The master went onshore without arms and was of course easily dispatched. The names of the survivors are Mrs Morley and child Betsy Broughton and Thomas Davis a boy.  The natives of the Spar district in this harbour have behaved well even beyond expectation and seem much concerned on account of this unfortunate event; and dreading the displeasure of King George have requested certificates of their good conduct in order to exempt them from his vengeance; but let no man (after this) trust a NEW ZEALANDER.  We further certify that we gave Tarra the bearer of this a small flat-bottomed boat as a reward for his good conduct and the assistance in getting us a cargo of spars. Given on board the ship CITY OF EDINBURGH Captain Simeon Pattison Bay of Islands January 6th 1810.  SIMEON PATTISON Master.  ALEXR. BERRY Supercargo.  JAMES RUSSELL Mate.  A Letter from Windsor.  By a letter from Windsor dated the 10th. Instant we have been favoured with an account of a most disgraceful transaction which has lately taken place there and we feel it a duty owing to Society to give it public notoriety as well for the purpose of exposing the parties themselves to the contempt and disgrace which they have so highly incurred as also to put the ignorant and abandonned on their guard against the commission of a crime which every sense of manhood should revolt from with detestation.  A PERSON (for A MAN I cannot call him) of the name of RALPH MALKIM led his lawful wife into our streets on the 28th. ultimo with a rope round her neck and publicly exposed her for sale and shameful to be told another fellow equally contemptible called THOMAS QUIRE actually purchased and paid for her on the spot sixteen pounds in money and some yards of cloth.  I am sorry to add that the woman herself was so devoid of feelings which are so justly deemed the most valuable in her sex agreed to the base traffic and went off with the purchaser significantly hinting that she had no doubt that her new possessor would make her a better husband than the wretch she thus parted from.  The business was conducted in so public a manner and so far outraged all laws human and divine that a Bench of Magistrates consisting of Mr. Cox the Rev. Mr. Cartwright and Mr. Mileham had it publicly investigated on Saturday last and all the odius circumstances having been clearly proved and even admitted by the base wretches themselves; the Bench sentenced the NO-MAN to receive 50 lashes and put to hard labour in irons in gaol-gang at Sydney for the space of three calendar months; and the WOMAN to be transported to the Coal River for an indefinite time.  The public indignation at so gross a violation of decency was most unequivocally expressed by the acclamations with which the sentence was received by a numerous concourse of people assembled to know the event of so extraordinary and unprecedented a business in their feelings were worthy of MEN and judging from them I trust with confidence that the recurrence of such a crime will not take place here AT LEAST FOR THE PRESENT GENERATION.  SYDNEY September 1811  The discovery of the eastern coast of New Holland was the result of that laudable and beneficial spirit of enterprize and investigation which conferred on the name of Captain Cook so just a claim to posthumous gratitude and immortal renown. Four months of his first voyage round the world this celebrated circumnavigator dedicated to the exploration of this hitherto unknown tract of the universe stretching from the north-east to the south-west to an extent of nearly two thousand miles to which he gave the name of New South Wales. [2] After hovering about the coast for some time he at length came to an anchorage in the only harbour which appeared to him commodious; and which in consequence of the innumerable varieties of herbage which were found on shore he called Botany Bay. In this spot he remained some days employing himself in making those observations which suggested themselves to his capacious mind; and from his report of the situation of the country - of its apparent extent climate and surface the British Government was induced to relinquish those intentions which had been previously entertained and to fix upon this spot as the best adapted for the establishment of a settlement whither those unhappy delinquents might be conveyed whose offences against the laws had rendered their further residence in their native land incompatible with the welfare of society.  According to this determination Governor Phillip was sent to this new continent where he arrived on the 20th of January 1788 with eight hundred convicts and a portion of marines and laid the foundation of the new settlement which continued gradually to improve under his government until the close of the year 1792. Numberless obstructions existed during this early period to check the growth of the colony; amongst the principal of which may be remarked : - 1st the discordant materials of which the settlement was to be constructed; 2dly the disputes with the natives; and 3dly the occasional pressure of want which for a long time was unavoidable on account of its remoteness from the European quarter. The continual disorders amongst the convicts which no lenity could assuage no severity effectually check were injurious to the well-doing of the colony whose true interests required a combination of reciprocal confidence and mutual exertion; but on men inured to crime and hardened in guilt - on men almost divested of the common principles and feelings of their species - on those whom a course of depravity had rendered obnoxious to every other pursuit it was not possible to make impressions of a liberal and enlightened nature. Their intentions uniformly tended to vice and no good was to be expected from them except such as was the effect of compulsory measures; so that the task which industry might have achieved with comparative ease proved under existing circumstances a work of difficulty requiring time and perseverance to bring it to the desired perfection. It was not to the commission of depredations upon each other that the restless and dishonest dispositions of the convicts confined themselves even the poor and miserable natives of the country were made the dupes of a system of knavery which they could not penetrate; and their spears their shields their canoes and their persons were equally exposed to the violence of the new settlers. [3] It was easy to foresee the consequences of such conduct: the natives at first discovered symptoms of justifiable reserve and subsequently adopted steps of an hostile complexion several unfortunate convicts being found murdered in the woods. In vain did the governor issue order after order and proclamation after proclamation; insults still continued to be offered to the natives and such acts of retaliation ensued as circumstances would allow. Governor Phillip himself was wounded by a spear which one of the savages threw at him under the influence of a momentary apprehension. Another evil to which the colony was subjected arose from the pressure of occasional scarcity which relaxed the sinews of industry where it did exist or strengthened the pretexts of indolence: when men were reduced from a plentiful allowance to a weekly ration which scarcely sufficed to preserve existence; when the storehouses were almost empty of provisions and the boundless ocean presented no object of relief to the aching and strained eyes of the sufferers; and when the busy mind painted to itself the dangers inseparable from a voyage of such length which might intervene to delay the arrival of succours until horror and wretchedness should have been heightened to the utmost; no inclination to laborious exertion existed and no hand had the power to wield and employ the implements of toil. The progress of the settlement towards maturity was necessarily retarded; and the operations which proceeded at these periods of general debility were compelled to move with a slowness which afforded but a faint promise of speedy perfection. Under this combination of disadvantages it affords proof of no common perseverance to find that the settlement had been scarcely established four years before two towns were formed and the colony seemed rapidly advancing to the appearance of maturity.  Governor Phillip sailed to England on the 11th of December 1792 when Lieutenant-Governor Grose succeeded to the government; and during his period the improvements in the settlement assumed a more decisive and favourable aspect. The settlers were now enabled to sell corn to the public stores all of which the commissary received directions to purchase at a given price: passage-boats were licensed and established between the towns of Sydney and Parramatta and the number of settlers began to increase in a rapid portion. [4] On the 15th of December 1794 Lieutenant-Governor Grose left the colony for England and Captain Paterson of the New South Wales corps assumed the government until the arrival of Governor Hunter who came out in the Reliance on the 7th of September 1795 and entered upon the functions of his important office without delay.  One of the first acts of the new governor was the establishment of a printing-press the advantages of which soon became obvious in the more ready communication of all orders for the regulation of the settlement.  The bulls and cows which had been originally brought over to the new continent had by the carelessness of their keeper been suffered to stray into the woods and every subsequent search after them had proved ineffectual until this period when a fine and numerous herd of wild cattle was discovered in the interior of the country which was evidently the progeny of the animals which had been so long lost to the colony. The protection of this wild herd and its increase became a matter of public interest since it would hereafter serve as a valuable resource in case of necessity; and measures were accordingly adopted to prevent any encroachment on that liberty which it had preserved above seven years.  In the commencement of the year 1796 a play-house was opened at Sydney under the sanction of the governor who while he laboured to promote the public weal was not less anxious to extend to individuals the enjoyments and privileges which were compatible with the good of the colony. Towards the close of the same year the houses in Sydney and Parramatta were numbered and divided into portions each of which was placed under the superintendance of a principal inhabitant. The county of Cumberland was assessed a few months afterwards for the erection of a county gaol; and the peaceable inhabitants of the colony had the speedy satisfaction to perceive a building of such utility put into hand; for such had been the recent increase of crimes and so greatly had the settlement been annoyed by the desperate and atrocious conduct of the disorderly part of the community that it became an object of necessity to adopt some stronger measures than those which had hitherto been put in force to secure the prosperity and tranquillity of a community which was now so rapidly growing in extent and importance. A town-clock was also erected in Sydney a luxury which bad been hitherto unknown and affords evidence of the gradual maturation of the settlement; and indeed the whole of this enumeration is calculated to impress the reader with an idea of the rapid strides which the few last years had enabled the colonists to make in the path of respectability. [5] The natives had been of late years perfectly reconciled to their new countrymen; and although their attachment to their accustomed habits and situations induced them to abstain from taking up new residences and from mixing indiscriminately with the Europeans they had become comparatively social and commenced an intercourse which was calculated to rivet the prosperity of the colony. Those insulting attacks and sanguinary recriminations which had disgraced the earlier years of the establishment no longer existed to disturb the tranquillity and excite the alarms of the settlers; many of the convicts had reformed their lives and instead of being examples of depravity had turned to habits of industry and endeavoured to benefit that society on which they had formerly preyed; while the apprehensions of famine had entirely vanished before the improvements in the agriculture of the country: the stock had increased wonderfully; the granaries and storehouses were amply supplied; and the ground brought forth more produce as its nature became better understood and the most advantageous methods of tillage were discovered.  The peace of the colony was threatened however in the year 1800 by the seditious conduct of a number of Irish convicts who had recently arrived in this country and who had laboured with ceaseless exertions to disseminate their pernicious and absurd doctrines amongst the prisoners. They had assembled frequently for the purpose of accelerating their diabolical views and a Roman Catholic priest named Harold who was discovered to be one of the instigators and originators of the scheme of insurrection was taken into custody. Voluntary associations were embodied and every measure of prudent precaution was promptly adopted to prevent the expansion of principles which are totally subversive of all order and of the best interests of civilized society. It may easily be supposed that amongst such characters as composed the colony there must be numbers to whom these sentiments of insubordination must be congenial and who would eagerly grasp at any projects however absurd and impracticable the proposed object of which was their emancipation from the punishment which their crimes had drawn upon them. Men who have obtained a proficiency in crime and are callous to the voice of conscience are seldom very choice as to the degree of the criminality which they are inclined to commit; and it is highly creditable to Governor Hunter's prudence and skilful management that the settlement was at this moment preserved from the horrors and consequences of internal commotion. [6]   In September 1800 Governor Hunter quitted the colony having exercised the functions of government for the space of five years; during which his attention to the interests of the settlement was most unremitted; his humanity and condescension rendered him inestimably dear to every bosom which confessed the influence of grateful feelings; and his cheerful vivacity and private worth caused him to stand highly in the estimation of those who were honoured by a participation in his hours of recreative enjoyment. The necessary consequence of his abstracted devotion to the service of the settlement for a long period was the obtainment of a thorough knowledge of every subject connected with its welfare; and in the application of that knowledge to the practical improvement of the settlement no man could have been more happy none more eminently successful. A more forcible illustration of the truth of this remark will however be found in the following statements of the situation of the colony before and after Governor Hunter's residence there in an official capacity; and I am the more readily induced to give these details as the reader may thence ho enabled to form a judgment by comparison of the progressive prosperity of the colony subsequent to that period until the commencement of the year 1809 the date and termination of the facts which I shall elicit in the succeeding pages.  At the close of the year 1795 the public and private stock of the colony consisted of 67 horses and marks 101 cows and cow-calves 74 bulls and bull-calves 52 oxen 1531 sheep 1427 goats and 1869 hogs: exclusive of this statement the poultry was exceedingly numerous. The total of the land in cultivation amounted to 5419 acres; the quantity of which sown was somewhat below 3000 acres. At this period the storehouses were exhausted so completely that on the arrival of Governor Hunter there were no salt provisions left in store and the allowance of other food was much reduced; the state of the colony seemed about to assume a retrograde movement and it was only the speedy arrival of a storeship at this critical and distressing moment which saved it from destruction in the eighth year of its establishment. [7]   But at the commencement of the nineteenth century the state of the settlement was abundantly more prosperous. The live stock at this period in the public and private possession amounted to the following numbers: - 60 horses 143 mares; 332 bulls and oxen 712 cows; 2031 male sheep 4093 females; 727 male goats 1455 females; 4017 hogs - a prodigious multiplication of the means of subsistence in about five years! The quantity of land sown with wheat was 4665 3 / 4 acres of Indian corn 2930 and of barley 82 acres. In New South Wales and Norfolk Island the numbers of the colony had been swollen to the amount of six thousand and the general prosperity appeared rapidly increasing.  The moment of the governor's departure was a moment of sorrowful agitation: loved and honoured by all he was attended by a numerous train of civil and military officers as well as a long concourse of the grateful inhabitants who at this distressing instant marked in the most unequivocal manner the sense they entertained of his public worth and his private benignity.  On the secession of Governor Hunter the government of the settlement devolved to Governor King who had arrived from England in the Speedy a few months previous to this time. Soon after his accession to this dignity a quantity of copper coin was received from England and put into circulation upon which occasion the following table of specie was issued : - A guinea one pound two shillings a johannes four pounds; a half ditto two pounds; a ducat nine shillings and sixpence; a gold mohur one pound seventeen shillings and sixpence; a pagoda eight shillings; a Spanish dollar five shillings; a rupee two shillings and six-pence; a Dutch guilder two shillings; an English shilling one shilling and one penny: a copper coin of one ounce two pence; a ditto of half an ounce one penny; and a ditto of a quarter of an ounce a halfpenny. No sum exceeding five pounds in the copper coins was to be considered as a legal tender; and the exportation or importation of copper coin above that amount was prohibited under a penalty of thrice its value.  The criminal addiction to the use of spirituous liquors had become so rooted and was productive of such evil consequences as to require some vigorous exertion to check its still further increase. In the month of December 1800 two vessels laden with these destructive cargoes arrived in the harbour; but the governor with a spirit and prudence creditable to his resolution and judgment refused them permission to land the poisons and forced them to quit the settlement before any evil consequences could ensue from their arrival. [8] The variety of afflicting casualties consequent upon the immoderate use of these pernicious fluids and their introduction of dreadful and fatal disorders were considerations sufficient to justify the governor's conduct in this instance to every rational mind.  On the 17th of January 1801 the settlement was menaced with destruction by the shock of an earthquake which was felt severely through the whole colony but providentially produced no injury. A slight concussion had been felt in the month of June 1788; but never until this moment had the alarm been repeated. The affrighted inhabitants rushed out of their houses in momentary expectation of destruction; nor did they dare to return until the shock had passed by and the apprehensions which it had produced had entirely subsided.  In the earlier days of the settlement the settlers on the Hawkesbury (a river of great extent in the interior of the country the course of which is traced in the annexed chart) had been much annoyed by the frequent overflowings of that capacious river. In the month of March 1801 the most severe visitation of this nature had occurred which had destroyed the promise of an abundant harvest spread desolation through the farms in that district destroyed numerous habitations and caused the loss of several of the unfortunate settlers and others. At the melancholy period alluded to the colony in this quarter was just reaching a degree of ease and comfort from the judicious plans put into execution by that "father of the people" Governor Hunter and the assistance he gave them as an encouragement to industrious exertion. Scarcely however had they begun to revive after this calamity - scarcely had they repaired the ravages occasioned by this tremendous inundation - scarcely had the desolated lands once more confessed the power of cultivation before those ill-fated settlers were doomed to experience a repetition of the destructive calamity; and on the 2d of March 1801 the river again overflowed its banks and rushed impetuously to renew its former devastations. Flocks and herds were swept away by its irresistible influence; the houses which had been re-built were once more levelled to the earth; and a settler was deprived of his existence after witnessing the catastrophe which had robbed him of the whole of his possessions. The waters of the Hawkesbury at those periods of inundation would rise seventy or eighty feet above their accustomed level; and it is easy for the mind to picture to itself the inexpressibly mournful consequences which must necessarily accrue from such a circumstance. [9] Neither was this overflowing an event of rare occurrence but was to be constantly expected after a long continuance of the rainy seasons when the torrents which rushed from the mountainous ridges which overlooked the channel of the river never failed. to produce a rapid swelling of its waters and to cause an inundation of greater or less extent and injury more or less destructive to the inhabitants of its vicinity.  Amongst the crimes which existed in the settlement that of forgery had recently made its appearance and bills of a counterfeit description had been offered in the markets; and at length one of these forged draughts was traced to its source and the delinquent was immediately apprehended and brought to trial for an offence so heinous in its nature and so fraught with mischief in its consequences. Sufficient proof being adduced to place the prisoner's guilt beyond doubt sentence of death was passed upon him and the execution took place on the 3d of July; it being considered an act of necessary justice to make a severe example of the offender in this case in order to check in its infancy the growth of a practice pregnant not only with general evil but with individual ruin. Of all the different species of delinquency which had found their way into the colony this might be considered as second to none but murder: the house-breaker and the midnight robber might be guarded against and counteracted or detected immediately the mischief was at most limited and might be calculated; but the introduction of a system of forgery threatened more widely-wasting injuries : it required more than common vigilance; more than common perseverance to discover a fraud of this description; and it was scarcely possible to ascertain the precise extent which it embraced or to mark the end of its destructive progress. It was therefore under this impression considered expedient to make a severe example of the first offender who had been brought to trial in order if possible to deter others from the pursuit of such aim iniquitous career. A solitary sacrifice might prove salutary to future thousands.  The storms of thunder and lightning are sometimes particularly terrific but have seldom been productive of much damage. In some few instances indeed individuals had been killed by the electric fires but these accidents have generally resulted from the too common and dangerous mode of seeking shelter under trees which attracted and directed the lightning to its object instead of affording that security which was sought for. [10] A very singular circumstance happened at the close of the spring of 1802 when the Atlas a ship commanded by Mr. Thomas Musgrove was stricken by a flash on the 5th of November and although the bottom of the ship was immediately perforated by the stroke not a man on board received any material injury: such a singular instance is almost without its parallel. At other periods the tempestuous gales which have been experienced surpass the conception of those who have never witnessed the boisterous and tumultuous agitation of nature. Hailstones exceeding six inches in circumference have frequently fallen with such violence as to destroy the windows of those habitations which had neglected the adoption of measures of security to kill the poultry and lay level with the earth the shrubs and the corn. In fact storms of this description never fail to occasion the most extensive devastation and to commit injuries to the settlers which the labour of months is scarcely sufficient to Overcome.  An absurd notion had uniformly existed amongst the convicts that it was possible by penetrating into the interior to discover a country where they might exist without labour and enjoy sweets hitherto unknown. This ridiculous opinion had induced numbers since the establishment of the colony to desert their employment and to trust themselves in forests which were unknown to them and where they generally wandered until the means of supporting further fatigue had failed them and they perished from want - until they became the victims of the natives who fell in with them - or surrendered themselves to the parties who were sent in pursuit of them. Such was commonly the termination of these chimerical expeditions; yet these consequences were unable to expunge the impression alluded to from the minds of these obstinate people and in February 1803 fifteen convicts once again ventured into the woods from Castle Hill in search of this undiscovered country. Many of these bigotted fugitives were subsequently re-taken after enduring every fatigue and privation which human nature is capable of sustaining; after bearing the complicated hardships of want weariness and pain; their feet blistered and bare their hopes destroyed their perseverance completely worn out and their restless dispositions perfectly corrected into submission.  The art of printing had been gradually improving from the period of its establishment by the judicious care of Governor Hunter and its advantages became daily more and more obvious. [11] On the 5th of March " The Sydney Gazette" was instituted by authority for the more ready communication of events through the various settlements of the colony The utility and interest of such an establishment were speedily and universally acknowledged; and its commencement was soon succeeded by the publication of an almanack and other works calculated to suit the general taste and increase the general stock of amusement. The general orders were also issued through the medium of the press and a vigilant eye was kept upon it to prevent the appearance of any thing which could tend to shake those principles of morality and subordination on the due preservation of which depended the individual happiness and the public security of the settlement; and which could be in no danger of subversion until the press should become prostituted to base designs - a period much and sincerely to be deprecated by every real friend to the colony.  In the month of August a most inhuman murder was committed on the body of Joseph Luken a constable who after going off his watch at the government-house was beset by some villains who still remain undiscovered and who buried the hilt of his own cutlass very deeply in his head. I was the second person at the spot where the body of the unfortunate man was discovered; and in attempting to turn the corpse my fore-finger penetrated through a hole in the skull into the brains of the deceased. Every possible search was made to discover the vile perpetrators of this diabolical act but to no purpose the measures of escape had been too well planned to be thwarted. Even the governor himself attended and gave directions for the drums to beat to arms; the military to stop all avenues leading from the town and different officers to search every house; but although several were apprehended no conviction could be brought home. Soon afterwards another murder was committed on the body of a man belonging to one of the colonial craft named Boylan. It appeared that he had been in a part of the town called "The Rocks" and had been struck with some heavy weapon on the head of which he immediately died. Upon this occasion I sat as foreman of the jury which was summoned soon after daylight and continued to sit until nearly one o'clock the next morning when two men and a woman were committed for trial; and a third man in the progress of the investigation was sent to gaol for prevarication. When the prisoners were arraigned at the bar they all pleaded" Not guilty;" and after an impartial trial were acquitted. [12]   The singularity and cruelty of this man's murder appeared to be equal to that of Luken. A third murder was committed nearly at the same time by a woman named Salmon on the body of her own child. It appeared that she wished to conceal her pregnancy; and after delivering herself had thrown the infant down the privy where it was smothered. Suspicions of her situation having however been entertained by some persons an investigation took place and the body of the child was discovered. The woman was too ill to be brought to trial and her subsequent dissolution rendered that event unnecessary: before her death however she made confession of her crime; and her body was afterwards carried to a grave under the gallows by men belonging to the jail gang with the greatest ignominy; nor was it without the greatest exertions of the police that the corpse was permitted to be carried along the streets so great was the abhorrence expressed by the inhabitants at the idea of such an unnatural detestable and abominable offence.  In the month of September Joseph Samuels who had been convicted of a burglary was three times suspended : the rope first broke in a very singular manner in the middle and the suffering criminal fell prostrate on the ground ; on the second attempt the cord unrove at the fastening and he again came to the ground; a third trial was attended with no better success for at the moment when he was launched off. the cord again snapped in twain. Thomas Smyth esq. the provost-marshal taking compassion on his protracted sufferings stayed the further progress of the execution and rode immediately to the governor to whom he feelingly represented these extraordinary circumstances and his excellency was pleased to extend his majesty's mercy. Samuels was afterwards transported to another settlement in consequence of his continuance in his dishonest career and has subsequently lost his life on the coast in making an attempt to escape from the colony.  In the month of October Lieutenant-Governor Collins arrived to form and command a settlement at Port Phillip: he was accompanied by detachments of marines and convicts; but the situation being found particularly ineligible after communicating with the governor in chief he removed to the river Derwent where he arrived on the 19th of February 1804 and a very extensive settlement was speedily formed there; as in addition to the numbers of persons he took with him a great many settlers and others went thither from Norfolk Island since that place had been ordered to be evacuated. [13] In the following April a new settlement was formed at the Coal River now called Kinges Town Newcastle District the county of Northumberland and a short distance to the northward of Port Jackson. Previous to this period some form of government had been adopted at that place in order to enable vessels going there to procure cedar and coals with greater facility; but on account of the increasing trade the governor considered it expedient to found a regular settlement and thus to establish a commercial intercourse of greater importance.  At the commencement of the year 1804 the tranquillity of the colony experienced some interruption. I have mentioned in the beginning of this chapter the circumstances of the importation of Irish convicts in the year 1800 and of their attempts to disseminate amongst their fellow-prisoners the seeds of insubordination and riot. The vigilance and prudence of Governor Hunter at that time checked the rapid progress of the flame of sedition ; but although apparently extinguished the fire was only smothered for a time. Discontent had taken root and its eradication was a matter of more difficulty than could have been foreseen. The most unprincipled of the Convicts had cherished the vile principles of their new companions and only waited for the maturity of their designs to commence the execution of schemes which involved the happiness and security of the whole colony. The operations of these disaffected persons had hitherto been conducted with such secrecy that no suspicion of their views was entertained until the 4th of March in this year when a violent insurrection broke out at Castle Hill a settlement between Parramatta and Hawkesbury and the insurgents expressed their determination to emancipate themselves from their confinement or to perish in the struggle for liberty. Information of the extent and alarming appearance of this mutiny having reached the governor it was deemed necessary on the following day to proclaim martial law; and a party of the troops under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel George Johnston were directed to pursue the rebels. After a long march the military detachment came up with the insurgents near the Ponds about half-way between Parramatta and Hawkesbury and a short parley ensued when the Colonel found it necessary to fire upon them; and after killing several of the misguided rebels and making prisoners of the principals who survived the remainder made a rapid retreat. Ten of the leaders of the insurrection who had been observed as particularly conspicuous and zealous in their endeavours to seduce the rest were tried on the 8th of March and capitally convicted. [14] Three were executed on the same evening at Parramatta since it was justly concluded that measures of prompt severity would have a greater effect upon the minds of those who had forsaken their allegiance. On the following day two other rebels were executed at Sydney and three at Castle Hill: the two remaining criminals were respited. as they were the least corrupted and had discovered symptoms of sincere remorse for the part which they had taken in the late operations. On the 9th martial law was repealed; and from that moment no disturbance has again broken in upon the peace of the settlement of a serious nature although it would be too much to suppose that the seeds of insubordination and disorder were entirely eradicated by the frustrated event of the first endeavour. Men of such desperate characters as are to be found in this colony are not to be intimidated by punishment nor discouraged by failure from the pursuit of that career of depravity which is become dear to them from habit; nothing short of death can destroy in those minds the affection for vice and the determination to gratify their ruling passion in spite of obstacles however alarming or opposition however strenuous and vigilant. Mr. Dixon a Roman Catholic priest who had been sent under an order of transportation from Ireland for his principles accompanied Colonel Johnston on this service and proved to be of some utility in bringing back the insurgents to a proper sense of their duty. It cannot be too much to say that the conduct of Mr. Dixon before and after this business was strictly exemplary.  In May the blessings of vaccination were introduced into the settlement and all the young children were inoculated with success; but unfortunately by some means as yet unaccounted for the virtue has been lost and the colony has been once more left without a protection from that most dreadful of all disorders the small-pox; of the fatal consequences of which the natives have more than once afforded the most dreadful evidence their loathsome carcases having been found while this disorder was prevalent amongst them lying about the beach and on the rocks. In fact such is the terror of this disorder amongst these untutored sons of nature that on its appearance they forsake those who are infected with it leaving them to die without a friend at hand or assistance to smooth the aspect of death and fly into the thickest of the woods. [15]   Their superstition leads them to consider it as an infernal visitation; and its effects are such as to justify this idea in some degree for it seldom fails to desolate and depopulate whole districts and strews the surface of the country with the unburied carcases of its wretched and deserted victims.  In September the limits of Northumberland and of Cornwall and Buckinghamshire on Van Diemen's Land where a settlement had been made during the last year were defined; and the lines of demarkation were fixed as follow : - The line of demarkation between Cumberland and Northumberland is the parallel of 33. 2. south latitude; and the line of demarkation between Buckinghamshire and Cornwall on Van Diemen's Land is the parallel of 42. south latitude. On the 15th of the following month Lieutenant-Governor Paterson sailed to make and command a settlement at Port Dalrymple; and in the course of a short period the colony had the satisfaction to hear of the foundation of two towns. Yorkton and Launceston which are making their progress to perfection with considerable rapidity.  During the violence of a tempest in this month a ship of five hundred tons named the Lady Barlow and belonging to Messrs. Campbell and Co. whilst lying in the Cove at her moorings was completely overset by the irresistible fury of the gale; but with some difficulty she was raised again. Considerable damage also resulted from this tremendous storm in the interior of the settlement where trees were rooted up and the forests were almost depopulated of their most ancient tenants. Huts were blown down and houses unroofed and the loss to numbers of the inhabitants was such as to afford a serious interruption to their prosperity.  In the month of May 1805 Norfolk Island experienced a considerable influx of the sea which from the extraordinary nature of the occurrence is worthy of mention. The tide first ebbed to a great distance; when suddenly an unusual swell was seen coming in which occasioned considerable alarm to the colony to whom such a circumstance was entirely novel: it rose to a great height and retired to its channel. A second time it revisited the shore and flowed to a more considerable height than before: a second time it retreated; and once again returned with a fury surpassing its former efforts; paralyzing the spectators with terror who were unable to imagine where the extraordinary swellings might pause. [16] For the last time however the ocean left the shores without having caused any material damage; and in its regress it opened the secrets of the deep and displayed to " mortal ken" rocks which had remained until now undiscovered.  About this period a mare belonging to a settler named Roger Twyfield at Hawkesbury produced a foal without any fore-legs or the least appearance of any: it lived for some time fed very well and exclusive of it natural deficiency was in every respect a remarkably well-made animal. Such a singular phoenomenon in nature has no parallel in my recollection; and I believe it is the only instance of an imperfect or deformed progeny in the settlement. Previous to the death of this singular animal an appearance of a horn was discovered sprouting from its forehead; assimilating it in some degree to the supposed unicorn.  [...]    Chapter II  Of the General Orders which were issued for the government of the settlement I shall here give the following abridgment as it will shew to the reader the nature of the regulations which were adopted in the colony: - Agreements - not cognizable unless written and registered; being witnessed by one person not a prisoner.  Apprentices and Deserters - forbid to be harboured or inveigled under the penalty of six months hard labour exclusive of penalties by law ordained if free; and if a prisoner one hundred lashes with other penalties at discretion of a bench of magistrates.  Arms and Ammunition - prohibited to be landed without permission under the penalty of forfeiting bond and charter-party. [17]   Assault - Every description of persons to obtain redress by action or indictment; and persons beating prisoners assigned them to forfeit such future indulgence.  Assignments - not cognizable unless drawn up at the judge-advocate's office and registered.  Bakers - to make bread of one quality only; viz. 24lbs. of bran to be taken from 100lbs. of wheat: to charge 4d. in money or 2 1/2 lbs. wheat for a loaf weighing 2lbs. 10z. when new and 2lbs. if one day old under the penalty of 5l. and otherwise at discretion of a bench of magistrates. - (Since the above regulations were made a much more regular system has been adopted to fix the price of bread. On every Saturday morning a bench of magistrates assemble to hear the price of wheat and affix that of bread for the ensuing week according to the rate wheat has been sold at.)  Bakers - not to pay more than one shilling per bushel for grinding wheat into flour.  Barrack Bedding and Furniture - prohibited to be purchased; penalty - indictment for receiving stolen goods.  Boats - belonging to individuals to land only at the Hospital-wharf. unless by permission; nor must any convey spirits without a permit under penalty of being seized.  Boats - employed in the Hawkesbury trade not to depart from thence nor from Sydney without three days notice of departure. In case of attack to cut away masts and run on shore; and to be provided with an axe or tomahawk under penalty of exemplary punishment. Those boats in the Hawkesbury river to be numbered registered and chained at night and not to be rowed about after dark under penalty of confiscation. No boat to convey any person on board a vessel after notice of departure without permission from the governor or officer in command under the penalty of the boot being forfeited to the informer and five pounds to the Orphan School. And all boats must be registered and numbered under the penalty of their being forfeited to the Orphans.  Boats - forbid being in Cockle Bay or Farm Cove either ashore or afloat after sunset under the penalty of being forfeited to the crown; and all boats to be moored within the Hospital wharf and hulk.  Boats conveying Grain from Hawkesbury. - No grain to be put into an open boat or one that is not trust-worthy or no complaint of damage therefrom cognizable; but if more grain be received than is consistent with safety the master to make good all loss or damage lose the freight and pay five pounds for Orphans; and the same sum to that institution if grain should appear to have been wetted to increase its weight or measure. [18]   British Seamen - forbid shipping in foreign vessels during the war under the penalty of fifty pounds.  Butchers. - None to vend carcase meat but such as are licensed under the penalty of five pounds and one year's imprisonment. Licenced butchers to enter into recognizances to observe as follows : - Not to kill any breeding stock; nor to send live stock or carcase meat on board vessels without permission; to deliver to the governor a weekly return of stock killed purchased and sold; not to demand more than one shilling and eight-pence per pound for beef one shilling per pound for mutton and eight-pence halfpenny per pound for pork; and not to sell meat by the joint but by weight under the penalty of forfeiting their licences and recognizances; the latter to the informer.  Cedar - growing at Hawkesbury not to be cut down or removed without permission under the penalty of confiscation with that also of the boat or cart removing it to public use.  centinels - to oblige every person (except an officer) to advance when challenged and to confine every person who presumes to answer "Officer" without authority; and when stores &c. are to be placed in the charge of a centinel application must be made to the serjeant of the guard from whom he is to receive instructions otherwise the centinel not to be accountable.  Certificates. - No person to be employed unless he produces his certificate if a freeman or his ticket of leave if a prisoner under the penalty that his employer pays five pounds and half-a-crown for each day the man has been employed; and should he prove to be a prisoner without permission the sum of twenty pounds and half-a-crown a day to Orphans. Certificates will not be granted to persons about to leave the colony unless their names be published one week previous to their leaving the Cove.  coals (Newcastle) and Timber - the exclusive property of the crown. Coals prohibited to be worked by individuals but to be procured by government at ten shillings per ton and cedar at three halfpence per superficial foot exclusive of other duties and fines; viz. Licence 2s. clearance 1s. harbour-dues at Sydney at established rates entrance in and clearance from the river 2s. entrance at Sydney 1s. King's dues for Orphans: coals for home consumption or for exportation 2s. 6d. per ton; timber for home consumption 31. per 1000 square feet ditto for exportation 41. per ditto; metage per ton on coals 2s.; measure of timber per 1000 feet 2s. [19] No vessel to go to Hunter's River without a specific licence; and the masters to enter into recognizances themselves in 50l. and two sureties in 25l. each to abide by the following regulations; viz. To take a regular clearance; to observe the orders of the officer in command; not to interfere with people at public labour; not to be riotous or troublesome; not to land until permission be obtained; to use baskets which will contain one hundred weight of coals; to make daily returns to the commandant of the quantity of coals and timber taken in; to give two days notice of departure to the officer in command and receive his certificate and letters; not to sail between dusk and daylight; to land at the place directed only; to employ no prisoner without permission and to pay 3s. 6d. per day for the ration of each permitted to be employed; to give no strong liquors to any prisoner; not to land any spirits without Permit; likewise to enter into further recognizances the master in 100l. and two sureties in 50l. each to take no person on board without sufficient authority.  Colonial Vessels - to be registered and pay fees to Orphans: for register ten shillings; for permission to go to Botany Bay or Hawkesbury two shillings; for re-entry two shillings; and to go beyond Broken or Botany Bay five shillings and the same at re-entry. Colonial vessels clearing for or from any dependent settlement prohibited taking any person on board unless authorised under the penalty of forfeiting bond and recognizances; nor is any colonial vessel to be allowed a clearance with more than eighty gallons of spirits for twenty-six men fifty gallons for eighteen men thirty gallons for twelve men and eighteen gallons for six men if going on a sealing or whaling voyage. Persons having families not to enter on board any colonial vessels unless provision be made by the owners for their families whilst absent; the owners to find security also to return such persons when their engagement expires. The owners must likewise maintain their men while on shore or the latter may relinquish their contract. The owners must also provide sufficient provisions for the support of their men or be prosecuted at civil law. [20] Colonial vessels not to depart for oiling and sealing until bonds be entered into by the owners binding themselves in five hundred pounds and two sureties in fifty pounds each (to be renewed annually for the conduct of masters in their employ) to perform as follows : - To take no person without permission and regular notice of departure; to obtain a clearance; not to navigate beyond the limits namely 10. 37. and 43. 39. south and 135. east front Greenwich; not to entice seamen or entertain deserters; to provide sufficient provisions for the support of their men; not to break bulk until entered and the fees paid; not to authorize strange vessels taking away British subjects from the gangs; not to purchase or receive more than twenty gallons of spirits from any vessel they may meet without the governor's permission.  Constables - forbid releasing persons taken in charge until discharged by a magistrate.  convicts - not to employ others to do their work: to which all overseers are strictly to attend under such punishment as a bench of magistrates may adjudge. Convicts not to strike or be struck by free persons: penalty two hundred lashes the prisoner and jail-gang twelve months; a free man to pay two pounds for the first offence and be bound over; and for the second offence five pounds and security doubled. Those prisoners assigned to individuals to be of no expence to the crown nor can any convict's person be attached for debt. Those prisoners taken off the stores to be employed on their master's ground only and in no case be permitted on their own hands or let to hire: penalty to Orphans.; the master to pay ten pounds and half-a-crown for each day the servant has been absent from public labour. Servants who are prisoners are not to be beaten by their masters; who are to complain to a magistrate when necessary on pain of forfeiting such future accommodation. Those prisoners off the stores who charge exorbitant prices for their labour or misbehave in any other respect will be recalled and such other punishment inflicted according to the nature of the offence. Masters of convicts to clothe and maintain them with a ration equal to that issued by government; to provide for them a sheltered lodging; the servant to work in his own time for his master in preference to any other person and never absent himself without leave; in case of misbehaviour the master is to prefer his complaint to a magistrate who will order such punishment as the case shall require. [21] Persons secreting or employing such servants during government hours will be punished for a breach of public orders on that head. Those convict servants indented for not to be suffered on their own hands; penalty the master to pay half-a-crown per day and one shilling for each day the servant shall be discharged before the time indented for expires.  Copper Coin. - Importation or exportation above five pounds prohibited; penalty treble the value. Also five pounds and not above to be considered a legal tender.  cur Dogs. - Such as are dangerous to stock or apt to fly at horses to be destroyed; and if damage be sustained the owner of the dog to forfeit treble.  Debts. - Wheat and live stock at government prices to be considered a legal tender.  Debts of deceased Persons. - -Priority of claims for: 1st medical attendance; 2d debts and duties to the king; 3d judgments; 4th recognizances; 5th rents; 8th obligations bills final and protested; 7th single bills; 8th wages; 9th book debts &c.  Deeds Bonds 4-c. - to be executed by the judge advocate as notary public: individuals prohibited the exercise of any part of such office under the penalty of removal.  Detainers. - All applications respecting detainers against persons leaving the colony to be made at the secretary's office in writing and to be lodged within ten days after notice of departure; otherwise not cognizable unless the party about to depart remains twenty days after the notice has elapsed.  Extortion - to be punished as circumstances may require.  Fees. - High court of appeal before the governor: to provost marshal 1l. 1s. to secretary or clerk 1l. 1s. door-keeper 5s. Note. No appeal is allowed from the verdict of the civil court to the governor unless the appellant gives good security to prosecute it and to answer condemnation-money with costs and damages in case the verdict of the civil court be affirmed; nor from the governor's award to the King in council without giving good security in twice the sum sued for to prosecute the appeal in one year or as soon after as circumstances will admit to answer condemnation-money and such costs and damages as shall be awarded by his majesty in council in case the sentence on judgment of the governor be approved. [22] - Pees to provost marshal in civil actions executions &c.: 5l. per cent on proceeds of auctions in execution; 5l. per cent levy money from 100l. downwards 4l. per cent ditto from 100l. to 500l. 3l. per cent from 500l. to 1000l. 2 1/2 per cent from 1000l. upwards; and for a man to keep possession 2s. 6d. per day for five days. - Fees on civil actions: a writ or warrant of execution above 10l. and not exceeding 20l. 10s. to the judge advocate's clerk 1s.; ditto above 20l. and not exceeding 50l. with 1s. to clerk 16s.; ditto above 50l. and with 2s. to clerk it. 2s. Capias for any sum not exceeding 30l. 13s.; ditto above 30l. and not exceeding 50l. 17s.; and all above 50l. 1l. 2s. Summonses under 40s. 4d.; above that sum 6d. Witnesses travelling from Hawkesbury to Sydney 10s.; ditto from Sydney to Hawkesbury 10s.; to Sydney from Parramatta 5s. and back again the same sum; attending the court each day 2s. 6d. - Fees to secretary's clerks receiving no salary: free pardons 5s. conditional ditto 2s. 6d.; and on each person leaving the colony by certificate 2s. 6d.  Female Stock - prohibited to be sent from the territory or its dependencies under the same penalty as for breach of orders. - Female stock prohibited to be killed under the penalty of 20l. to informer and two months hard labour for the crown.  Fires - No person to fire stubble until his neighbours are warned and prepared; penalty by action remuneration of all damages: also no person to smoke pipes or make fires near a stack under the penalty of exemplary punishment.  Fire-arms - forbid to be discharged between sun-set and sun-rise under the penalty of a breach of general orders.  Fines. - Persons removed to different settlements for misdemeanour not to return until the expiration of sentence under penalty of corporal punishment.  Foreigners - not permitted to settle or reside in the colony without permission.  Forgery - subject to prosecution on a written as well as on a printed form of note of hand; and persons concealing such offence will be subject to the same penalty as persons compounding felony.  Fort Phillip. - Every person cautioned from purchasing repairing or building huts near the Esplanade the limits of which are to be explained by the assistant engineer. [23]   Fustic - growing at Newcastle and its vicinity forbid to be cut without permission from the governor.  Goats - not to be suffered to range without a herd under penalty of being forfeited to Orphans.  Grants of Land - forbidden to be transferred within the term of five years under the penalty of their being cancelled.  Grants and Leases - of buildings erected at the public expence and grounds allotted for public purposes to revert to the crown at the governor's discretion.  Guard sent on board merchant vessels - instructions to: to suffer no one to board but the pilot naval officer or officer authorized by the governor; and no article to be sent on shore nor any person to go on board except the above until the flag of admission is hoisted: not to suffer spirits wines or other strong drinks to be sent from the ship but by permit; to admit no unauthorized person on board without a pass at any time; and to suffer no shore-boats to board after sunset. If insulted or interrupted in their duty to report the same to head-quarters.  Hospital Servants - forbid vending or prescribing medicines; and all applications to be made to the medical gentlemen for relief.  Hogs - forbid to be sent on board any vessel without permit. Idlers - loitering about the wharfs to be sent to hard labour; and if after sunset to be imprisoned.  Initials - of the governor commissary and deputies if forged to be considered as full signatures.  Interest - not more than eight per cent to be exacted; and any persons demanding more are subject to the laws against usury.  King's Stores - articles granted for the use of families comprising annual and extra supplies sent for barter not to be retailed under the penalty of forfeiting all further indulgences.  Licenced Persons - bound by recognizance to the due assize of weight and measure; to permit no gaming drunkenness indecency or disorder; to pay due respect to existing regulations; not to entertain persons from tap-too beating until the following noon or during divine service under the penalty of forfeiting licence and recognizances; the latter to informer and five pounds to Orphans. Nor is any licenced person to credit more than twenty shillings under forfeiture of debt; nor to sue soldiers seamen servants or prisoners under the penalty of nonsuit and treble charges. [24] And any licenced person vending or receiving liquors distilled in the colony (that practice being strictly prohibited) they will forfeit their licence and recognizances; and all such persons receiving permits for spirits are to receive it themselves and not to dispose of spirits on any other person's account under the before-mentioned penalty and all such spirits to become the property of the informer.  Merchandize. - Not more than twenty per cent. on the importer's prices admitted on the retail; in doubtful cases to be estimated by courts if sued for by allowing from 80 to 100 per cent. - on the prime cost of English or India goods and 20 per cent. on the retail. Notes of hand for debts so contracted not cognizable as evidence unless the account of articles be produced with prices annexed. All merchandize to be landed at the Hospital wharf and no where else under penalty of confiscation; and those articles which are brought from the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope are to pay five per cent. ad valorem on the prices laid in at exclusive of wharfage and wine and spirit duties. All British manufactures exempt.  Musters. - Persons neglecting to attend musters if free to be treated as vagrants; and if prisoners jail-gang twelve months. Persons returning false accounts to be dealt with according to the decision of a bench of magistrates.  Natives - not to be treated with inhumanity or injustice under the penalty of prosecution and indictment; and the natives of Otaheite New Zealand &c. are all to be considered as under the protection of the crown; to be properly treated and maintained by their employers and not to be sent on any voyage without the governor's permission.  Parramatta. - Persons passing the barracks to give a satisfactory account of themselves to the commanding officer at that place when required; and no person to carry a musket without permission from the magistrate.  Passage-boats. - Not to convey any person unless a settler without a pass; penalty confiscation. The boats to be kept tight; carry four oars; one mast and sail; boatmen to treat passengers civilly; to give notice half an hour before they depart by bell ringing; not to stop more than ten minutes by the way nor to go alongside a vessel without acquainting the wharfinger; and the proprietors to keep entry-books under the penalty of forfeiting the bond and recognizances entered into at the time their license was granted. [25] The following charges to be made: Each passenger to pay 1s.; children 6d.; luggage 1s. per cwt.; wheat or shelled maize 6d. per bushel; maize in cob 4d. per bushel; each chair 6d.; sheep and goats 6d. each; pigs and packages. according to their size; liquids ld. per gallon; porter 3s. per hhd.; planks 2s. 6d. per 100 feet; fowls and ducks 1s. per dozen; geese and turkies 1s. 2d. per dozen; parcels weighing 2lhs. 3d.; and private letters 2d. each. The hire of the whole boat 1l. 1s.  Passes. - No person unless a settler to leave his place of abode without a pass which he is to produce to the chief constable at the settlement expressed in it and return it to the officer who granted it under the penalty of three months hard labour if free; and if a prisoner corporal punishment at discretion of one magistrate not exceeding one hundred lashes.  Permits - for removing half a gallon of spirits &c. to be granted by commissioned officers superintendants and licensed retailers; and if any spirits be obtained by fraud and collusion by any licensed person if free he will suffer the penalty of one year's hard labour for the crown and forfeit his license; and if a prisoner he will undergo such punishment as a bench of magistrates may direct.  Petitions - signed by more than one person to be sanctioned by three magistrates under the penalty of prosecution.  Prisoners - not to be conveyed on board any vessel about to depart: penalty for breach of this order forfeiture of the boat and the person rowing it to be subject to two months imprisonment. Nor is any prisoner to be seduced or diverted from the public harvest under the penalty of ten pounds half of which to be paid to the informer.  Provisions - including flour bread meat wheat &c. not to be sent on board vessels but by permit for that purpose.  Public Registers - applications respecting them to be made to the secretary only.  Public Roads - not to be encroached upon: persons aggrieved thereby to obtain redress by complaint to the nearest magistrate.  Rations - allowed to prisoners prohibited to be purchased or exchanged under the penalty of being indicted; and if bartered for spirits all such found in the house will be staved; if a licensed person forfeiture of license also: And if the ration is not applied for at the time of issue it will not afterwards be given.  Sabbath. - A strict observance of the sabbath and general attendance at divine service required; during the performance of which all strollers are to be apprehended and confined. [26]   School-house and Chapel at Hawkesbury erected by Government for the Benefit of Settlers in that District. - Those for whom the benefit is designed invited to become subscribers for supporting the institution and maintaining the chaplain and preceptor by the payment of two-pence for each acre of land they possess. All regulations to be determined by six subscribers and two magistrates one of whom to be the principal chaplain.  Seamen. - Any person trusting or retaining any seaman shall lose his or her money and be proceeded against; and forfeit five pounds for each day and night (after the first offence) should he be a deserter; but if ignorant of his being such penalty ten shillings a day only. And any seaman deserting a ship and discovered after her departure shall be subject to thirty-one lashes and hard labour for the crown.  Sedition. - Transgressors amenable to existing laws; in addition to which the following regulations for the effectual suppression of such crime against his majesty's government and the public tranquillity are strictly to be enforced; viz. Persons using seditious words or actions to receive exemplary punishment; and all persons knowing but concealing such offence to be treated as accomplices. Any house in which seditious meetings are held to be demolished.  Slop Clothing - the sale and purchase thereof prohibited under penalty of indictment for receiving stolen goods.  Spirits and other strong Drinks. - If landed without permit penalty forfeiture to informer wherever found and all such discovered in the house; nor is any to be removed but by permit penalty from the original vender 51. to Orphans. Nor is any greater quantity of spirits to be removed than half a gallon but by a permit signed by a magistrate; penalty forfeiture. And if spirits be landed by a master of a vessel without license lie will forfeit his bond and be ordered immediately to depart the port. Persons licensed to retail spirits and other strong drinks to pay 3£. for each license to the Orphans' fund and 2s. to the clerk. Spirits drawn for domestic purposes forbid to be transferred; penalty forfeiture; and if bartered for wheat the wheat to be forfeited to the crown with the spirits and premises. Spirits prohibited to be smuggled landed without permit or sold without a license under the penalty of confiscation. [27] And should any spirits be brought without the governor's permission from the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope the following additional duties are to be paid; viz. If permitted to be landed for every 100 gallons 5l.; not to be charged more than 6s. per gallon including duty of 2s. per gallon; 5l. per cent. ad valorem and 5s. wharfage for each cask or case of 100 gallons. If not permitted to be landed no colonial vessel within the limits to receive such spirits under the penalty of confiscation together with the vessel; half to the informer. Nor are any spirits to be sold or bartered for more than 20s. per gallon; penalty the excess of 20s. to be returned and future indulgence forfeited; and if licensed the license to be taken away.  Stallions - not to be suffered to run loose; penalty 5l. to informer and 10s. for each night they are held in charge: If not claimed within a week forfeited to Orphans.  Stock furnished by Government to Individuals. - Oxen hired to such approved settlers as procure ploughs or carts to be paid for in wheat each March quarter in the proportion of ten bushels a year for two years when each head is to be purchased for 70 bushels of wheat or be returned to government; such cattle not to be ill-treated or applied to any other than agricultural purposes on pain of being reclaimed. In case of disease or accidental death the superintendant of stock to be immediately informed thereof or the settler responsible for the loss. Cows one remove from the Bengal breed valued at 28£. per head occasionally to be bartered for as follows: To be paid for in wheat into the store on delivery of each cow or if accepted in two half-yearly payments; in failure of payment when due the stock to be reclaimed and the payment already made forfeited. The stock and produce to the third generation unalienable unless by the governor's permission; and no person to purchase any such stock without the governor's sanction. Stock if impounded a description to be sent to the nearest magistrate or constable of the district immediately; to be properly fed and if near a town made public thrice a week for one month by the common crier under the penalty of 2l. for each head and all other costs; but owners of stock running at large to pay all damage sustained. Any person who has received stock from government and obtained permission for the sale thereof must first tender the same to government at market prices under the penalty of forfeiture with twice the value from seller and buyer; the original stock to the crown the other penalties to informer. [28]   Stills - prohibited to be used; penalty if free privation of indulgence and removal; if prisoners at discretion of a bench of magistrates: Also all liquors and utensils found to be seized and destroyed.  Stream running through the Tanks at Sydney - no person to throw filth into nor to wash clean fish or erect pigsties near; nor to take water up but at the tanks; under the penalty of 5l. to Orphans if free and the house razed; if a prisoner imprisonment and hard labour for the crown for twelve months.  Strikes. - No strikes are to be used for measuring grain but such as are stamped by superintending carpenters who are to charge one shilling each; and in case of any other strike being used the person offending to forfeit five pounds and one shilling for every bushel which has been measured.  Sureties. - Persons becoming sureties for individuals of indifferent character to forfeit the full amount of their recognizance if such decision is given before a bench of magistrates.  Swine - found at large without ring and yoke will be forfeited to the Orphans.  Taptoo-beating. - Persons passing after to answer centinels when challenged and to carry a lantern. None but known householders to pass except officers of vessels who are to make themselves known under penalty of confinement.  Timber - to be taken if wanted for government purposes wherever found growing on grounds located by the crown to individuals. No private individual to damage or remove any timber but by permission from the owner of the land or from the governor upon crown lands; penalty prosecution. And all timber exported to be paid for to Orphans 3l. per 1000 feet solid; returns of all embarked to be made to the wharfinger under the penalty of 5l. for each neglect. Exotic timbers exempted from the general claim of government and to be the exclusive property of the owner; but if disposed of the crown to have the preference.  Vagrants and idle and disorderly Persons - to be sent to public labour for a time to be limited by the magistrates. [29]   Vendue - no person to sell goods by unless licensed those exempt by act of parliament excepted under the penalty of 50£. to the Orphans.  Vendue Master - to give a daily account of sales to the treasurer of the Orphan fund to which institution 1.5 per cent. is to be paid from the proceeds of sales. He is also to furnish a list of articles to the treasurer previous to the auction under the penalty of forfeiture of recognizances he enters into at the time he is appointed to that situation.  Vessels - to pay the following dues and fees on entry: To Orphans an English merchant ship with merchandize in government service 15s.; ditto not in government service 1l. 10s.; a whaler with merchandise 15s.; ditto with no articles for sale 10s.; a foreign ship 21. 10s. General permission to trade 10s.; each bond 3s. 6d.; to water on Orphan lands 10s.; to wood on ditto or on government grounds 10s.; on clearance and bonds being returned 5s.; for every permit to land or remove spirits 6d. To the Gaol fund: For every gallon of spirits landed or removed from the vessel 1s.; ditto for wine 6d. and beer 3d. Wharfage for every cask or package 6d. No vessel to break bulk until reported and entered at the naval officer's office; and every ship to hoist her colours on public days; in case of refusal all intercourse to cease. Vessels taking spirits from hence not to be allowed communication with any dependent settlement unless the master produces a letter from the governor or officer in command (to relieve distress excepted); and no spirits to be landed at the settlement he may touch at unless the governor's certificate of price &c. be produced. All commanders are also strictly forbid entering seamen from other ships under the penalty of 15£. for each man; half to the king and half to the informer. Masters of vessels not colonial to give security previous to any communication themselves in 500l. and two sureties in 50£. each to take no person away without regular authority nor to depart without leave under an additional penalty of 50£. The usual bond not to lade from hence to India China &c. without certificate to be also exacted. Masters shipping seamen to make application to the secretary in writing stating whether such men have been prisoners and if so the ship they came in and where tried; nor is any communication to be held with any vessel after the clearance has been obtained under the penalty of forfeiture of boat so trespassing and two months imprisonment. The crews of all vessels to be put on ration agreeable to existing circumstances.- - Vessels not to be built within the limits of the territory exceeding 14 feet keel without permission from the governor (unless in case of shipwreck) under the penalty of confiscation. [30] Vessels under foreign colours not to be cleared for any sealing voyage or to return hither but to clear out for a port of discharge. And if any master disregard the colonial regulations all intercourse to cease; to depart the port immediately and not permitted to return.  Vouchers for Grain &c. furnished the King's Stores - to be finally settled quarterly otherwise not cognizable; viz. 31st of March 30th of June 30th of September and 31st of December.  Weights and Measures - to be true and stamped as such under the penalty of ten pounds to Orphans for every weight or measure which is defective.  The internal regulations from which the preceding abridgment was taken are the leading features of the General Orders issued by all those who have administered the government of the colony up to the secession of Governor King and are frequently altered or annulled according to the variations in the local circumstances of the country: since which period however a number of other orders and proclamations have been issued by those who have subsequently held the command in the settlement; but the notice of which as well as of all political matters must unavoidably be deferred until some future period from the peculiar circumstances under which I am at present placed.  On the 12th of August 1806 Governor King was succeeded in his command at the settlement by Governor Bligh who arrived from England for that purpose; at which period the colony was in a state of growing prosperity notwithstanding the progress of cultivation was considerably retarded by the frequent overflowings of the Hawkesbury which never failed to produce such extensive injury to the settlers on its banks as would have been sufficient to discourage men of much more industry and perseverance than many amongst them.  The death of Mr. George Barrington who for a long time was in the situation of chief constable at Parramatta ought to have been previously adverted to as his decease took place some time before this period. During his residence in the colony he had conducted himself with singular propriety of conduct; and by his industry had saved some money; but for a considerable time previous to his death he was in a state of insanity and was constantly attended by a trusty person. [31] The general opinion of those around him was that he brought on this malady so destructive to the majesty of man by his serious and sorrowful reflexions on his former career of iniquity. His death however was that of a good man and a sincere christian. He expressed a very considerable degree of displeasure when he was in a state of sanity at his name being affixed to a narrative which he knew only by report as being about to be published and which subsequently did appear under a deceptions mask.  The Blue Mountains have never yet been passed so that beyond those tremendous barriers the country yet remains unexplored and unknown. Various attempts have at different periods been made to exceed this boundary of the settlement; but none of them have been attended with the wished-for effect. M. Barrallier a French gentleman late an ensign in the New South Wales corps has been further across than any other individual; but he was compelled to return unsatisfied before he had obtained any knowledge of the trans-mountaneous territory which he longed to behold. I myself made an excursion to these mountains in the year 1807 accompanied by an European and three natives; but after mounting the steep acclivities for four days until I found my stock of provisions sensibly diminishing I thought it most prudent to re-trace my way to the habitable part of the settlement and to leave the task of exploring them to some person more qualified mentally as well as physically for the arduous undertaking. In fine from the specimen I had acquired during this journey of the difficulties which surround this task I think that after travelling a few miles over them their appearance (although so amazingly grand) is sufficiently terrific to deter any man of common perseverance from proceeding in his design.  In the progress of my undulating I ascended about four or five stupendous acclivities whose perpendicular sides scarcely permitted me to gain the ascent. No sooner had I attained to the summit of one of these cliffs flattering myself that I should there find the termination of my toil than my eye was appalled with the sight of another and so on to the end of my journey; when after mounting with the utmost difficulty a fifth of these mountainous heights I beheld myself apparently as remote from my ultimate object as at the first hour of my quitting the level country beneath. Some of these ridges presented to the eye a brilliant verdure of the most imposing nature while others had the appearance of unchanging sterility relieved by the interposition of pools of stagnant water and running streams; there shrubs and trees enlivened the scene and here barrenness spread its dreary arms and encircled the space as far as the eye could reach. [32] On my return in sliding down the steep declivities I so completely lacerated my clothes that they scarcely contained sufficient power to cover me. I saw no other animals or reptiles during this excursion than those which are common throughout the country.  Were it not for the existence of such insurmountable obstacles is it to be supposed that persons who have resided above twenty years within sight of this Alpine chain of hills would have so long suppressed a curiosity of the existence of which every day gives some evidence and have remained so totally uninformed as to the nature of a country from which the most distant part of the settlement is far from being remote? Or is it probable that the settlers who reside at the very base of the mountains would so long have remained ignorant of the space on the other side if such impassable impediments did not intervene.  In the commencement of the year 1808 a new market was established on a part called the Old Parade near to the Orphan House and every exertion was made to expedite the building of the shops. The market-days are Wednesdays and Saturdays when a considerable number of farmers from the districts between Sydney and Parramatta as well as from other quarters attend with the produce of their lands: they also bring poultry vegetables fruit &c.; and to prevent as much as possible the too frequent impositions practised a clerk of the market has been appointed to weigh all things that may be required.  Of late years a number of vessels have been seized and carried away by the convicts amongst whom there must ever be numbers who will eagerly grasp at any project of emancipating themselves which occurs to their minds. Lately the Venus a brig belonging to Messrs. Robert Campbell and Co. laden with a quantity of provisions and stores to supply the settlements to the southward and a very handsome brig called the Harrington from Madras were seized and taken off. The former when she had reached her place of destination after coming to an anchor and landing the master with dispatches for the Lieutenant-Governor was seized by some convicts who had been placed on board under confinement aided by part of the crew and was carried beyond the reach of re-capture. She has since been heard of but without a probability of her recovery. [33] The latter was Cut out of Farm Cove and was carried out to sea before any information was received on the subject. This transaction was planned in a very secret manner so that all the convicts boarded her about twelve o'clock at night; and although the vessel lay in sight of some part of the town and within the fire of two batteries yet nothing was discovered of the circumstance until the following morning. Upon the representation being made to Colonel Johnston that officer ordered several boats to be manned immediately and a party of the New South Wales corps with a number of inhabitants who had volunteered their services to use every means to re-take the vessel put out to sea; but after rowing and sailing for several hours they were at length obliged to return without ever coming in sight of the Harrington. Other means were subsequently tried for the recovery of the vessel but all to no effect; the convicts had managed their matters with such secrecy promptitude and skill as totally prevented every endeavour to counteract their intention.  The natives and our countrymen are now somewhat sociable and there are not many outrages committed by either party. I believe that some of the white men would frequently be more severe with the Aborigines when caught in the very act of committing depredations but the circumstance of several settlers being capitally convicted of the murder of a native boy in January 1800 acts as a check on their violent dispositions and prevents the recurrence of such sanguinary proceedings. Some years previous to this period the Europeans at the Hawkesbury suffered considerably from the marauding inclinations of the natives several of their huts being burned and themselves severely wounded; their corn-fields were also frequently despoiled and their future promise blasted. On these as well as subsequent occasions the settlers in defence of their persons and property were compelled to have recourse to arms the natural and necessary consequence of which was the destruction of some of the plundering tribes; but in these instances the circumstances justified the deed and the governor sent assistance to them rather than the contrary. In fact so many atrocious deeds were committed by one of their leaders at Hawkesbury who had long been a determined enemy to the Europeans that Governor King found it necessary to issue an order offering a reward to any person who should kill him and bring in his head. This was soon accomplished by artifice the man received the reward and the bead was sent to England in spirits by the Speedy. [34] Those practices however had now in a great measure been done away with and it was seldom heard that any steps of violence were pursued on either side. But when thus speaking of the general good understanding which exists between the Europeans and natives I must be understood to confine my meaning to the vicinity of the principal settlements; for about the remoter coasts they are still savages as may be gathered from the following narrative of an occurrence in April 1808 : - The Fly colonial vessel being driven into Bateman's Bay by bad weather had occasion to send three of her crew on shore to search for water; and it was agreed previous to their departure that in case of any appearance of danger a musket should be fired from the vessel as a signal for the immediate return of those who had landed. Shortly after the boat had reached the shore a considerable body of natives assembled round the boat and a musket was accordingly discharged. The men returned to the boat with the utmost precipitation and without any obstruction; but they had no sooner put off from the shore than a flight of spears pursued them and was succeeded by others until the whole of the three unfortunate men fell from their oars and expired beneath the attacks of their enemies. The savages immediately seized and manned the boat; and with a number of canoes prepared for an attack upon the vessel itself which narrowly escaped their unprovoked fury by cutting the cable with all possible expedition and standing out to sea. The names of the unhappy men who were thus murdered were Charles Freeman Thomas Bligh and Robert Goodlet. This melancholy circumstance affords a sufficient illustration of the dispositions of those natives which are remote from the settlements; and as no such occurrences have taken place amongst the neighbouring inhabitants of the country it is but a fair presumption to conclude that an association with Europeans has in some degree polished their native rudeness has softened the cruelty and natural violence of their dispositions and inculcated into their breasts some principles of humanity. By observing the conduct of the new settlers the savages have learned to imitate their actions and to discard a portion of that barbarity of manners which allied them to the material creation.  Just before I quitted the colony two persons arrived; one as master of the female Orphan school and the other to superintend the boys; but as the school for the latter was not yet erected an advertisement was immediately given out by government to ascertain the numbers of the youth of that description in order that some correct idea might be formed of the extent of the projected building. [35] The female school was established and occupied by the children who were considered as proper objects of the charity in the early months of the year 1801 soon after Governor King took the command of the settlement and is a fine institution; and the late committee have so acted as to reflect honour on the task which we have so feelingly undertaken. Nor can the children of that institution on ever be sufficiently grateful to Mrs. Paterson and Major Abbott as well as to some few others of the several committees whose judicious measures and well-adapted plans have not only contributed to their present comfort but laid a foundation for their being brought up in a life of virtue and industry instead of becoming the objects of prostitution and infamy. It is supported by different duties levied on merchandize - by fines fees &c. (as maybe seen by a reference to my abridgment of the General Orders) and is of no expense to the crown. The establishment of these benevolent asylums for the offspring of misery confers a high degree of credit on their originators as well as on the people amongst whom they flourish and afford a powerful argument to combat those weak and obstinate prejudices which have been raised against this colony by persons of little information and less liberality who reasoning on narrow principles and with obscure views of the subject are incredulous of the good which exceeds the horizon of their own bounded perspective and are ever amongst the foremost to exclaim "Can any good come out of Nazareth?"  About the same period a complete range of storehouses was completed on the banks of the Parramatta river and another had been commenced close by the wharf at Sydney. The necessity for some new buildings of this description had been evident for some time as the chief part of the King's storehouses which had been previously erected were unfortunately so remote from the water-side as to occasion much superfluous labour as well as to render the unloading of ships extremely burdensome and expensive. These inconveniences have however been considerably lessened by the new arrangements; and the pursuance of a similar system will speedily render the port infinitely more commodious and effectually remove those grievances which were calculated to restrict the influx and increase the estimated value of merchandize. [36]   Some short time also before I left the settlement two murders were committed by men named Brown and Kenny; the former of whom had killed several men at the southward and was brought from thence to Port Jackson for trial where he was convicted executed and subsequently hung in chains on Pinch-gut a small island in the centre of the harbour leading to Sydney Cove. The latter was arraigned for the murder of a woman named Smith who after he had perpetrated the deed endeavoured to consume the body of his victim by thrusting it in the fire. He was executed and hung in chains at Parramatta. - Several other murders have been committed; but as it is my intention to touch only on the most particular occurrences I have forborne to name more than those I conceived to be the most atrocious.  Such is as accurate a sketch of the progress of the colony as it comes within the compass of my limits or intention at present to depict. I have omitted numerous occurrences of a trivial nature considering their detail altogether superfluous as the interesting narratives of Governor Hunter and Lieutenant-Governor Collins are sufficient to give the minute inquirers into the rise of the colony a perfect acquaintance with the nature of the general occurrences therein; a continuation of which details would in fact be little more than their repetition. I believe I have touched upon the most interesting points in the history of this yet unmatured settlement subsequent to the valuable relations of these esteemed officers except such as relate to politics and other topics which may hereafter be subjects of contemplation; and my principal object has been to carry to the mind of the reader an idea of the progressive maturation of the colony without fatiguing his eye with minutiae which might render the work tedious and induce him to regret the hour which he has devoted to its perusal. It now remains for me to depict the state of the colony at the close of the autumn of 1809 (March) when I sailed for England; and in the execution of this part of my task I shall endeavour so to arrange my subject as to preserve an interest unbroken and unfailing throughout the whole. By a rigid adherence to facts I shall enable the reader by a comparison of my various statements with the previous details of the luminous narrators above mentioned to form just and indisputable estimates of the increase of the settlement; of its growth in population and extent as well as in the means of supporting its increased members. This division of my subject will also afford the political philosopher new materials for calculation on a subject so interesting so important to the civilized world as the colonization and cultivation of those remote parts of the universe which may at some future period be made the seats of new empires by draining off from the old world that superfluity of population which like an insupportable burden of fruit on a tree unless removed would tend to depress and destroy the trunk which produced and supported it. [37]     CHAPTER III.  PRESENT STATE OF THE COLONY.  AGRICULTURE &c.  The account of land in cultivation as it appeared at the last muster taken by me according to direction which I received from his Honour Lieutenant-Governor Foveaux and making a part of the several tracts granted by the crown to settlers &c. as described in the survey stood as follows: [...] [38]   The following is the general course of cultivation adopted amid justified by experience: - January. - The ground intended for wheat and barley to be sown in ought to be now broken up; carrots should also be sown and potatoes planted in this month are most productive for the winter consumption.  February.. - A general crop of turnips for sheep &c. should be sown this month the land having been previously manured cleared ploughed &c. This is also the proper month for putting Cape barley in the ground for green food for horses cattle &c.  March. - Strawberries should be planted this month and onions for immediate use should be sown. All forest land should be now sown with wheat; and turnips for a general crop in the proportion of one pound of seed to an acre of land.  April. - From the middle of this month until the end of May is the best season for sowing wheat in the districts of Richmond Hill Phillip Nelson and Evan as it is not so subject to the caterpillar smut rust and blight. Oats may also be sown now for a general crop. Asparagus haulm should also be cut and carried off the ground and the beds dunged.  May. - Pease and beans for a field crop should be sown in this month; but in gardens at pleasure as you may be supplied with them as well as most other vegetable productions sallads &c. nearly at all times of the year.  June. - This is the best season for transplanting all kinds of fruit-trees except evergreens; layers may also be now made and cuttings planted from hardy trees. Spring barley should be sown this month upon all rich land three bushels to an acre.  July. - Potatoes which were planted in January are now fit for digging. Stocks to bud and plant upon should now be transplanted; cabbage and carrots may be sown; and strawberries should be cleaned and have their spring dressing.  August. - Potatoes must now be planted for general summer use; the ground prepared for clover at this season is best. Cucumbers and melons of all kinds should now be sown and evergreens transplanted. Vines ought to be cut and trimmed early in this month. Ground may this month also be ploughed for the reception of maize and turnip land prepared for grass. [39]   September. - This is the best season for grafting fruit-trees and the ground should be entirely prepared for planting with maize. Crass-seed or clover should be sown in the beginning of this month if the weather is favourable and there is a prospect of rains.  October.. - All fruit-trees now in bearing should be examined and where the fruit is set too thick it must be reduced to a moderate quantity. The farmer should plant as much of his maize this month as possible and clean ground for potatoes.  November. - In this month the harvest becomes general throughout the colony and no wheat ought to be stacked upon the ground as the moisture which arises from the earth ascends through the stack and tends much in this warm climate to increase the weevils which prove very destructive to the wheat. Evergreens may now be propagated by layers and cabbage lettuce and turnips sown.  December. - The stubble-ground is frequently planted with maize in this month so that it produces a crop of wheat and another of maize in the same year; but the policy of thus forcing the ground is much questioned by many experienced agriculturists and is supposed to have led to the ruin of some of these avaricious farmers. Cauliflower and brocoli seeds may now be sown.  The prices paid for planting clearing ground &c. is as follows according to the regulations specified in the general orders : - For felling forest timber 10s. per acre; for burning off ditto 25s. per acre; for breaking up new ground 24s. per acre; for breaking up stubble or corn land 13s. 4d. per acre; for chipping in wheat 6s. 8d. per acre; for reaping ditto 8s. per acre; for threshing ditto 7d. per bushel; for planting maize 6t. 8d per acre; for hilling ditto 6s. 8d. per acre; and for pulling and husking ditto 3d. per bushel. - The hours of public labour are from sunrise to eight o'clock and (Sundays excepted) from nine to three. On Saturdays on account of the stores being open for the issue of provisions the hours are from sunrise to nine o'clock.  Yearly wages for servants with board 10£.; weekly ditto with provisions 6s.; daily wages with board 1s.; and daily wages without board 2s. 6d. [40] [...]   From the above statements it will most certainly appear that the colony is in a very flourishing state and no doubt will soon become independent of the mother country if those methods are pursued which are best calculated to promote this end. No one step has latterly been taken to facilitate this desirable object more than the measures adopted by Colonel Johnstone and Lieutenant-Governor Foveaux who distributed the breeding cattle amongst the industrious and deserving settlers; a step which has produced benefits of a two-fold nature - laying the foundation for the more rapid increase of stock and affording a stimulus to meritorious exertion. In the districts about Hawkesbury the grain yields abundantly; but at the other settlements it is less productive: The reason of this distinction must be chiefly obvious to the reader of the preceding sketch in the liability of the soil at the former settlement to frequent inundations which serve every purpose of manure and uniformly keep the ground in a mellow state. [41] It has been erroneously stated that the average produce of the land in New South Wales is sixty bushels of wheat per acre; but I can take upon myself to say; that twenty-five bushels an acre will be found the full extent of the average produce. When a comparison is made between the present state of the country and its former condition the improvements will appear considerable in agriculture and almost incredible in every other respect. The season for the gathering in of the wheat has been gradually accelerated ever since the commencement of the colony; and the harvest of the last year previous to my departure from the settlement commenced nearly a month sooner than it did at the first: The fruit seemed also later.    PRICES OF PROVISIONS AND RATION.  The following was the current price of Articles of Food in the year 1809: - Wheat 12s. per bushel; maize 5s. per bushel; barley 5s. per bushel; oats 4s. 6d. per bushel; potatoes 10s. per cwt.; turnips 4d. per bunch; carrots 6d. per bunch; cabbages 3d. each; lemons 6d. per dozen; peaches 2d. per dozen; apples 2s. per dozen; pears 3s. per dozen; strawberries 1s. per quart; quinces 2s. per dozen; water melons 9d. each; musk and other melons 1s. each; apricots 1s. per dozen; mulberries 1s. per quart; Cape gooseberries 8d. per quart; native currants 8d. per quart; oranges raspberries grapes plums almonds pomegranates limes shaddocks citrons pine-apples nectarines and guavas are to be procured; but their prices are variable some of them being more scarce than others. Cucumbers 1d. each mushrooms 8d. per quart French beans 4d. per quart onions  20s. per cwt. peas 1s. per quart beans 9d. per quart asparagus 2s. per hundred artichokes 6d. each spinage 1s. per dish pumpkins 6d. each cauliflowers 6d. each brocoli 6d. per dish figs 3d. per dozen. Beet-root lettuces raddishes sallad of all kinds horse-raddish samphire watercresses celery endive and herbs of every description are extremely plentiful and to be purchased at reasonable rates.  Animal food is to be procured at the following prices: - Beef 1s. 3d. per lb.; mutton 1s. 3d. per lb.; pork 1s. per lb.; lamb 1s. 3d. per lb.; kangaroo 8d. per lb. (the flesh of this animal is somewhat similar in taste to English beef but rather inferior owing to the want of fat); goat mutton 1s. per lb.; turkeys 10s. each; geese 8s. each; ducks 4s. each; Muscovy ducks 5s. each; fowls 2s. 6d. each; wild ducks 2s. each; teal 1s. 3d. each; rabbits 4s. each; roasting pigs 5s. each; pigeons 1s. 3d. each; kids 5s. each; eggs 1s. 6d. per dozen; butter 6s. per lb.; milk 1s. per quart; cheese 2s. 6d. per lb.; oysters 1s. per quart; and lobsters 1s. each. [42]   Fish is exceedingly numerous of every description and is very good as well as moderate in charge. A turtle was caught recently in Broken Bay with a hook weighing seven hundred weight which was retailed to the inhabitants at 4d. per lb.  The following is to be considered as a full weekly Ration which is issued from the stores whenever there is a sufficiency without a prospect of want to those who are in the employ of government : - Seven pounds of salt beef or four pounds of salt pork; eight pounds of flour or meal or an addition of a quarter of a pound of wheat to each pound if it cannot he ground; pease or other pulse three pounds; six ounces of sugar in lieu of butter. The same quantity is to be given by their employer to those who are indented to settlers &c.; but as frequent alterations are necessarily made according to the pressure of circumstances the deficiency is generally made up with maize.  TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.  A manufactory has been established for coarse woollen blanketing or rugs and coarse linen called drugget; a linen of a very good quality has also been produced which has been disposed of to settlers &c. and issued from the stores to those who labour for the crown. The spinning has been done by the female convicts and the weaving &c. by the male. The person who superintended this department for some time was George Mealmaker a well-known political character in North Britain; but he has been dead some years and the manufactory which adjoins the gaol at Parramatta has been almost entirely destroyed by fire; consequently the progress which would have been made in this manufacture has been greatly retarded. When I left the colony however a very deserving respectable and persevering settler at Hawkesbury was about to commence in that way on a very extensive scale; for which laudable purpose he had sown several acres with flax and hemp and I am hopeful his exertions will tend to benefit the colony to which the establishment of a manufactory of this description has been long an object ardently to be desired; and it is to be hoped that the effort of this new speculator will be crowned with that success which it so eminently deserves. [43]   The leather made from the skins of cattle kangaroo seal &c. are extremely good and are tanned by a bark which grows in the settlement much sooner than a similar operation is performed in England. The sole leather in my opinion cannot be surpassed in point of goodness; and every improvement which can arise from competition may be naturally expected since there are several persons who follow this line of business both at Sydney and Parramatta.  Several potteries have been established; but the most celebrated manufacturer of this description named Skinner lately died. His dishes plates basons covers cups and saucers teapots and chimney ornaments were in a very superior style of workmanship; and other useful articles equally handsome.  Tobacco-pipes which some years ago at the cheapest periods cost sixpence each are now manufactured in the settlement of a very good quality and are retailed for one penny each. The great propensity to smoking which prevails throughout the colony causes an astonishing consumption of this article and has well repaid the original speculator.  Salt is made in great abundance from salt water; and large salt-pans have been erected at Rose Bay whence and at Newcastle great quantities are made and sent to Sydney. A plan however had been proposed to the governor for making it by evaporation which it was supposed would be carried into effect; it was in agitation and was nearly brought to perfection when this statement was made.  Some very palatable beer is brewed in the settlement at four extensive breweries; one at Sydney one at Kissing Point one at Parramatta and the other at Hawkesbury; and a number of persons brew their own beer. Some improvements here may yet be looked for since at present the grain is malted very badly in the colony which I attribute more to the want of proper utensils than any deficiency of ability. In a short time also they will be enabled to grow a sufficiency of hops in the settlement for every purpose without being compelled as at present to have recourse to the mother country for this necessary article.  Eight wind-mills have been erected for the purpose of grinding corn; and a water-mill which had been erected at Parramatta has most unfortunately been destroyed by a flood which came on some time previous to my leaving the colony. [44]   There are four auctioneers or vendue masters in the settlements; two at Sydney one at Parramatta and one at Hawkesbury: They usually charge five per cent. on sales.  The shops are particularly respectable and decorated with much taste. Articles of female apparel and ornament are greedily purchased; for the European women in the settlement spare no expense in ornamenting their persons and in dress each seems to vie with the other in extravagance. The costliness of the exterior there as well as in most other parts of the world is meant as the mark of superiority; but confers very little grace and much less virtue on its wearer when speaking of the dashing belles who generally frequent the Rocks who may often be seen of an evening attired in the greatest splendour and on the following morning are hid front public view with extremely mean attire.  Spirits are also bought up with astonishing rapidity; and when prohibited will ever be obtained by some means or other and I have known it to sell as high as thirty shillings per bottle; the general price by the retailer however is from ten to sixteen shillings per bottle. Most of the people in the colony male and female give way to excessive drinking. Wines are not so eagerly sought after and are therefore more reasonable than might be expected; but if the rage for luxuries continues to increase in the same proportion as it has done for the last few years it must soon obtain an enhanced price and a more rapid sale. The evils consequent upon the unrestrained use of these articles are such as to justify the most poignant regrets that they should be held in such estimation by all descriptions of persons since they have proved from their first introduction into the colony and still continue to be the fertile sources of social disorder of domestic misery of disorders and of death. It is to no purpose that the higher orders set examples of sobriety and temperance; it is of no avail that the governor uses every prudent exertion to restrain the immoderate traffic in these pernicious liquors; threats intreaties and punishments are equally useless; and while spirits are to be procured the inhabitants will possess them at the price of every other comfort of life.  While on this subject I shall just take occasion to advert to a singular circumstance respecting the specie of the settlement. [45] The copper coin which was sent out by government and was originally issued at the close of the year 1800 has most surprisingly decreased as very little indeed is now used currently. This occurrence is so strange in itself that I am totally at a loss to account for it on any principles whatever. Considering its rapid diminution I cannot conjecture by what means the circulation is still kept up; nor on the other hand can I suppose that the coin is caught up for the purposes of exportation as it was issued in the colony in the first instance at one hundred per cent. above its real value. The scarcity of this specie at all events operates as an obstruction to trade; and I think that some steps ought to be taken to remove the cause of complaint by filling up the deficiency which has so unaccountably taken place.    POPULATION.  THERE are nine thousand three hundred and fifty-six inhabitants in the settlement out of which number upwards of six thousand support themselves and the rest are victualled and clothed at the expense of the crown. Most men of a trade or profession pursue their calling; and labourers are either employed by settlers to cultivate their lands and in various occupations or work in different gangs where they can be serviceable.  When a transport arrives with prisoners their irons are immediately knocked off (if this has not been previously done) unless some powerful reason exists to justify an exception from this rule. The muster is taken by the commissary who gives receipts for every thing belonging to the crown; the list with remarks is given to the governor who orders them to what part of the settlement he thinks proper where the deficiency of hands in agricultural or other employments renders such an acquisition desirable.  The behaviour of the prisoners has recently been much less exceptionable than in the earlier days of the settlement and they seem to have accommodated their dispositions in a great degree to their new situations; those who are guilty of theft have latterly been transported to some remote settlement and this system of punishment has been found more efficacious than the infliction of castigation or any other corporal punishment since they feel an unconquerable repugnance to the idea of a separation from their old connections and companions and a removal to a solitary scene where they cannot hope for any opportunities of re-commencing those pursuits which are so truly congenial to their dispositions. [46]     NATIVES  Speaking generally of the natives they are a filthy disagreeable race of people; nor is it my opinion that any measures which could be adopted would ever make them otherwise. Their wars are as frequent as usual and are attended with as much cruelty both towards men and women. They are still ready at all times to commit depredations upon the Indian corn whenever there is a probability of their attempts being attended with the desired success; and this predatory disposition renders it frequently necessary to send detachments of the military to disperse them; but the utmost care is taken to prevent any fatal circumstances from attending these acts of needful hostility and orders are uniformly issued never to fire upon the natives unless any particularly irritating act should render such a measure expedient. They are amazingly expert at throwing the spear and will launch it with unerring aim to a distance of thirty to sixty yards. I myself have seen a lad hurl his spear at a hawk-eagle (a bird which with wings expanded measures from seven to ten feet) flying in the air with such velocity and correctness as to pierce his object and bring the feathered victim to the earth. This circumstance will tend to shew how soon the youth of these tribes are trained to the use of the spear and the dexterity to which they attain in this art before they reach the age of manhood. Indeed instances are by no means uncommon where an army of natives is seen following a youthful leader of fifteen or sixteen years of age and obeying his directions implicitly because his previous conduct had been characterized by remarkable rigour of body and intrepidity of mind - virtues which qualify natives of every age and rank for the highest honours and the most marked distinctions amongst these untutored sons of nature. Their attachment to savage life is unconquerable; nor can the strongest allurements tempt them to exchange their wild residences in the recesses of the country for the comforts of European life. A singular instance of this fact occurred in the case of Be-ne-long who was brought to England by Governor Phillip and returned with Governor Hunter. For some time after his return it is true he assumed the manners the dress and the consequence of an European and treated his countrymen with a distance which evinced the sense he entertained of his own increased importance; and this disposition was encouraged by every method which suggested itself to the minds of those of the colony with whom he associated; but notwithstanding so much pains had been taken for his improvement both when separated from his countrymen and since his return to New South Wales he has subsequently taken to the woods again returned to his old habits and now lives in the same manner as those who have never mixed with the civilized world. [47] Sometimes indeed he holds intercourse with the colony; but every effort uniformly fails to draw him once again into the circle of polished society since he prefers to taste of liberty amongst his native scenes to the unsatisfactory gratification which arises from an association with strangers however kind their treatment of hint and however superior to his own enjoyments.  Yet there are many of the natives who feel no disinclination to mix with the inhabitants occasionally - to take their share in the labours and the reward of those who toil. Amongst these there are five in particular to whom our countrymen have given the names of Bull Dog Bidgy Bidgy Bundell Bloody Jack and another whose name I cannot call to recollection but who had a farm of four acres and upwards planted with maize at Hawkesbury which he held by permission of Governor King; and the other four made themselves extremely useful on board colonial vessels employed in the fishing and sealing trade for which they are in the regular receipt of wages. They strive by every means in their power to make themselves appear like the sailors with whom they associate by copying their customs and imitating their manners; such as swearing using a great quantity of tobacco drinking grog and other similar habits. These natives are the only ones I believe who are inclined to industrious behaviour and they have most certainly rendered more essential services to the colony than any others of their countrymen who in general content themselves with assisting to draw nets for fish for the purpose of coming in for a share of the produce of others toil.  The general pursuits of the natives their manners and customs have been so accurately described by preceding writers on the subject that I shall forbear from entering into more minute particulars which would swell my sketch far beyond its intended limits and could add nothing to the knowledge of which the well-informed reader is already possessed. [48] It will be sufficient to remark that such as the inhabitants of the interior of New Holland were represented ten years since they still remain as the antecedent remarks must sufficiently illustrate: The jealousy of the new settlers which originally existed has indeed entirely vanished; but the proximity of a civilized colony has not tended in the least to polish the native rudeness and barbarism which mark the behaviour of the original inhabitants of this remote spot of the universe.    CLIMATE.  Although the climate is variable yet it is very healthy and uncommonly fine for vegetation. Most of the disorders which exist in the settlement are the fruits of intemperance and debauchery the necessary result of that fatal addiction to drunkenness which produces mental imbecility and bodily decays. Frost is known but little; at least ice is very seldom seen; and I believe snow has never yet appeared since the establishment of the colony: Yet on the highest ridges of the remoter mountains to which I have had occasion to allude as never yet having been passed snow is to be seen for a long time together; and this circumstance is a proof of their elevation. The usual weather in New South Wales is uncommonly bright and clear and the common weather there in spring and autumn is equal to the finest summer day in England. This purity and warmth of atmosphere it may be naturally inferred must be particularly favourable to the growth of shrubs and plants which flourish exceedingly and attain to a degree of perfection and beauty which is unknown to the inhabitants of this country. The woods and fields present a boundless variety of the choicest productions of nature which gratify the senses with their fragrance and magnificence; while the branches of the trees display a brilliant assemblage of the feathered race whose plumage "glittering in the sun" dazzles the eye of the beholder with its unmatched loveliness and lustre and presenting on the whole a scene too rich for the pencil to pourtray - too glowing and animated for the feeble pen of mortal to describe with half the energy and beauty which belong to it and without which description is unfaithful. [49]     NATURAL HISTORY.  This subject has been so well treated and the various species of animals &c. have been so accurately described by those who have treated on the history of this colony that it would be superfluous in me to re-tread the ground which has been already so ably trodden. I shall therefore content myself with describing the few natural productions of the country of New Holland which have been discovered subsequent to the latest publication on the subject and concerning which consequently no information of an accurate and public nature has yet been transmitted to this country. The exploration of the works of nature in this immense tract of the universe is however still incomplete; and I have no doubt but the lapse of a few years will tend greatly to the augmentation of the knowledge we now possess on this interesting subject and will prove the fertile source of new delight and instruction to the mind which can derive enjoyment from that pure source the contemplation of nature in her varied and astonishing works.  The Koolah or Sloth a singular animal of the Opossum species having a false belly was found by the natives and brought into the town alive on the 10th of August 1803. This is a very singular animal; for when it ascends a tree at which it is astonishingly expert it will never quit it until it has cleared it of its leaves it is mostly found in the mountains and deep ravines to the southward and northward of Broken Bay and the natives instantly discover its concealment by observing the leaves of the Gum-tree eaten off this being the tree which it usually selects. It is astonishingly indolent and is uniformly found with a companion locked in each other's arms as it were. Its claws are very strong and are of material service in assisting it to climb trees; its length from eighteen inches to two feet; and two stuffed specimens are to be seen in Mr. Bullock's Museum.  Latterly also a species of the Hyena has been found at Port Dalrymple which is extremely ferocious in appearance has a remarkably large mouth is striped all over very strongly limbed and its claws strong long and sharp. This animal is likewise of the Opossum kind having like the generality of subjects found in New Holland a false belly. Notwithstanding its apparent ferocity it has never yet ventured to attack any human being but has confined its ravages to sheep and poultry amongst which it has committed frequent and very serious depredations. [50] No one of these animals I believe has hitherto been brought over to England either alive or dead since their native fierceness renders them less easy of capture than the Koolah.  Flying Mice are likewise found in considerable numbers in this country of a very handsome appearance and also of the Opossum species. The tail of this interesting little animal resembles a feather; its belly is white and its back brown; and it is covered with a down as soft as satin. It flies like an Opossum. This subject is much regarded for its beauty.  The Porcupine Ant-eaters are found in most parts of the country and are esteemed very good eating; they burrow in the earth and have a tongue of remarkable length which they put out of their mouth and the ants immediately crowd upon it as if lured by some particular attraction and when it appears to be pretty well covered it is drawn in with rapidity and the insects are expeditiously swallowed. - Stuffed specimens of these are also to be seen in the Museum of Mr. Bullock.  Black and white mottled Fern tree was found at the head of Lane Cove by Colonel Paterson about five years since; but it does not run to any considerable size. It is esteemed a very handsome wood for the purposes of veneering.  The Spice tree has also been found to the southward: it is a very strong aromatic and possesses a more pungent quality than pepper. This tree produces a berry which as well as the bark is of a very powerful spicy nature.  Fustic has been discovered at Newcastle - a wood which makes the finest yellow dye; but it has been hitherto confined to New South Wales. Indigo was also found in different parts of the country; but after a thorough trial of its properties by a French gentleman of much patience and experience as well as by some other individuals of research it was found impossible to derive any benefit from it.  Native green currants grow wildly and make an uncommonly fine jelly. A wild cherry is also found in the settlement growing with the stone on the outside of a red colour but nearly unfit to eat; as also a wild fig equally nauseous full of seed but eaten by the natives. Strawberries grow to fine perfection; but no English currant gooseberry or cherry trees are to be seen in the country: [51] Some were brought from England by Captain Kent of the royal navy and were in a flourishing state with some gingers from Rio de Janeiro when a fire happened upon that gentleman's farm and consumed the whole which has been a very great loss to the colony. Pines far exceeding in size those of England are now growing there but they are scarce; melons on the contrary are very large and plentiful. Botany Bay greens are procured in abundance; they much resemble sage in appearance and are esteemed a very good dish by the Europeans but despised by the natives. The bark of a tree called Carajong which grows like a willow is manufactured into ropes of considerable strength. A single nectarine tree only has been known to bear fruit which is in the Government Garden. Some coffee trees were planted by a Frenchman (Mons. Declambe) but he unfortunately died before be could bring them to perfection.  The shrubs and plants of this country are all evergreens and numbers of them are to be seen covered with beautiful blossoms at all seasons of the year. Jeraniums flourish in such abundance that in various parts of the settlement they are made into hedges and are so thick as to be almost impenetrable; they are always in leaf and flower and emit an odour of the most fragrant nature perfuming the surrounding atmosphere.  Cedar and coals of a very fine quality are the produce of the Newcastle district and are procured with very little trouble. Manna has also been found near Port Dalrymple made by the locusts on the trees from which it drops in very considerable quantities. But the most prizable subjects which have been discovered here are the valuable stones; of which the white yellow and large brilliant Topazes are considered of far greater worth than those which are produced in any part of the Brazils; since I was informed when at Rio Janeiro in the month of August 1809 by a number of gentlemen of the best information amongst whom were the Marquis de Pomball and the Judge Consalvadore that none which had been found on that coast could bear a comparison with those of New Holland.  The other animals of this country; the numerous curious and beautiful birds which abound there; and the various reptiles which have been discovered have been already sufficiently described: More of the latter however have subsequently been discovered to be of a venomous nature than was formerly conjectured; and the bite of several species of the Coluber or Snake have proved in various instances fatal in the course of a very few minutes after the wound has been received. [52] It is to be wished that some mode of cure could be discovered. - It is worthy of remark that at Norfolk Island a spot where a settlement was made and which has been subsequently evacuated about three hundred leagues from the nearest coast of New South Wales no reptiles of any description are to be found; while at Philip Island only seven miles from Norfolk Island several species of reptiles exist in abundance such as the Centipede Tarantula &c.    RELIGION.  The religion most generally followed in the colony of New South Wales is that established according to the usage of the Church of England; and it is a subject of satisfaction to observe that the churches are generally speaking well attended. A great part of the military corps with their officers uniformly attend divine service. - A Roman Catholic priest (the Rev. Mr. Dixon) was formerly allowed by government to preach in public but this indulgence has been subsequently withdrawn from some cause or other; and I am somewhat inclined to attribute this alteration to the seditious conduct of the Irish prisoners some years since in which it was proved that another priest (Mr. Harold) bore a conspicuous part upholding and encouraging the designs of those who entertained schemes inimical to the existing government and subversive of the welfare of the colony.  Some of the Missionary Society preach at the out-settlements frequently on a Sunday with various success; and it is much to be lamented that in the selection of these men who are sent out to enlighten and instruct the ignorant greater attention is not paid to their qualifications; and the abuses which are practised under the cloak of religion in these remote parts of the world call loudly for a close investigation and a total reformation of the system. That there are amongst these Missionaries men of strict fidelity whose hearts are engaged in the task they have undertaken and whose conduct has justly gained them the esteem and veneration of all classes is a fact which no dispassionate observer can deny; but it is also equally notorious that there are too many of an opposite description who practise every vice and do the most serious injury to that sacred cause to which they have been delegated and have engaged to support. [53] If greater pains were taken in the choice of servants the Missionary institution might tend to the more rapid promotion of the knowledge of religion; but the work will be retarded while improper instruments are used. A Missionary of irreproachable character was unhappily murdered a few years since by some persons whom he had served and who adopted this new and inhuman method of repaying the obligation which had been conferred upon him.  The natives are in general very superstitious and entertain some singular notions respecting their deceased friends and countrymen of which very ample accounts are given in Lieutenant-Governor Collins's interesting publication. Their funeral ceremonies are extremely impressive and every mark of respect which suggests itself to their untaught minds is paid to the body of the deceased. A barbarous custom however prevails which is sanctioned by their rude ideas of religion : - When a mother dies while giving suck to an infant the living babe is uniformly thrown into the grave of the parent and the father having cast a stone upon it the earth is cast into the pit and thus the innocent offspring is immolated to an erroneous and superstitious prejudice.  Amongst the convicts the influence of superstition is less prevalent although amongst many of the lower orders of Irish the traces of it are to be discovered; it leads however to no injurious consequences and deserves encouragement in preference to those totally irreligious principles which might naturally be expected to shew themselves amidst a body of men of characters and dispositions so hostile to every thing which is virtuous dignifying and good.    MORALS.  The morals of the colony are by no means so debauched as the tongue of prejudice has too frequently asserted; on the contrary virtuous characters are not rare and honourable principles are not less prevalent here than in other communities of equal extent and limited growth. The instances of drunkenness dishonesty and their concomitant offences are not more common than in the mother country; and those amongst the convicts who are disposed to return to their old habits and re-commence their depredations upon society are deterred by the severe punishment which awaits their detection: [54] There are many also amongst the prisoners themselves who are now striking examples of probity industry temperance and virtue; and some have obtained a remission of the punishment which occasioned their residence in the settlement in consequence of the signal and radical change which had taken place in their inclinations and behaviour. Where there is society their must exist offences; but on the whole considering the nature of the colony of New South Wales the morals of the people are as free from glaring defects as those of any other tract of equal population in the habitable world; and the characters which are celebrated for their virtues are as numerous in proportion as those which are to be found in other countries where civilization and prosperity have made greater progress and where individuals have greater inducement to labour and the prospect of a brighter reward for their industrious exertions.    AMUSEMENTS.  The erection of a play-house was noticed in the preceding part of this sketch; the abuses which were uniformly committed on the nights of performance subsequently rendered that a nuisance which was originally intended for an innocent recreation. When the inhabitants were engaged in this enjoyment their property was left unwatched and there were ever numbers of dishonest individuals who were ready to seize upon these opportunities to gratify their vicious dispositions. It was also a common practice to give provisions to obtain entrance if money was scarce; and thus by the frequent privations of their regular food many of the convicts were unable to pursue their labour with proper energy and activity. Other abuses also resulted from the establishment of the theatre which induced the governor to recal the permission which had been given for the performances and the playhouse itself was soon afterwards levelled to the ground.  Since the destruction of this building the sources of amusement have been confined to cricket cards water-parties shooting fishing hunting the kangaroo &c. or any other pleasures which can be derived from society where no public place is open for recreations of any description. The officers of the colony have also built a private billiard-room by subscription for their own use; and if these amusements possess not that degree of attraction which is attached to dramatic representations they cannot on the other hand be liable to those abuses and produce those injurious consequences which previously existed. [55]   Amongst the convicts indeed gaming is carried too frequently to the most deplorable excesses; and in some cases the most abandoned of the prisoners have actually staked the clothes which they wore and when those were lost stood amongst their companions in a state of nudity thus reducing themselves to a level with the natives of the woods. The most severe measures were called for by this unprincipled practice and the most gross part of the custom was done away; but it was impossible to put a total stop to the gratification of this gaming disposition which is still pursued with equal avidity in some way or other and which may be said next to drinking to constitute the chief pleasure and amusement of the lowest classes of the prisoners.  The amusements of the natives need no recital here as they have been fully detailed in other publications.    MILITARY FORCE.  The whole of the military in the colony consists of the New South Wales corps (now the 102d regiment) two volunteer associations and a body-guard of troopers for the governor commanded by a serjeant. In fact the inutility of a larger military force must be obvious to every man of common reflection since it is merely required for the purposes of preserving domestic peace which might be in danger of continual interruptions in case of the absence of military power altogether from the turbulent dispositions of many of the convicts. This inclination to revolt however is repressed by the appearance of a few organized troops; and a sufficient check is kept upon the natives who still continue to make occasional incursions and commit their depredations upon the India corn of the settlers whenever an opportunity offers itself: At these periods the soldiers are called in and a few of them are found sufficient to drive back the plunderers who hate and fear the approach of a soldier. [56]     BUILDINGS.  The buildings are of stone brick and lath and plaister; weather-boarded; and the houses are durable. There are two churches; one St. Philip's which possesses a very handsome service of communion plate presented by his Majesty and received by the Calcutta on the 8th of October 1803; and the other St. John's at Parramatta: There are likewise a school and chapel at Hawkesbury where divine service is performed. Two jails have also been erected in the colony. A house has been built for the governor at each of the principal settlements; which also possess several very commodious barracks with many other public buildings and a great number of extensive and handsome houses the property of private individuals. There are a stone bridge and several very substantial wooden ones which if not celebrated for beauty are found extremely serviceable and well calculated for all the present purposes of the colony which is not yet sufficiently advanced in prosperity to prefer ornament to use. A new stone citadel is in a course of building on which the Royal Standard for the first time in these settlements was hoisted on the 4th of June 1803; and several batteries are erected. - For a more particular account of the buildings at Sydney I must refer the reader to the following explanation of the Views of Sydney the principal seat of government which accompany this sketch:  In the View of Sydney from the East side of the Cove No. 1. the house under two birds is the Residence of the Governor in Chief which is built of brick plaistered over; has very convenient stables and out-houses and is a very pleasant and comfortable residence; the garden and shrubbery extend to about four acres. The Flag-staff near the garden-house bears the Union on holidays and different signal-colours are used there to form a communication between the shore and the king's vessels in the Cove. The Pine tree growing in the garden is from Norfolk Island and runs to an amazing height and thickness; the knots from this tree are used instead of flambeaux and burn remarkably well. The buildings under three birds as extending some distance right and left and forming a square are the Military Barracks built of brick the largest of which was erected by Lieutenant-Governor Foveaux: This is an extensive well-built place and was finished in far less time than any building ever begun upon by government in that settlement considering its magnitude. [57] The White House and Warehouses which appear immediately under that building although a considerable distance on this side belong to Mr. Simeon Lord; they are built of stone and the dwelling-house is by far the most magnificent in the colony. The road leading through Barrack-square is the high road to Parramatta. The house at the head of Government-wharf shewing four windows on the ground floor is a Dry Storehouse belonging to the crown and is used for depositing articles for barter &c. in which are sent out by government for that purpose. The small yellow house behind it belongs to government and is inhabited by Mr. John Gowen one of his majesty's store-keepers in that settlement. The yellow house on the right of the Barrack-square and having nine windows in front on each floor is an extensive Government Granary and was built of brick plaistered over under the direction of his excellency Governor Hunter. Attached to this building on the right is a very useful Military Store; and on the left a Store for the issue of Provisions. The red house to the right built of brick with two wings is the Female Orphan-house which is a very convenient building and was purchased from Captain Kent of the royal navy but great additions have been made to it subsequent to its purchase. The long building above the Orphan-house of which only a part of the front is seen is built of brick and belongs to Garnham Blaxcell Esq. whose zeal for- the colony and whose industry have equally entitled him to the esteem and praise of all. The house a little to the right of the Orphan-house and appearing to have a wing is the Dwelling and attached to it are the Warehouses of Mr. James Underwood; they are built of brick and are extremely commodious and comfortable. The building above is the Church as the tower denotes; it is built of stone and has a peal of eight bells therein but they are not very harmonious. On the right of the one road leading to the church the building with four windows and two doors in front and the erection above it are two Government Store-houses built of brick and plaister; the first is generally used for bonding of spirits in for naval stores &c.; and the other for the reception of salt provisions when any arrive from England. The Windmill on the hill is built of stone and belongs to government; and the building on the right which is continued in View No. 11. with a wall round it is built of stone and forms part of the County Gaol. In the fore ground six of the Natives are in the attitude of throwing the spear; two with spears; one with a spear and helemon or shield; and two sitting down. [58] - Of the dexterity with which they hurl this weapon some notice has been taken in a preceding part of this sketch.  In View No. 11. taken from the East side of the Cove the long building with a flight of steps is the County Gaol of which a part is seen in No. 1. The White Building to the right of the Prison of which only three windows in front and the warehouses around it are discovered belongs to Mr. Henry Kable who with Messrs. Lord and Underwood have been very industrious and enterprising men in the oil and seal-skin trade &c. and possess a number of vessels anti considerable estates in the colony. The two small Houses rather to the right below the Gaol built of brick are used for the boats' crews. The Warehouses which hide part of these huts and the House above belong to Mr. Isaac Nichols; they are very extensive and commodious and are built of stone. The House still further to the right with a door four windows and two side-lights in front and kitchen detached belongs to Mr. Thomas Moore the principal shipwright a man of unshaken integrity and large property. The wharf near this part is called the Hospital Wharf where all merchandize &c. is directed to be landed. The Road leading on the hill takes different directions to the houses and streets on the rocks. The three long- buildings on the right of the road are the General Hospitals; and in the front of them is the Government Dock-yard. Next to the right of the Hospitals one building with eight windows and two doors in front and the other with four windows and a door with side-lights in front are the Barracks occupied by the Medical Staff. The two next buildings are not tenanted by their late possessors. The large buildings to the right at the water's edge are the House and extensive Warehouses of Robert Campbell Esq. a merchant where a ship of large dimensions can load or unload with any tide alongside his wharf. Near this place a vessel belonging to that gentleman some time ago caught fire and after a great deal of trouble she was sunk by which means the fire was extinguished; she was afterwards got up and underwent such repairs as soon enabled her to proceed on her voyage. Where the yellow flag is seen flying on Dawes's Point there is a Battery and Lookout-house to communicate with the signals for ships in the offing at South Head. The River round the point leads to several agricultural and farming districts and to Parramatta. [59] On the hill is the Citadel with the union flag flying and two Government Wind-mills one built of wood and the other of stone the latter of which is unserviceable. The other buildings belong to individuals indiscriminately. The Canoes with fires in them belong to the natives.  In View No. .1. taken from the West side of the Cove on one side of the land which is farthest seen is the Harbour; and on the other is an amazing expanse of sea. There is a carriage-road made from Sydney to the extreme point which is South Head and a great many carriages and horsemen frequently go down there to spend the day or to see any vessels which may appear off the land. On South Head are a Flag-staff a Lookout-house and an Obelisk; and betwixt it and the North Head is a narrow entrance by which vessels enter the port about seven miles from Sydney. The small island in the centre is called Pinch-gut which name originated from some persons being placed there on an allowance of provisions for some offence where they built an oven the remains of which are yet to be seen: At this time there is a man named Brown before spoken of hung in chains on this spot for committing several murders. The other islands between these and the heads are called Garden Shark's and Clark's Islands. On the land to the right of Pinch-gut called Be-ne-long's Point the native of that name who was once in England had a hut built by government; but he soon left it and it was destroyed: There are also the remains of a battery there. Under two birds are two Houses on a point of land leading from Farm Cove the next cove to the eastward of Sydney. Under a large flight of birds are three Wind-mills and an extensive Bake-house; two of which and the bake-house belong to John Palmer Esq. and the other to Mr. Henry Kable. Beneath them is Government House and part of the offices and grounds. To the right of the Government wharf are the Dry Stores spoken of in No. I. from the east side. The building above that of brick is the Main Guard-house and is a very convenient place for that purpose. The Stone-house and offices to the right of the Dry Stores with five windows on a floor belong to Mr. Thomas Reiby; the brick House nearly adjoining to Mr. Andrew Thompson; and the large Stone-house and Warehouses to Mr. Simeon Lord spoken of in No. I. of the other Views; in the front of which buildings is the principal road leading to Government House where are houses and offices for the Judge Advocate Commissary Clergyman and Surveyor-General; but they are mostly hidden in this View by the trees and large buildings before them. [60] The stone building at the stern of the Sloop comprises the Warehouse and part of the House belonging to Mr. Isaac Nichols spoken of in No. 11. of the other Views and continued in the next of this. The buildings concealed by part of the long shed near but on this side Mr. Nichols's is the back part of the Assistant-Surgeon's Barracks. The house behind the trees is the back of the Barracks of the principal Surgeon. The house near the Natives who are fighting is not occupied by any person of particular consequence; and the one partly hidden by the rocks was occupied by Mr. Moore but is going to decay.  In View No. 11. taken from the West side of the Cove the lofty House of which a part is seen and which was spoken of in No. 11. of the other Views and I. of this belongs to Mr. Isaac Nichols; and the buildings on this side are the back of the General Hospital. The Bridge the only one built of stone in the whole colony is a very bad structure; the walls on each side of the arch inclose the grounds belonging to the Orphan-house and Mr. Simeon Lord. The road seen on the other side of the bridge is called Spring-row; it leads to several streets and joins the main road to Parramatta &c.; below the paling of which there are very large Tanks cut in rocks to supply the town and shipping with water; but there is another watering-place for ships on the north side of the Cove very commodious and the permission to use which produces a small annual income to the Orphan fund. The rows commencing above the foot of the Bridge on the east side are called Chapel Pitt's and Serjeant-Major's rows the latter of which under the two birds runs to the Brick-fields towards Parramatta. The House on the right at this end of the longest street seen in this View with three windows and a door visible belongs to Garnham Blaxcell Esq. spoken of in No. 1. of the other Views. The building the eastern end of which is partly covered by a tree is the most southern Military Barrack. The two lofty red houses at the west foot of the Bridge in the rise are side-views of the Orphanhouse and Mr. James Underwood's spoken of in No. 1. of the other Views. The houses on the right a spot called the Rocks belong to different individuals and some of them are very comfortable habitations. [61]   Over the south creek at Hawkesbury a floating-bridge has been erected which has proved greatly beneficial to the public; since previous to its completion every person who had occasion to go to that settlement and in many cases from one farm to another was obliged to pass to and fro in a boat. As this bridge was constructed by an individual (Mr. Andrew Thompson a settler) at his own expense the following tolls are allowed to be demanded : - For every foot-passenger four-pence or ten shillings per annum; for each horse single or in draught two shillings and sixpence or two pounds ten shillings per annum; for waggons or other four-wheel carriages with not more than half a ton lading one shilling and sixpence or one pound ten shillings per annum; for carts or carriages with two wheels laden or not each one shilling and sixpence or one pound ten shillings per annum; for sheep under a score two-pence each and by the score two shillings and sixpence or two pounds ten shillings per annum; swine and goats the same as sheep. Passengers horses carts and carriages are allowed to pass and re-pass during the same day with one ticket; and a considerable income is derived from this toll.  The children born in this colony from European parents are very robust comely and well made; nor do I recollect a solitary instance of one being naturally deformed. They are remarkably quick of apprehension; learn any thing with uncommon rapidity; and greatly improve in good manners promising to become a fine race of people.  The Duke of Northumberland has sent over some Teeswater sheep and one stallion very recently to Colonel Johnston which have greatly improved the breed of both. Mr. Mac Arthur took over some Merino sheep from the King's flock which are thriving and the wool of which is extremely fine; several samples have been produced in England. The deer in this colony (originally I believe from India) thrive very well but are of the Rein species and rather inclined to be small: I have seen some very good venison and of a superior flavour to any I ever eat in England though not so fat; the breed might be much improved by a few being sent of a larger quality. Some time ago several made their escape from a park belonging to Mr. Harris who has for many years been surgeon of the regiment there and before I left the colony they were breeding and running wild in the woods. [62]   Several foreign vessels have within these few years arrived here on discovery; but nothing material has resulted from their observations with which the reader has not been made acquainted.    CHAPTER IV.  HINTS for the IMPROVEMENT of the COLONY.   HAVING thus touched upon the progress of the Colony and its present state I shall now beg to add such Hints respecting its future improvement as have suggested themselves to my mind during a residence of ten years in the settlement in which period I have been enabled from the nature of the various situations I have held there to render myself intimately acquainted with all those particulars which are essential to the formation of a correct opinion on this interesting subject. And to the execution of this task I feel the more particularly urged since I have beheld with pain that those who seem to be most deeply impressed with the necessity which exists for the adoption of some measures to further the interests of the colony have entirely mistaken the line which ought to be followed and have marked out to themselves a course of procedure which is founded on a total misconception of the nature of the colony and a very superficial knowledge of its present state. That a period of twenty-two years has not been sufficient to render New South Wales independent of the mother country is a reflection which must produce strong and ungenial suspicions of the prudence of those methods which have been pursued to accelerate such a desirable end; and the continuance of the late system the inefficiency of which has been amply illustrated by recent events and facts which are incontrovertible is of all evils the most sincerely to be deprecated and guarded against. Of the capability of the settlement to produce adequate means for the subsistence of its members there can be but a single opinion amongst persons who are enabled from experience to judge of the nature and fertility of the soil; and it must consequently form an evident conclusion that some unnatural check must have sprung up to impede the ordinary course of proceedings. [63] My object however is not to deprecate the opinions of others but to give to the public those ideas of improvement which have arisen in my own mind and which have been confirmed by the approbation of others who are equally as well or better qualified to decide upon this important subject.  Complaints having been made by the government of the expenses of the colony which have accumulated rather than diminished with the increasing growth of the settlement I shall first enter into a statement of the causes of this augmented expense part of which as I shall hope to demonstrate with clearness has arisen out of the nature of things and the other part may be attributed to various causes.  1st As to the retarded progress of public buildings and the diminution in the labour of the convicts. - This decrease in the quantity of labour performed is to be attributed to the natural falling-off in the strength of the convicts employed in government labour from deaths desertions and their becoming free. Those who were first sent to the colony and had been originally transported for seven and fourteen years had served their times the former in 1793 and the latter in 1800; numbers had been released from their servitude on account of their exemplary behaviour or of services done to the colony; and all who became settlers being allowed one two or more convicts to assist in the cultivation of the tracts assigned to them the reduction in those who laboured for the crown must necessarily have been very considerable and must still continue in an increasing degree owing to the great numbers of free settlers who have been allowed to go out from England many of whom have only been a great expense to government and an hindrance to the settlement. From a correct estimation taken in the year 1800 it was ascertained that three-fourths of the convicts employed in the service of government at the close of 1792 had been subsequently discharged. From that period to the year 1800 1259 new male convicts arrived effective and non-effective a number which was insufficient to fill up the deficiencies occasioned by those who had obtained their liberations in consequence of having completed their terms of servitude and the emancipations which had taken place the number of which together amounted to 1264 without including the deaths casualties and escapes which may be taken at an equal number; nor were there more employed by the crown than 710 when Governor King was succeeded in the command of the colony (although a great many had arrived between those periods) including the vast number allowed to officers settlers and others and but few of the remainder were either mechanics or persons adapted to the improvement of the colony; therefore from these causes it must be evident to every rational mind that the progress of the colony towards perfection and prosperity has in fact been as rapid as could be expected considering the circumstances of the settlement; and an opinion of a contrary nature must have been grounded upon an exaggerated estimate of the means which existed and an entire ignorance of the due proportion which they have borne to the labour required at their hands. [64]   2dly As to the expenditure of the stores which were forwarded to the colony in the interval which elapsed from the departure of Governor Phillip in December 1792 to the arrival of Governor Hunter in September 1795. - It has been subsequently ascertained that in this lapse of two years and three-quarters a sufficiency of stores had been received to supply the real wants of the settlement for a period nearly thrice as long; whereas the whole was expended and the store-houses were found empty at the arrival of the latter governor from England. In consequence of the profusion which had thus been practised although it might at that time be deemed needful his excellency Governor Hunter was reduced to the necessity of purchasing new stores at an expensive market where every advantage was taken of the necessity which had induced the demand and the most exorbitant prices were charged for each article. I have understood from very good authority that two pounds were paid for a pair of men's shoes and thirty shillings for women's; tobacco was forty shillings per lb.; soap twelve shillings and sugar eight shillings; a beaver hat and a coarse jacket fetched five pounds each and every other article in an equal proportion. A great deal of time was also lost in endeavouring to make implements of husbandry mechanical tools and other requisites of a similar description. The reduced state of the colony at this period was also rendered still more deplorable by the neglect of the government in England to comply with the urgent requisitions of Governor Hunter for each supplies as were necessary. [65] The exhaustion of the stores of clothing and beds and blankets assisted to fill the hospital with patients and rendered the purchase of these articles absolutely indispensable at any price and on any terms on which they might be procured. I feel myself inclined to suppose that the backwardness which displayed itself at this time in the government to dispatch the stores which were demanded. arose from a conviction that the supplies which had been previously sent in such abundance were sufficiently ample for all the immediate wants of the colony and consequently that the pressure of necessity could not be so great as was represented; for it was not to be expected that those officers who administered the government of the colony on the arrival of their successors would depict the situation of the settlement and the state of the stores in any other than a favourable light particularly to his Majesty's ministers at home; a line of conduct which tended considerably to enhance the mischiefs which had been already showered upon the inhabitants by the perhaps too liberal distribution which had been displayed in the issuing of the various necessaries during their administration.  3dly As to the custom of allowing to settlers a certain number of convicts for years to assist in the tillage and continuing to victual those servants out of the public stores. - I am clearly of opinion that much evil has arisen from the unrestrained issue of this indulgence. The original object of this grant was to enable the young farmer to clear the tract which was assigned to him and to bring it into a condition which would enable it to produce a maintenance for its possessor; then he was required to take the convicts which he thought it necessary to retain entirely off the public stores and to victual and clothe them at his own cost. The abuse of this indulgence however has arisen from the extension of its advantages to an unlimitted term; so that the farmer is interested in retarding the efforts which he might otherwise be induced to make for the improvement of his land in order to save himself from the burden of supporting his servants; and thus a spirit of indolence is promoted and the original intention of the measure is totally perverted. The continuance of this pernicious system previous to the administration of Governor Hunter had induced the settlers to look upon it as a right rather than an indulgence. Numbers of useful mechanics whose services might have been turned to advantage in the exercise of their different professions for the public benefit were thus given to those who cultivated lands until their term was expired; and no sooner did they recover their freedom than they quitted the service of government for more lucrative employments; the consequence was artificers at a high price were to be hired by the governor to build those store-houses which might have been erected before and to repair the towns of Parramatta and Toongabbee which were falling into ruins on account of the necessary repairs having been neglected at a proper season: This was a new expense entailed upon government and many thousands were expended which foresight and prudent policy might have saved. [66]   A 4th cause of superfluous expense to the crown was to be found in the employment of the convicts to perform the public service by task-work which was completed by nine or ten o'clock in the morning and thus left the hands free to assist in the cultivation of those tracts of land which had been granted to different descriptions of persons. Thus was the government labour protracted in a most shameful degree; the labour of little more than a week requiring the lapse of a month to complete it; and thus also several were induced by their attention to their individual interests to neglect the service of the colony. The consequence of this innovation was the rapid clearing and cultivation of such persons' estates and the erection of comfortable residences and the acquisition of further accommodations which they must otherwise have waited some time to obtain; while the buildings which were required to be raised for the security of the stores and for other purposes of equal necessity were greatly retarded. I am confident also that this conduct tended to relax the discipline which ought to have been rigidly preserved amongst the convicts and produced a general carelessness of the general interest; and it was not without some difficulty that Governor Hunter succeeded in the adoption of a contrary line of behaviour. Habits of dissipation and indolence resulted from this pernicious mode of bartering the public for individual interest which had taken such deep root as to render their complete eradication matter of the most extreme difficulty: The encroachments on the hours of labour for the crown has however been done away by Governor Hunter and a more regular system has been adopted in the allowance of convicts and other indulgences to settlers &c. by order of the Secretary of State since his excellency's departure. [67]   The custom of imprisoning for debt those persons who are employed in the public service constitutes the 5th article of notice; and this practice had been carried to such a pitch that dealers would readily give credit to convicts or any servants of the crown under the idea that they might sue the debtors for the amount and imprison them or obtain the benefit of their labour until the debt was liquidated. The necessities of the convicts frequently compelled them to seek for credit and thus to throw themselves into the power of those iniquitous designers. In consequence of the prevalence of this practice many of the convicts were immured continually and thus the public was deprived of their services; since they preferred remaining indolently in confinement to making those complaints to the governor which would have led to their release and reinstation in their former situations of labour. Governor Hunter no sooner made himself acquainted with the mischievous extent to which this conduct was carried than he published an order in which he prohibited every person in trade from " crediting the servants of the crown " under the plea of their being at liberty to imprison their persons; if " such credit was given it was to be understood as being done at the " risk of the creditor on the good faith he entertained of the integrity of the persons he so entrusted but that the public should not be deprived " of the labour of its servants for the partial accommodation of individuals." This order was dated the 4th of October 1798 three years after the return of Governor Hunter to the administration of his high and responsible office; and the regulation was justified by the situation of the colony and the abuses which had sprung out of the custom. After the publication of this order however I saw many persons committed to prison for debt whose situation as convicts exempted them from incarceration; but this apparent breach of the regulation was entirely attributable to the ignorance of the court which had thus decided that the person against whom their warrant was directed was at the time a bond-servant and consequently within the reach of this clause. Whenever a commitment of this description came to the governor's knowledge (which was always the case in a few days when the report of the prisoners for debt was delivered to him) the delinquent was immediately enlarged since his confinement was illegal as contrary to the order which had been published on the subject. [68]   Another cause of expense comprising the 6th in this enumeration arose out of the number of orphan children in the settlement who were allowed full ration and clothing at the charge of government. This evil has however experienced a very natural reduction from the judicious measures adopted by Governor Hunter who laid the foundation of a fund for the benefit of these orphans; the consequence of which has been the completion of a school for the education and maintenance of female children of that description and which is now supported by various imposts upon merchandize and other taxations or fines for certain offences against the general orders. The children embraced by this charity are not simply the offspring of deceased parents but such other children also as have been left unprovided for by the desertion of those whose duty it was to foster them or from the circumstance of their being found to be worthless and profligate characters or by their having betrayed a carelessness and indifference as to the moral improvement of their children; where such a disposition displayed itself the offspring were taken from them and their subsequent progress was made the care of this institution which provided for their support and improvement; and I am happy to say that there is every appearance of a great good arising from this foundation by rescuing from infamy and shame and bringing up to a life of virtue and industry a number of fine young girls whom it is earnestly hoped will strive to repay the paternal care that has been taken of them in their juvenile days by a strict adherence to every pure inclination as they rise in age and a grateful remembrance of those from whom their happiness has sprung.  7thly The establishment of a most injurious monopoly amongst the inhabitants of the settlement which has tended to the ruin of fair trade - The commencement of this baleful system is traced back to the administration of Governor Phillip at which time I was not in the settlement. In a very scarce period when all classes were labouring under every kind of privation the officers prayed leave of the governor to charter the ship Britannia for the Cape of Good Hope to bring back cattle and other articles on their account for which speculation a considerable sum was subscribed in equal shares. The governor assented to the proposition in consequence of the peculiar state of the colony at that time; but scarcely had the Britannia sailed upon her voyage when the governor having received leave of absence left the settlement and the government immediately changed its form from a naval to a military system. [69] In consequence of this variation permission was readily obtained for the disposal of the cargo thus imported on its arrival and after its passing through the hands of the importers the chief part of the merchandize produced from 1000l. to 2000l. per cent to the private retailer. These extraordinary advantages could but be attended with evil and destructive consequences to the settlement at large; nor does the system of monopoly which was so early introduced in the colony cease to spread its baleful influence; by which means the settlers who were deserving of the most marked encouragement and indulgence still remain in far less affluent circumstances than they otherwise might have been. This topic deserves serious attention and the mild hand of legislative authority to check its further pernicious effects.  Having spoken thus on the subject of monopoly which I shall at a future period fully establish and which has occasioned the sacrifice of the public to individual interest I shall proceed to advert 8thly to the loss which the government has sustained in the dereliction of some of its most valuable servants who have been allured by the rapid fortunes made by several individuals to quit the service of the public and to embark in traffic. The inferior officers of the settlement and the non-commissioned officers and privates of the regiment have been infected with the itch for dealing; and many of the settlers themselves have either disposed of their farms or deserted them to obtain the means or the leisure to devote themselves to a species of dealing which never failed to turn to good account. Many who had also served their terms of transportation instead of remaining to aid the public service withdrew themselves from the stores and turned their thoughts to trade. The consequence of this universal inclination to one object and that of such an evil nature being chiefly confined to the sale of spirits soon became obvious in the desertion of those farms which had been previously tilled with so much advantage and in the neglect of all (In ties whether of a public or private nature. The immense profits made by this pursuit served as a new stimulus to its continuance:  One dealer was known to have cleared twelve hundred pounds sterling in four weeks and chiefly by the sale of spirits; and an inhabitant of the lowest order who commenced dealing with five pounds has been known to realize five hundred pounds in the course of six months. [70] It must naturally be inferred that the most base imposition must have been practised to render this business so extremely lucrative and the article itself must have been diluted away to excessive weakness; but while the temptation remained so strong it is not to be wondered at that such numbers of persons in a colony of this or any other description should be found to quit every other object for a free and full pursuit of one so full of attraction. Many of the convicts soon acquired property in this way and some of those who had been in that unfortunate situation by their good conduct are now considered as respectable characters and are in possession of horses carriages and servants with a sufficiency to secure their independence during the remainder of their lives. The military have also made considerable wealth by the same course and the consequence was the instilment into every bosom of a consciousness of independence which was fatal to that strict subordination which ought to be maintained and enforced. Non-commissioned officers were the principal actors in this department and being connected by the ties of common interest they formed a combination which interfered with the middle class of inhabitants since they could get on board any vessels on account of their rank which gave them the privilege of doing so without being under the necessity of obtaining a written pass for that purpose. The principle of allowing a servant to enter into traffic is fraught with the most serious mischief; since he is not only led to neglect the duties he has undertaken to perform but gradually becomes independent in his feelings and opinions and substitutes insolence of conduct for the respect which ought to mark his behaviour. The value of an article also becomes greatly enhanced to the consumer when it is permitted to pass through so many hands each individual of whom must place upon it a profit which he deems adequate to his labour or his ingenuity. Allowing liberty to a prisoner to pursue this kind of avocation is productive of another evil; it leads him by gradual steps from becoming careless of his proper duty to the assumption of a degree of importance and independence which induces him to place himself above his master and thus controverts the natural and necessary distinctions of society. This traffic has also originated numerous frauds of a pecuniary description amongst which may be mentioned as the most notorious the custom of indorsing notes of hand over to persons without receiving any consideration for the same and thus making them the plaintiffs in the suits which they were permitted to institute. [71] From all these practices it has resulted that numerous settlers have been induced to neglect or quit their farms which with industrious management were competent to the supply of all their necessary wants and thus to diminish the means of procuring subsistence for the colony; and they have become dissatisfied with a country which is capable of being made the most lovely and prolific in the world. Amongst the inhabitants also was introduced the vice of gaming - a natural consequence of the astonishing increase of wealth in men of little principle and no economy; drunkenness was the ready way to this crime and so addicted were many of every class of society to it that they scrupled not after losing the property which they possessed to stake that which they did not possess. Some persons however either favoured by fortune or possessing more prudence than their unfortunate companions contrived to retain the property they had gained and by applying it to traffic are now in a state of affluence of which few persons can form an accurate conception.  The 9th item of expense is to be found in the provisions and spirits issued to parties on command; a custom which has been esteemed proper and necessary in cases where such parties have been employed in particular services for the public benefit and in no other cases have they been issued during the administrations of governors Phillip and Hunter. These services were of various descriptions parties being frequently detached in pursuit of those who had absconded either into the woods or had carried off boats and endeavoured to escape over the ocean; others were oftentimes employed in excursions into the interior to obtain a more perfect and comprehensive acquaintance with the nature and productions of the country; others again were sent at times to reconnoitre the herds of wild cattle to remark their progress and see that no attempts were made to destroy such an useful resource; the inspection of the various settlements also occupied. some detachments; small divisions were dispatched to cruize and survey the coast; and the crews of colonial vessels which were engaged in going to and from the Hawkesbury as well as to the more distant settlements were in the habit of receiving these extra supplies as they had no other means of increasing their common allowance when such augmentation was necessary: Certain customary rations were also given to the settlers while they were employed in making and repairing the different roads which led to the settlements and at which periods they received allowances in proportion to the number of days during which their services were required. [72] It had also been usual to give one pint of spirits weekly to each of the clerks employed in the offices of the governor secretary commissary and judge advocate; a similar portion was also issued to the constables of the crown and the overseers; and also to such constables of districts as were chosen out of the inhabitants who were not prisoners and who with their families were victualled from the public stores; but some of these have been subsequently done away with being considered by Governor King as a superfluous addition to the already excessive expenses of -the colony. There are also many other occasional duties the persons employed in which would be entitled to the extra allowances from a sense of their indispensable necessity since it is sufficiently evident that men who are called upon and expected to perform services of more than common exertion must receive additional means of increasing their physical strength and of enabling them to execute the task assigned to them.  A 10th cause of loss to the crown and of the expenses of the colony resulted from the abuses formerly practised in the medical department of the colony; amongst which it was customary to screen the convalescent labourers in the Hospital and to employ them for individual benefit so that the patients were thus kept under the hands of medical men longer than was requisite for the establishment of their health: An imposition of this nature called for immediate steps on the part of the governor but unfortunately his excellency Governor Hunter did not receive information of this iniquitous practice until he had delivered up his executive power and was embarked or otherwise he expressed his determination to have put a stop to the disgraceful proceeding; it has however subsequently been done away 'with. At one time it was ascertained there were forty or fifty convicts who were thus kept in the Hospital and were employed by a medical man in the furtherance of his private interests and such other occupations as he marked out for them to the loss of eleven pounds five shillings a day to the crown. Such a circumstance as this from a quarter so totally unexpected afforded an additional proof of the general disposition which prevailed amongst almost every class of society to push their individual interests to the detriment of the public service; and instead of giving their full assistance to promote the prosperity of the colony to retard its progress. and make its necessities the source of their profit. [73]   The 11th cause of loss to the crown and of the expenses of the colony arises from the dependent settlements within the limits of that territory; and although the governments at the River Derwent and Port Dalrymple are allowed to draw separate Treasury bills for their internal expenses yet the great quantity of wheat maize salt provisions slop clothing and other stores it is absolutely necessary to send from the principal seat of government to those places added to the conveyance and other unavoidable charges enhances the expenses at Sydney to an amount that no person would believe but such as have had an opportunity of being an eye-witness to the mode in which such immense sums are disposed of or upon strictly investigating the voluminous official documents which are transmitted from that colony. As the accounts of the expense of the settlement at Newcastle are wholly included in those at Port Jackson I shall forbear to make any regular estimate thereupon; but it must be evident that where the subsistence of such distant places chiefly depend upon a settlement but a short time colonized the expenses must be very considerable and the supplies must be given out and used with the greatest caution to prevent the necessity of applying to a market where their charges are generally exorbitant and in most cases optional.  The last source of expense to the government which I shall mention and which although now also done away has been the means of an astonishing increase in the expenditure of the colony. From the fertility of its soil Norfolk Island was for some time considered a great acquisition to the principal settlement; but subsequent experience has proved the futility of this idea since the price of grain instead of lowering in proportion to the additional trouble bestowed on the cultivation of the soil remained the same just before its evacuation as it had been eight years before. As a place for raising swine this island indeed might have proved of much utility if the establishment there had been almost entirely reduced and the attention of the colony had been confined to this subject and to the curing of pork for the consumption of all the other settlements; but as this method was not adopted it proved from the time of its establishment a continual check upon the prosperity of the principal colony draining those resources which ought to have been applied to different purposes where the hope and probability of some recompense adequate to the expense might have been more sanguine and less unlikely. [74] Norfolk Island so far from returning any proportionate recompense for those supplies had not in the course of thirteen years sent to New South Wales property of any description exceeding in value 2000l.; during which period all the expenses of that island were included in the general account of the whole country with the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury. So far from being in itself a flourishing colony Governor Hunter who called there in his way to England in 1800 found that the whole of the public and numbers of private erections were in a most miserable condition; and his excellency declared that he had scarcely seen a negro town in the West Indies with half such a wretched appearance. The grain here and there displayed a promising appearance and swine were in some considerable numbers; but the coast was dangerous Governor Hunter being himself once wrecked upon it in the Sirius and nearly lost with all his ship's crew; and this circumstance is calculated to deter vessels from touching at the island in quest of wood and water which are both plentiful but which may be procured in equal abundance in any of the other islands of the Pacific ocean where there are fewer rocks and breakers to contend with and where the acquiescence of the natives might easily be purchased. In addition to the above obstacles and inauspicious appearances vessels at this place have no anchorage but are obliged always to keep under sail; and I have known them to be blown off the island for several weeks together with very little provision on board whilst a part of the crew have been on shore; and by those means not only a considerable loss has accrued to the merchants or owners but the lives of a number of fellow-creatures have been exposed to the most imminent danger.  To the existence of these with other subsequent causes it may be attributed that the colony of New South Wales has not made a more rapid progress towards independence but has so long hung as it were upon the breast and derived its sole nourishment from the food of the mother country. To raise the settlement from this state of dependence; to expunge from its early page that stain which must be affixed to it by remoter ages; to stimulate its growth and impel it along the path which leads to greatness must be the object the desire and the hope of every one who feels an interest in its prosperity; and it a long residence in the colony a fall consciousness of its capacity and an unshaken affection for the country can entitle any one to a rank amongst the friends of this infant empire I flatter myself that my claim must be allowed; and I shall therefore proceed to suggest those further ideas of improvement which are founded in a thorough knowledge of the subject from experience. [75]   To facilitate the rise of New South Wales to a state of consequence and independence its interests must be entrusted to a governor who has no private or mercenary views and will seek after nothing but the welfare of the colony; who will thoroughly support the trust and honour reposed in him as the representative of our most gracious Sovereign; who will not treat nor suffer others to treat the officers serving under him with indignity; who will not study the rapid rise of one man and the sudden downfal of another but will administer and cause justice to be administered impartially to all descriptions of persons and only shew his favour to those whose conduct is such as to merit his distinguished notice. Under such a man the industrious settlers should receive the most liberal encouragement to induce them to pay every attention to the cultivation of their lands and to the rearing of stock; and I am of opinion that when the price of grain has been reduced under ten shillings per bushel for wheat five shillings for maize and barley and four shillings and sixpence for oats the grower has very frequently been a loser without admitting that in the course of the season there had been any flood blight insect or rust to injure the growing crops. I speak this from the general knowledge I have of the country having taken every settler's and other muster there for a number of years and from the concurrent opinions of several of the first and most independent farmers throughout the settlement; nor can any man who is acquainted with the exorbitant wages demanded by every class of labourers who are not prisoners assigned by the crown to their employers. in that part of the world and the great difficulties attending the various occupations he has to encounter before his grain can be brought to the market judge otherwise. The government stores should also be open at all times to receive the grain which would not only enable the commissary to send the requisite supplies to the dependent settlements but would also afford a powerful security against the fatal and frequent losses which are occasioned by the floods so destructive to property of every description but more particularly to the grain; and it would also set aside the necessity of issuing short allowance to those prisoners who are necessarily supported by the crown by which means government labour is sometimes retarded in consequence of the reduction of the hours of work in proportion to the diminution In the weekly ration. [76]   If government were also to decline farming it would excite a greater degree of perseverance in the settlers and would in my opinion eventually disburden the crown of a very considerable expense as those employed in agriculture on the government account are generally that description of persons who only care how little they work and are equally as indifferent as to the manner in which their labour is performed; besides which very few of these individuals are at all acquainted with the art of husbandry particularly that system which ought to be adopted in a colony the climate soil and produce of which are so essentially different to those of the mother country; and those few as soon as they have attained a knowledge of the regular method necessary there to he pursued are generally taken away by some cause or other or claim their freedom from the original term of their transportation being expired so that little better than a succession of new hands have to perform a task of which the chief part are totally ignorant.  By the opening of the stores and the prevention of the losses before mentioned the Southseamen and other vessels touching at Port Jackson might at all times receive ample supplies of such refreshments as they stood in need of in exchange for articles more serviceable to the inhabitants than any recompense of a pecuniary nature; and indeed absolutely necessary to the comfort and prosperity of the colony. In case of a war in these seas or in any tart of India this settlement would prove a very desirable depot and place of rendezvous. Soldiers and seamen would at all times be healthy without great fatigue free from scorbutic complaints so prevalent after a long voyage and would not suffer from a change of climate which too frequently brings on dysentery or other fatal diseases; these circumstances would naturally render them more fit to enter a field of battle and better qualified in every respect to endure the wearisome fatigues and dangers of war.  Several ships which have touched at the settlement under the pressure of necessity have been denied the requisitions which they have made for bread and other provisions; and although the local circumstances of the colony rendered that denial absolutely necessary yet had the settler been guaranteed by any means against loss or could he have received any sufficient security for his grain every ship which had been in need as well as every one touching there in future would have been and might be amply provided for. [77] The influx of American vessels and ships from the East Indies has recently suffered a very considerable diminution; the former at one period nearly supplied the colony with articles of almost every description at very reasonable prices but from some cause or other vessels from the United States seldom now arrive at the settlement with merchandize for sale; the Indian vessels have also ceased to arrive in the same numbers as formerly and the supplies have consequently fallen off materially which naturally injures all descriptions of persons not only by preventing an immediate intercourse between those countries but also by lessening very considerably the consumption of stock grain &c. so that the settler in planting his land has now no other views than to raise a sufficiency of grain for the consumption of his own family and the liquidation of his debts. He has no longer a stimulus to labour; he calculates that the time and toil are wasted which are spent in raising an article for which he has no vent; his industrious disposition is consequently cramped; his present exertions are without hope of reward; and his prospects are divested of the supporting promise of future comfort or competence. Such a system as this evidently and rapidly tends to ruin; these symptoms are the obvious marks of a diseased economy; and if decay appears in the present unripe state of the country with what propriety - with what hope - on what grounds can the mind calculate upon future prosperity?  The vessels of neutral powers ought to be encouraged in my opinion to trade to the settlement; they would serve the colony by giving encouragement to the settlers; there would once again be a beneficial competition; there would be a channel for the carrying off the surplus produce of the country and industry might again look forward with joyous expectation to the harvest of its toil. These vessels might be laden back with spermaceti or other oils seal skins coals ship-timber fustic or any other articles the produce of the settlements and the Southern Seas; and thus a traffic might be established and carried on with reciprocal benefit and the independence of New South Wales must be greatly aided in consequence of these beneficial regulations. [78]   It may perhaps be argued that the indiscriminate admission of the trade of neutral vessels might tend to injure the British ships trading to this colony; but such a consequence I think may easily be averted since the governor has power to prevent those ships from selling any such articles as he may deem it expedient to prohibit; and no injury could consequently be sustained while it would hold out the necessity of selling the European goods at a reasonable rate or the wants of the colony might be supplied from another market. The arrival of neutral ships with merchandise would also tend to prevent the too frequent monopolies which take place in this quarter of the nature of which and their mischievous effects upon the general prosperity of the colony I have spoken in a former part of this chapter; and I feel a great regret that circumstances at this moment prevent me from enlarging upon so destructive a subject and exposing the very root of so pernicious an evil which has latterly been fostered by those whom nothing more than suspicion could ever have attached to but by recent events; and I am anxious that a full exposition of the plans which had been adopted to facilitate the rapid rise of a mercenary and powerful few to the serious injury and almost inevitable downfal of the country will be held up to the public view of every impartial man; by which means the grand promoters of so nefarious a practice will bring upon their own heads that disgrace dishonour and infamy which their vile projects had formed for others to bear the burthen of it has been truly said that by means of those ships a great quantity of spirits have been introduced into the settlement of Port Jackson and on this plea the prohibition of their sales it is said has taken place but which I do not strictly believe: However the landing of those noxious cargoes might easily be prevented; or they might be suffered to be brought on shore and lodged in one of his majesty's store-houses under a bond so that whenever the vessel was about to sail from the port she might receive it again having some trusty and vigilant person placed on board to see that no smuggling transactions were carried on and where he should be ordered to remain until the ship quits the Heads. By these means which would be no expense to the crown the dry goods &c. which had been brought to the market might be readily disposed of without any risk being incurred of the introduction of too much of that maddening liquor generally brought by these vessels to be distributed amongst the inhabitants of the colony. [79]   It must be obvious to every man of reason that the early days of colony require as much attention and assistance as human infancy and that a course of improper and unskilful treatment at the outset must undoubtedly lay the foundation of future imbecility and ultimate destruction. Much evil has already been done in the settlement but it is not yet too late to apply the remedy; the malady which threatens the existence of the colony has not yet attained to an incurable height and if the proper measures are adopted prosperity and happiness may yet be seen where adversity and apprehension are at present discovered; and the seeds of a new and powerful nation may not be doomed to perish before they have scarcely broken the ground which was intended for the scene of their growth and expansion. I shall however without farther digression endeavour to point out other means of improving the settlement than such as relate to its agriculture.  The establishment of a post-office for the receipt of all letters and parcels for private individuals and for the dispatch of those which are transmitted from the colony would be productive of essential service to the general interests and could be entrusted to some person of respectability whose remuneration might arise from a certain tax or postage:  Such an institution would prevent a number of letters from being lost delivered to wrong persons or illegally obtained by such for the purpose of sending to the friends of the person for whom they were intended with a view to obtain money or other property. It has frequently occurred that boxes &c. have been gained under false pretensions from on board ships which had arrived in the port and the contents of which have been worth a very considerable value: The persons guilty of this crime by some means obtain the information as to the packages which are on board and then personate or cause some of their connexions to personate those to whom the packages are addressed on which they obtain the property by only signing a receipt to the officer on board. An office of this description would effectually prevent the recurrence of such fraudulent practices and would give a security for the regular delivery or transmission as well as the security of the letters &c. which were entrusted to its care An oath might be administered to the super-intendant.  The unfit clothing sent out for the convicts has been a subject of sincere complaint as being dispatched without any regard to quality or comfort. [80] I am therefore of opinion that it would be highly expedient to send out a considerable portion of wearing apparel unmade so that there would be an absolute saving of the cost of making; for the wearers would feel much greater satisfaction from being allowed to receive it in the piece that they might suit it to their respective wants as well as consult their own comforts: Those who might have less leisure than their fellow-prisoners could have their clothing made by the tailors of the different settlements while the others would be happy to make their own. If this plan were to be carried into execution it might be necessary to find a person properly qualified to take the superintendence of this mechanical department; and such an one might readily be found in the mother country whose disposition owing to adverse circumstances might lead him to accept this situation in the colony; thus a proper quantity of work would be completed and economy would be much promoted.  The indiscriminate distribution of the clothing sent over is also another evil which requires a remedy and this might easily be provided by supplying the prisoners only with such articles as were necessary to them; since those who had received superfluous garments have been in the habit of resorting with them to gaming or sell them being unable to apply them to any purpose of wear as their scanty make will not allow of a change; this however would not be the case if the clothing was given to them unmade since every man would find himself enabled to turn it to some beneficial purpose. The clothing has materially fallen off in point of quality and suitableness for the climate of late years; but the evil complained of would in my opinion cease to exist if articles similar to those originally distributed in the time of Governor Phillip (of which I have seen several suits) were now to be issued annually. Many of the females indeed are the slaves of vanity and pride and being in the custom of cohabiting with persons in affluent circumstances never appear in the dress originally given them by the crown; from such as these the issue is now withheld and they are struck off the victualling list. The consequence of these regulations would be the obtainment of more comfortable clothing to the convicts and a considerable diminution in the sick list which has been filled as much from this as from any other cause; and a degree of content and carefulness would be instilled into the minds of the prisoners in lieu of the negligence slovenliness and discontent which have recently prevailed amongst them on that account. [81]   A very considerable saving in the expenses of the colony would be effected by the consolidation of the two offices of Ship-owner and Contractor into one and the undertaking to land all stores which are liable to injury in the colony in a perfect state at his own risk; for it is a notorious fact as I have often had occasion to observe in an official capacity that vast quantities of clothing stores and provisions are landed out of every vessel which arrives in the port in such a damaged state as to be actually unserviceable; the necessary consequence of which very often is the total loss of the articles to government; nor has it unfrequently happened that boxes containing stores have been broke open on the passage and articles of various descriptions thereby have been purloined to a very great amount. It cannot be doubted that there are many ship-owners who would not scruple to enter into an engagement of the kind to which I have alluded by sending out his own vessels and might undertake to convey the stores safely at a very reduced expense. The saving which would thus be effected is surely sufficient to justify the experiment since the security of the articles which are in general the most damaged might be easily guarded by the adoption of a few measures of prudent precaution and by a careful attention during the voyage. A considerable advantage might also accrue to the merchant from employing his vessels in the Southern Whale-fishery and a strong probability would exist of his procuring freights from India for his ships on account of the East India Company: The adoption of this plan seems to be practicable and there cannot be a reasonable doubt entertained of its superiority over every other in point of economy.  A commissioner or agent might be appointed for the purposes of inspecting the stores and various articles sent to New South Wales whose duty it would be to see the articles shipped correctly and thus to prevent those omissions which are daily in the habit of occurring and which are of more consequence than may at first glance be imagined. This person might also be beneficially employed in comparing the stores shipped with the receipts of the masters so as to preclude all possibility of practices which are inconsistent with the welfare of the government but which are too common and can only be prevented by the adoption of such a measure as the one which I now propose. [82] Whenever the governor of the colony should send over a requisition this agent ought immediately to be furnished with an extract from his excellency's correspondence so that by these means the requisition would not be liable to neglect and much trouble would be spared to the Public Office whose province it had previously been to attend to this department. The reduction of expense which would result from this appointment would be much more than adequate to the increased expense incurred by the appointment and remuneration of a gentleman of probity and respectability to this office.  The method of conveying convicts from England is so very inhuman that some better and more benevolent measure ought to be adopted. The lives of these unfortunate victims of depravity ought surely to be regarded with as much care as those of any other class of his Majesty's subjects; the contrary of this has however been too frequently the case and some of the masters of the transports who have been entrusted with these captives have treated them with such uniform rigour that numbers have perished through the intensity of their sufferings. This want of care is to be attributed to the former custom of contracting for the transport of the convicts at so much per head so that the master has no interest in the preservation of those entrusted to his care. This evil too might also be remedied by the contract being made only for the number which might be landed in New South Wales and by which means the owner of the transport would study to preserve the life of each individual with the most studious attention since the loss of a single life would be a diminution of his profit and there could no longer be a danger of the unhappy prisoners being suffered to perish from any negligence or severity. In addition to this the surgeon and the master might receive a reward for each person whom they delivered in good order if their humanity was such as to require a pecuniary stimulus. I believe this has been tried in some instances at least report has so stated and if so there must have been sufficient evidence gained of the superiority of the method over that which was formerly adopted. It might not be a bad plan to try if some of the superfluous frigates in the service might not be converted into good transports; for there could be no doubt that in vessels of this description the accommodations which might be afforded to the convicts would much exceed those of the common transport ships and the prisoners would of course be sooner fit for duty and less liable to the attacks of disease. [83] Out of several ships that have arrived not two-thirds of the number of convicts originally put on board have reached their pace of destination; and this mortality it is feared must have been occasioned by the embezzlement of the provisions and stores which were intended for the use of the captives. It is also much to be feared that an undue degree of severity has oftentimes been exercised towards the convicts under the pretence of some attempts to mutiny and effect their escape and such methods of throwing censure upon the innocent to excuse wantonness and cruelty cannot be too severely reprehended if reprehension be all that can be inflicted upon the perpetrators of such diabolical deeds. The treatment has been directly reverse where a King's officer has been placed on board the transport who evinced an unshaken resolution to perform his duty. The convicts which came out on board the Royal Admiral Captain Bond met with a treatment and arrived in a condition which reflected the highest honour on the humanity and prudence of her esteemed commander and might be properly held forth as a model and an example to the masters of all transports who may in future be employed in the service. Every attention was paid to their cleanliness in particular care was taken to provide them with the most wholesome provisions and their messes were so varied as to prevent any dislike arising from repetitions with too much frequency; on the slightest appearance of indisposition some nourishing broths wine &c. were constantly ordered; twice a day they were mustered on deck and the ship was completely fumigated: The whole arrived in the most excellent health and spirits imaginable. If every master had displayed a similar good conduct there would have been no ground for the present complaint nor any room for the remedy which I suggest in the preceding part of this article.  A number of gentlemen of small fortunes might be appointed whose characters will bear the strictest investigation and whose talents are adequate to the task to go over to the colony as justices of the peace in order that the general welfare and individual security of the colony should be promoted. To these persons many indulgences might be granted and a respectable salary ought to be attached to the office so as to enable them to support that degree of respectability and dignity which their situation requires; so as to make their interest totally unconnected with those pursuits which have led so many to sacrifice their principles and to neglect their duty for the sake of pursuing the search after independence. [84] The incorruptibility which ought to characterise the conduct of a magistrate should be so fortified by every prudent precaution that it may at no time however remote be in danger of agitation; nor would it be prudent in another point of view to permit these gentlemen to mingle in occupations which must have an evident tendency to distract their attention from those arduous tasks which they would be called upon to fulfil in a country where criminals must naturally abound. Numbers of persons are doubtless to be found in Great Britain who would gladly accept these appointments whose educations have taught them to look above situations to which unforeseen and unavoidable calamity may have reduced them; men who have preserved their principles and integrity unshaken by the attacks of adversity and who consequently must be eminently qualified to fill such offices as those which I have here suggested. The example which these persons would hold out to the rest of the settlement could not fail of producing very beneficial effects upon the moral conduct of those who copy the models of their superiors; and would also be of service in assisting to create a society of power and independence which might operate as a check upon the influence of all other descriptions of persons.  As instances of the irregularities that have been practised by some of those in magisterial capacities I need repeat none others than that I have known men without trial to be sentenced to transportation by a single magistrate at his own barrack; and free men after having been acquitted by a court of criminal judicature to be banished to one or other of the dependent settlements: And I have heard a magistrate tell a prisoner who was then being examined for a capital offence and had some things found upon him which were supposed to have been stolen and for which be would not account that were he not going to be hanged so soon he (the magistrate) would be d-d if he would not make him say from whence he got them. Nor do I believe it less true that records of an examination wherein a respectable young man was innocently engaged have been destroyed by that same magistrate before whom the depositions were taken. These and numerous other cases which I could enumerate cannot admit of a doubt but that such a regulation must tend greatly to the preservation of the liberty of the subject the property of all classes of the inhabitants and the general interest and security of the colony at large. [85]   I should also strongly advise that nine or ten of the principal officers of government should be authorized to act in the capacity of council to whom the governor could resort in all periods of difficulty and delicacy for advice how to shape his conduct by which means he would not in any future instance be left wholly dependent upon his own judgment. The good effects of this arrangement must soon be evident since the issuing of an order of council could not fail to carry with it much additional weight to that which would be attached to an act of the governor alone and would tend to the speedy suppression of any appearance of insubordination and discourage those who should incline so to act as to originate a spirit of dissatisfaction in the settlement. To a want of this council it may not be too much to attribute the present unsettled state of the colony and the maturation of a faction which has perverted the streams of justice and which has impeded the growth of opulence throughout the settlement merely to enrich a select party at the expense of the general welfare and consequently to spread vice and ruin through a land whose prosperity has never become their care although it was a solemn pledge of their leaders to support and cherish it to the very utmost of their ability in addition to this council composed of the chief officers of the government I consider it essentially requisite that a barrister should be appointed as a counsellor to the governor at all times when his excellency is referred to in matter of doubtful disputation which must oftentimes occur in the colony and which frequently reduces him to an unpleasant dilemma. Aided by a legal adviser however his judgment must be strengthened and his decision would be more weighty without creating in his breast those uneasy sensations which must arise under different circumstances. in the present conformation of the government the governor has no legal adviser to have recourse to when an appeal is made to his decision which is not rarely the case except the judge advocate and this officer having previously given his opinion in the court below cannot of course be again consulted on the same subject In consequence of this default of advice the governor must give his own Opinion which may or may not be in conformity with the laws of the mother country just as it may happen and according to the knowledge he may possess of the principles and practice of jurisprudence which is seldom very deep in persons whose inclinations are so opposite to this kind of study as the officers of the navy and army from whom the governors of the colony have hitherto been selected. [86] This counsellor could be selected from those who might be induced to listen to such a proposal as may place before them a certain liberal competence with the opportunity of rising -to independence in a sphere where the number of competitors would be so low as to render final success less precarious. It is needless to expatiate more amply upon the benefits which must accrue from an appointment of this nature which would impose but a trifling additional burden on the crown since it is extremely possible that a barrister might be obtained for the salary of 1501. per annum which together with the victualling of himself and his family and servants from the public stores and residence in the colony rent-free added to the other customary indulgences given to persons from whose services utility is expected to be derived would -not make his situation worth less than 500l. per annum a temptation which must possess some weight in the minds of those who meet with inadequate encouragement in England.  The legislative code of the colony requires a careful revision since the numerous residents who have arrived in the settlement and their increasing respectability and opulence render such a measure necessary. That system which would suit the original establishment composed only of two classes the officers of government and the convicts will scarcely be expected to adapt itself to the wants and wishes of a community advanced in civilization: In the former case the principal object was to punish delinquency; in the latter to secure property and insure the safety of that wealth which now began to shew itself in the multiplication of luxuries and the augmentation of individual splendour. The present system is so liable to abuse and has given just occasion for so many complaints on the part of those traders who visit the colony in great numbers as well as of the more respectable classes of the inhabitants themselves that it is become highly expedient to substitute in its place one which shall be incorruptible and which from its own importance may command a greater degree of respect. At the head of this court ought to be placed a chief justice who by the respectability of his salary should be effectually placed above the reach of every motive of an improper or injurious nature; and in order to lighten this expense to the crown certain court fees might be established which would materially assist to swell the amount of the remuneration which ought to be attached to this high office so as to render it worthy the notice of men who are fitted by habit and education to execute its duties in a correct and honourable manner.   ON Tuesday May 11 1813 Mr. Gregory Blaxland Mr. William Wentworth and Lieutenant Lawson attended by four servants with five dogs and four horses laden with provisions ammunition and other necessaries left Mr. Blaxland's farm at the South Creek for the purpose of endeavouring to effect a passage over the Blue Mountains between the Western River and the River Grose. [31] They crossed the Nepean or Hawkesbury River at the ford on to Emu Island at four o'clock p.m. and having proceeded according to their calculation two miles in a south-west direction through forest land and good pasture encamped at five o'clock at the foot of the first ridge. The distance travelled on this and the subsequent days was computed by time; the rate being estimated at about two miles per hour. Thus far they were accompanied by two other gentlemen.  On the following morning (May 12) as soon as the heavy dew was off which was about nine a.m. they proceeded to ascend the ridge at the foot of which they had camped the preceding evening. Here they found a large lagoon of good water full of very coarse rushes. The high land of Grose Head appeared before them at about seven miles distance bearing north by east. They proceeded this day about three miles and a quarter in a direction varying from south-west to west-north-west; but for a third of the way due west. The land was covered with scrubby brushwood very thick in places with some trees of ordinary timber which much incommoded the horses. The greater part of the way they had deep rocky gulleys on each side of their track and the ridge they followed was very crooked and intricate. In the evening they encamped at the head of a deep gulley which they had to descend for water; they found but just enough for the night contained in a hole in the rock near which they met with a kangaroo who had just been killed by an eagle. A small patch of grass supplied the horses for the night.  They found it impossible to travel through the brush before the dew was off and could not therefore proceed at an earlier hour in the morning than nine. After travelling about a mile on the third day in a west and north-west direction they arrived at a large tract of forest land rather hilly the grass and timber tolerably good extending as they imagine nearly to Grose Head in the same direction nearly as the river. They computed it at two thousand acres. Here they found a track marked by a European by cutting the bark of the trees. Several native huts presented themselves at different places. They had not proceeded above two miles when they found themselves stopped by a brush-wood much thicker than they had hitherto met with. [32] This induced them to alter their course and to endeavour to find another passage to the westward; but every ridge which they explored proved to terminate in a deep rocky precipice; and they had no alternative but to return to the thick brush-wood which appeared to be the main ridge with the determination to cut a way through for the horses next day. This day some of the horses while standing fell several times under their loads. The dogs killed a large kangaroo. The party encamped in the forest tract with plenty of good grass and water.  On the next morning leaving two men to take care of the horses and provisions they proceeded to cut a path through the thick brush-wood on which they considered the main ridge of the mountain between the Western River and the River Grose; keeping the heads of the gulleys which were supposed to empty themselves into the Western River on their left hand and into the River Grose on their right. As they ascended the mountain these gulleys became much deeper and more rocky on each side. They now began to mark their track by cutting the bark of the trees on two sides. Having cut their way for about five miles they returned in the evening to the spot on which they had encamped the night before. The fifth day was spent in prosecuting the same tedious operation; but as much time was necessarily lost in walking twice over the track cleared the day before they were unable to cut away more than two miles further. They found no food for the horses the whole way. An emu was heard on the other side of the gulley calling continually in the night.  On Sunday they rested and arranged their future plan. They had reason however to regret this suspension of their proceedings as it gave the men leisure to ruminate on their danger: and it was for some time doubtful whether on the next day they could be persuaded to venture farther. The dogs this day killed two small kangaroos. They barked and ran off continually during the whole night; and at day-light a most tremendous howling of native dogs was heard who appeared to have been watching them during the night.  On Monday the 17th having laden the horses with as much grass as could be put on them in addition to their other burdens they moved forward along the path which they had cleared and marked about six miles and a half. [33] The bearing of the route they had been obliged to keep along the ridge varied exceedingly; it ran sometimes in a north-northwestern direction sometimes south-east or due south but generally south-west or south-south-west. They encamped in the afternoon between two very deep gulleys on a narrow ridge Grose Head bearing north-east by north; and Mount Banks north-west by west. They had to fetch water up the side of the precipice about six hundred feet high and could get scarcely enough for the party. The horses had none this night; they performed their journey well not having to stand under their loads.  The following day was spent in cutting a passage through the brush-wood for a mile and a half further. They returned to their camp at five o'clock very much tired and dispirited. The ridge which was not more than fifteen or twenty yards wide with deep precipices on each side was rendered almost impassable by a perpendicular mass of rock nearly thirty feet high extending across the whole breadth with the exception of a small broken rugged track in the centre. By removing a few large stones they were enabled to pass.  On Wednesday the 19th the party moved forward along this path; bearing chiefly west and west-south-west. They now began to ascend the second ridge of the mountains and from this elevation they obtained for the first time an extensive view of the settlements below. Mount Banks bore north-west; Grose Head north-east; Prospect Hill east by south; the Seven Hills east-north-east; Windsor northeast by east. At a little distance from the spot at which they began the ascent they found a pyramidical heap of stones the work evidently of some European one side of which the natives had opened probably in the expectation of finding some treasure deposited in it. This pile they concluded to be the one erected by Mr. Bass to mark the end of his journey. That gentleman attempted some time ago to pass the mountains and to penetrate into the interior; but having got thus far he gave up the undertaking as impracticable; reporting on his return that it was impossible to find a passage even for a person on foot. Here therefore the party had the satisfaction of believing that they had penetrated as far as any European had been before them. [34]   They encamped this day to refresh their horses at the head of a swamp covered with a coarse rushy grass with a small run of good water through the middle of it. In the afternoon they left their camp to mark and cut a road for the next day.  They proceeded with the horses on the 20th nearly five miles and encamped at noon at the head of a swamp about three acres in extent covered with the same coarse rushy grass as the last station with a stream of water running through it. The horses were obliged to feed on the swamp grass as nothing better could be found for them. The travellers left the camp as before in the afternoon to cut a road for the morrow's journey. The ridge along which their course lay now became wider and more rocky but was still covered with brush and small crooked timber except at the heads of the different streams of water which ran down the side of the mountain where the land was swampy and clear of trees. The track of scarcely any animal was to be seen and very few birds. One man was here taken dangerously ill with a cold. Bearing of the route at first south-westerly; afterwards north-north-west and west-north-west.  Their progress the next day was nearly four miles in a direction still varying from north-west by north to southwest. They encamped in the middle of the day at the head of a well-watered swamp about five acres in extent; pursuing as before their operations in the afternoon. In the beginning of the night the dogs ran off and barked violently. At the same time something was distinctly heard to run through the brush-wood which they supposed to be one of the horses got loose; but they had reason to believe afterwards that they had been in great danger - that the natives had followed their track and advanced on them in the night intending to have speared them by the light of their fire but that the dogs drove them off.  On Saturday the 22nd instant they proceeded in the track marked the preceding day rather more than three miles in a south-westerly direction when they reached the summit of the third and highest ridge of the mountains south-ward of Mt. Banks. [35] From the bearing of Prospect Hill and Grose Head they computed this spot to be eighteen miles in a straight line from the River Nepean at the point at which they crossed it. On the top of this ridge they found about two thousand acres of land clear of trees covered with loose stones and short coarse grass such as grows on some of the commons in England. Over this heath they proceeded for about a mile and a half in a south-westerly direction and encamped by the side of a fine stream of water with just wood enough on the banks to serve for firewood. From the summit they had a fine view of all the settlements and country eastward and of a great extent of country to the westward and south-west. But their progress in both the latter directions was stopped by an impassable barrier of rock which appeared to divide the interior from the coast as with a stone wall rising perpendicularly out of the side of the mountain.  In the afternoon they left their little camp in the charge of three of the men and made an attempt to descend the precipice by following some of the streams of water or by getting down at some of the projecting points where the rocks had fallen in; but they were baffled in every instance. In some places the perpendicular height of the rocks above the earth below could not be less than four hundred feet. Could they have accomplished a descent they hoped to procure mineral specimens which might throw light on the geological character of the country as the strata appeared to be exposed for many hundred feet from the top of the rock to the beds of the several rivers beneath. The broken rocky country on the western side of the cow-pasture has the appearance of having acquired its present form from an earthquake or some other dreadful convulsion of nature at a much later period than the mountains northward of which Mount Banks forms the southern extremity. The aspect of the country which lay beneath them much disappointed the travellers; it appeared to consist of sand and small scrubby brush-wood intersected with broken rocky mountains with streams of water running between them to the eastward towards one point where they probably form the Western River and enter the mountains.  They now flattered themselves that they had surmounted half the difficulties of their undertaking expecting to find a passage down the mountain more to the northward. [36]   On the next day they proceeded about three miles and a half; but the trouble occasioned by the horses when they got off the open land induced them to recur to their former plan of devoting the afternoon to marking and clearing a tract for the ensuing day as the most expeditious method of proceeding notwithstanding that they have to go twice over the same ground. The bearing of their course this day was at first north-east and north-north-west. They encamped on the side of a swamp with a beautiful stream of water running through it.  Their progress on the next day was four miles and a half in a direction varying from north-north-west to south-southwest; they encamped as before at the head of a swamp. This day between ten and eleven a.m. they obtained a sight of the country below when the clouds ascended. As they were marking a road for the morrow they heard a native chopping wood very near them but he fled at the approach of the dogs.  On Tuesday the 25th they could proceed only three miles and a half in a varying direction encamping at two o'clock at the side of a swamp. The underwood being very prickly and full of small thorns annoyed them very much. This day they saw the track of a wombat for the first time. On the 26th they proceeded two miles and three quarters. The brush still continued to be very thorny. The land to the westward appeared sandy and barren. This day they saw the fires of some natives below; the number they computed at about thirty men women and children. They noticed also more tracks of the wombat. On the 27th they proceeded five miles and a quarter; part of the way over another piece of clear land without trees; they saw more native fires and about the same number as before but more in their direct course. From the top of the rocks they saw a large piece of land below clear of trees but apparently a poor reedy swamp. They met with some good timber in this day's route.  The bearing of the route for the last three days has been chiefly north and north-west.  On the 28th they proceeded about five miles and three-quarters. [37] Not being able to find water they did not halt till five o'clock when they took up their station on the edge of the precipice. To their great satisfaction they discovered that what they had supposed to be sandy barren land below the mountain was forest land covered with good grass and with timber of an inferior quality. In the evening they contrived to get their horses down the mountain by cutting a small trench with a hoe which kept them from slipping where they again tasted fresh grass for the first time since they left the forest land on the other side of the mountain. They were getting into miserable condition. Water was found about two miles below the foot of the mountain. The second camp of natives moved before them about three miles. In this day's route little timber was observed fit for building.  On the 29th having got up the horses and laden them they began to descend the mountain at seven o'clock through a pass in the rock about thirty feet wide which they had discovered the day before when the want of water put them on the alert. Part of the descent was so steep that the horses could but just keep their footing without a load so that for some way the party were obliged to carry the packages themselves. A cart road might however easily be made by cutting a slanting trench along the side of the mountain which is here covered with earth. This pass is according to their computation about twenty miles north-west in a straight line from the point at which they ascended the summit of the mountains. They reached the foot at nine o'clock a.m. and proceeded two miles north-north-west mostly through open meadow land clear of trees the grass from two to three feet high. They encamped on the bank of a fine stream of water. The natives as observed by the smoke of their fires moved before them as yesterday. The dogs killed a kangaroo which was very acceptable as the party had lived on salt meat since they caught the last. The timber seen this day appeared rotten and unfit for building.  Sunday the 30th they rested in their encampment. One of the party shot a kangaroo with his rifle at a great distance across a wide valley. The climate here was found very much colder than that of the mountain or of the settlements on the east side where no signs of frost had made its appearance when the party set out. [38] During the night the ground was covered with a thick frost and a leg of the kangaroo was quite frozen. From the dead and brown appearance of the grass it was evident that the weather had been severe for some time past. They were all much surprised at this degree of cold and frost in the latitude of about 34 deg. The track of the emu was noticed at several places near the camp.  On the Monday they proceeded about six miles southwest and west through forest land remarkably well watered and several open meadows clear of trees and covered with high good grass. They crossed two fine streams of water. Traces of the natives presented themselves in the fires they had left the day before and in the flowers of the honey-suckle tree scattered around which had supplied them with food. These flowers which arc shaped like a bottle-brush are very full of honey. The natives on this side of the mountains appear to have no huts like those on the eastern side nor do they strip the bark or climb the trees. From the shavings and pieces of sharp stones which they had left it was evident that they had been busily employed in sharpening their spears.  The party encamped by the side of a fine stream of water at a short distance from a high hill in the shape of a sugar loaf. In the afternoon they ascended its summit; from whence they descried all around forest or grassland sufficient in extent in their opinion to support the stock of the colony for the next thirty years. This was the extreme point of their journey. The distance they had travelled they computed at about fifty-eight miles nearly north-west; that is fifty miles through the mountain (the greater part of which they had walked over three times) and eight miles through the forest land beyond it reckoning the descent of the mountain to be half a mile to the foot.  PIRATICAL SEIZURE OF THE UNITY By Seven Armed Convicts in the River Derwent Van Diemen's Land.  SYDNEY August 1813.  The Unity a Colonial schooner of 35 tons burthen left this port early in the month of January last with a valuable assortment of Merchandize bound to Port Dalrymple in Van Diemen's Land with a view of the cargo being disposed of at that settlement. She arrived safe there but not finding a suitable market she left Port Dalrymple on the 3d. of April bound for Hobart Town with Mr. W. H. MANSELL who was the owner and three seamen on board.  Shortly after she had put to sea however she encountered a heavy gale by which she was driven considerably out of her course in Bass's Strait and having but little provision on board was obliged to procure from a small sealing party a quantity of salted mutton birds.  On the 23d. of the same month (April) she reached the Derwent moored off Hobart Town and was the same night boarded between eleven and twelve by seven armed men who presented fire-locks at Mr MANSELL and his small unarmed crew and captured the vessel by surprise without any possibility of rendering opposition effectual.  Having cut her away from her moorings the desperadoes made sail; and landing the legitimate owner and crew at Frederick Henry Bay gave them up the boat with which they had effected the piracy. The persons who were immediately discovered to be absent and who there could be no doubt were the offenders are as follows  William Button alias Symer alias Mark Tyler capitally convicted at Old Bailey in December 1810; came by the Guilford 1812 a prisoner for life.  Richard Payne capitally convicted at the Old Bailey in October 1811; came in the Indefatigable 1812; also for life.  Patrick commonly called Peter Russell capitally convicted at the Old Bailey in April 1811; came in the Indefatigable 1812; for life.  Thomas Watson convicted at the Old Bailey in December 1809; came in the Indefatigable 1812; a prisoner for seven years.  Thomas Curtin capitally convicted at Bristol in April 1811; came in the Indefatigable 1812; for life.  Thomas Bird convicted at Wells in Somerset-shire in July 1811; came in the Indefatigable 1812; for seven years;  and Frederick Callaghan capitally convicted at Northampton in March 1810; came in the Guilford 1812; a prisoner for life.  As the only provisions on board the Unity comprised of about 50 lbs of Flour and 40 lbs of salted mutton birds it is scarcely possible that they should attempt a long voyage without adopting some method of recruiting their stock. Neither are they supposed to be equal to the conducting of a vessel to any remote coast so that it is very probable that they may be either totally lost or cast on some unfriendly shore where they may all perish. If it should happen that they fall in with an English ship of war they would of course be immediately apprehended and be sent hither to abide the consequences of their Piracy.  The owner of the Unity is a young man whose character is irreproachable and we are sorry to add had a considerable property on board consisting of piece goods wine etc. By this unfortunate event he will be necessarily involved in great distress and difficulties and deprived of the little property he had been enabled to acquire during a residence of upwards of ten years in this Colony by a series of unremitting Industry. Thus under circumstances so peculiarly distressing he has lost both his property and livelihood.  SYDNEY NOVEMBER 13 1813  The Endeavour Captain Walker returned from Otaheite on Tuesday last the 9th. instant. She sailed from hence to Otaheite and contiguous islands the 23rd May; arrived at Matavai bay the 7th. of July; staid there and at Utitea about three weeks and off Eimao received a note from Mr. Sheily of the Queen Charlotte stating the capture of his vessel at the Paliseer Islands by the Otaheitans whom he had shipped as divers; In accomplishing which they had murdered Mr. Leslie chief Mate Mr. John Harris second Mate and Thomas Watson a boy who was born in this Colony.  Mr. Shelly having had the vessel restored to him planned to accompany Mr. Walker back to the Paliseers but this was prevented owing to a separation occasioned by the arrival of the American ship New Hazard Captain Dye to refresh. She mounted 14 guns had 35 men and has escaped from an embargo at Macoa bound for Salem. She made no attempt on the Endeavour but was very friendly and after a stay of five days took her departure.  Next day the Endeavour weighed and got out of Matavai and seeing a brig close upon her concluded it to be the Queen Charlotte which they had not seen at all. In passing her Captain Walker bailed and was answered from on board by Mr Bignell nephew to Mr. Missionary Bignell that she was the brig Daphne (of this place) and in possession of the Natives. Mr. Bignell was permitted to go on board the Endeavour.  Some time afterwards a boat being perceived going from the Daphne Captain Walker pursued her; found her laden with plunder from the vessel and abandoned by the Natives on his approach. In towing this boat to the Endeavour a heavy fire of musketry was opened by the Natives from the Daphne which was briskly returned and a conflict commenced which lasted from half past seven to ten o'clock P.M.  Next morning it was found that the Natives had abandoned her leaving on board five seamen who together with Mr. Bignell were the only survivors of the Daphne's ship's company. The melancholy circumstances of her capture by the Natives are as follows: Captain Michael Fodger master of the Daphne having shipped 25 Otaheitans as divers proceeded to the Paliseers or Parmattoes. On the 28th. of August last the native divers mutinied led by a Lascar named Amile who had been shipped at Annah one of the Paliseer Islands. Captain Fodger was knocked down with a club on his own deck and rose no more. His things were afterwards stripped off and his body thrown over board.  Mr. Marcus Vanderkyse chief mate was next assaulted and wounded; but ran below and making his way out at the cabin window was seen no more. William Gill a seaman in running down to get the arms was shot dead. Christian Kistaskey seaman was desperately wounded and got below to conceal himself; but was afterwards brought on deck and deliberately killed. Three others were wounded and put on an uninhabited island without provisions whither five of the unhappy companions of their misfortune had leaped over board and escaped.  Mr. Bignell had been secured at the commencement of the assault and held in custody; and together with five other seamen who had been spared was forced by the Natives to sail the vessel to Matavai bay where they arrived on the 31st. of the same month. Hendrick and Bignell navigated the Daphne. On arrival a number of canoes came alongside and the Natives took whatever they could lay hold of. [60]   The Endeavour approached the Daphne providentially but an hour and a half after her arrival and anchored within pistol-shot. At night the Natives began removing the Sandle-wood and other plunder from the Daphne when firing commenced between the two vessels under the circumstances previously stated.  The arch-scoundrel Amile armed with a pistol appeared to be very active in encouraging the Mutineers. He told them to fight well and take the Endeavour and when they had two vessels they could go where they liked; but during the night the Natives abandoned the Daphne. Amile was left on board and it is believed he over slept himself for he was found in the sail room next morning when Captain Walker took possession of the Daphne and searched the vessel.  He was pointed out to Captain Walker by the survivors on board the Daphne as the principal Murderer and they desired to kill him. Captain Walker said No! but that he would take him on board the Endeavour and hang him from the yard-arm which fully met the wishes of the Daphne's people.  On board the Endeavour Captain Walker said Hang the Scoundrel hang the Pirate directly. He was immediately run up to the yard-arm and continued hanging about half an hour. While Amile was hanging a pistol was fired at him. His body was hove over board.  Captain Fodger was guilty of great acts of cruelty in the Voyage towards the Natives and this no doubt was the principal cause of the vessel being taken by the Natives. The two vessels left Otaheite in company for Port Jackson the 14th September and the Daphne arrived here also on Wednesday last.  While the brig Daphne was on passage from Sydney to Otaheite Captain Fodger touched at the Palmerstone Islands where he had left a Sealing Gang in 1811 consisting of four Englishmen and two Portuguese. One of the Englishmen swam off to the Daphne and when she was about seven miles off Shore informed Captain Fodger that John Bearback the principal of the Gang and one Michael Cuff were killed; another was speared in the back and the Man that swam off had ran into the woods and there remained until the Daphne arrived. Captain Fodger would not remain in order to get off the remainder of the Gang although his crew requested him to do so. The Man that swam off informed Captain Fodger that it was the Portuguese who had murdered his companions.  From thence the Daphne proceeded to Utitea and BolaBola to procure some Pork. From thence they touched at the Island of Eimao where the Man who swam off at the Palmerstone Islands was left with Mr. Henry the Missionary to give information relative to the murdered men. Thence they made Otaheite where six Natives were shipped as divers. Thence to Annah where a further five Natives were shipped as well as Amile the Lascar.  From thence they proceeded to the Paliseers or Pearl Islands and procured a quantity of Pearls and Pearl Shells; being short of provisions the Daphne returned to Otaheite to procure further supplies and the six Natives shipped there not being paid for their services by Captain Fodger ran ashore. The Europeans of the crew complained of the bad provisions given them and Captain Fodger ordered five of those that complained to be turned on Shore without provisions or Clothes. He directed the Mate to shoot any man that went below for his Clothes or things and one man was shot by Fodger through both thighs and another was wounded with the butt-end of a pistol. The names of these people were William Ralph George Roberts John Can James Welsh and William Gerrard; at length he allowed them to take their Clothes but he told a Native Chief to send his men after these Europeans to strip them and beat their brains out with stones.  At Otaheite Captain Fodger shipped fifteen other Natives as divers and from thence sailed to Tabooway and Roorrootoo to ship more divers. At Rematera three canoes very small came off to the ship with eighteen Natives with fruit and other presents. The Captain invited them on board and they appeared as if they had never before seen white people. They addressed the Europeans with the greatest reverence fell down and clasped their feet but their canoes were swamped alongside. The brig was standing out to sea; it blew fresh; the Land was about seven miles distant and the Captain ordered the Mate to turn these islanders out of the ship which was done in a very Cruel Manner. They were beaten with rope's ends turned over the ship's sides and while clinging on their hands were beaten until they fell off. Fourteen out of the eighteen were drowned at a very short distance from the brig.  At Leevoovoi the Chief of the Island came on board and offered to sell Captain Fodger some Sandle-wood for English Clothes; the Captain offered him a few Tokens which the Chief refused. The Captain then made a prisoner of the Chief and told him he would not be released until the Sandle-wood was brought on board. Next day the islanders brought off the Sandle-wood about a ton and a half and the Chief was then liberated but the Captain gave him only two puppy Dogs and a piece of bad Otaheita Cloth.  From thence the Daphne went to Annah and then to Arnon and on the 28th of August the Otaheitans and other Natives mutinied as before stated.  SEIZURE OF THE SLOOP SPEED WELL By CONVICTS at NEWCASTLE.  SYDNEY April 23 1814.  Information is received from Newcastle of the piratical capture of the Speedwell a schooner of about 21 tons burthen Patten master on the night of the 7th instant by four desperadoes whose names are Jos. Burridge Herbert Styles Edward Scarr and John Pearce.  The report states that the night was a continued heavy rain; and that about midnight the master was awakened by one of the ruffians who requested in the name of the Commandant the loan of a grapnel for the purpose of mooring a boat off; which the master went down the hold to procure and was there secured after a struggle in the course of which he received blows on the head and was severely beaten.  The wife of the master being on board and a seaman who was asleep in the forecastle they were both secured and the wind favouring the audacious attack the vessel was taken out of the harbour without the slightest alarm reaching the shore nor was she discerned till at the very mouth of the river; when the people on board the Governor Hunter which had been that day launched from the beach she had some time before grounded on saw her beating about and concluded she had got adrift and was endeavouring to work in; so that as it continued to rain very hard no further notice was taken of her.  The Governor Hunter's boat had been missed the same night from alongside and it proved afterwards that she had been stolen by these depredators and was employed in the capture but given up to the three persons whom they made prisoner to return with into the settlement.  On board the vessel was a month's provisions and about sixty gallons of water; which may enable them for a short time to subsist but they have no boat with them and consequently can procure no supply of necessaries without the utmost risque to the vessel and their own lives; and this as has been the case with every former attempt of the kind may be counted on as the certain destruction of those who have been rash enough to engage in it.  The men who have committed this Act of Piracy are of very desperate characters and in order to their being apprehended and sent hither again the following list of their names with their places and times of trials sentences &c is appended.  LIST OF FOUR CONVICTS WHO PIRATICALLY SEIZED AND RAN AWAY WITH THE SLOOP SPEED WELL FROM NEWCASTLE ON THE 7TH APRIL 1814  JOSEPH BURRIDGE; Tried at Kent March 1813; Sentence 14 Years; Arrived by the ship General Hewitt 1814.  HERBERT STYLES; Tried at Calcutta on 4th December 1809 for Piracy; Sentenced to Transportation for Life; Arrived by the brig Eagle Mackay master 17th February 1811.  EDWARD SCARR; Tried at Cambridge Assizes 28th March 1810; Sentence life; Arrived by the Admiral Gambier (2) 1811.  JOHN PEARCE; Tried at the Surry Assizes 28th March 1810; Sentence life; Arrived by the Indian Barclay 1810.  TOTAL LOSS by FIRE of the Ship THREE BEES  SYDNEY Saturday May 21 1814  We have unfortunately to report the total destruction of the Ship Three Bees Captain Wallace whose private loss we are confidently assured is very considerable indeed.  About half past four yesterday afternoon the ship was discovered to be on fire in the after hold immediately contiguous to the powder magazine. It has since been recollected that a boy had in the fore part of the day attended an officer on duty in the hold with a candle and lanthern; and it is concluded that a candle snuff had then fallen unextinguished among some oakum or other strongly susceptive substance which communicating and extending the fire in a more latent way for some hours at length kindled into a flame and burst forth with an impetuosity calculated at once to astonish and confound.  The proximity of the magazine to the place from whence the flames aspired was in itself a circumstance so dreadful as not to leave a moment to decide. To get down to scuttle her was utterly impossible on account of the suffocating columns of smoke that from her hatches darkened the surrounding atmosphere.  Such was the rapidity of the flame that in a few minutes they ascended with the smoke above the deck and in large curls mingled with its vapour by which the vivid flame was frequently conducted to her mast head and soon set fire to her standing rigging. As no possibility to save the ship or any of her property existed and the explosion of her magazine was expected every instant the crew forsook her.  Her anchorage close to the Government Wharf menacing the destruction of the nearest buildings when she blew up as it was currently reported she had 130 casks of powder on board (though it since appears there were but 30) and as the wind was from the southward and it was probable she would drift outwards if disengaged from her moorings she was cut adrift and as she swung to and fro with the tide menacing each point of the Cove with her broadside in turn with her guns all shotted.  Being past all assistance the ships and vessels at anchor shifted their births to safer situations. The brig James Haye was for some time an object of apprehension from the position assumed by the ship on fire when first adrift. This was a tremendous crisis a crisis of extreme agitation to the inhabitants of the town and to those especially whose houses and other property were from the approximation of the danger the more exposed. At this crisis little short of the total Destruction of the Town of Sydney Was expected every moment to take place by the Explosion of the Magazine. The alarm was so great that numbers of the inhabitants deserted their houses and fled into the country to avoid being buried in its ruins.  A ship of nearly five hundred tons burden cast loose it may almost be said in the middle of the town unmanageable and pouring forth columns of smoke and fire threatening desolation all around her with her guns all loaded first pointed upon one object and then upon another and every instant expected by her explosion to throw down or cover with the dreadful blast all the buildings around or near her!  About half-past six when lying off the north east corner of the new Government Store her first gun exploded in a direction over Mr. Blaxcell's or the new Guard-house. Fourteen went off in all; and tho' there were several hair-breadth escapes yet we are happy to find no personal injury has occurred. A swivel ball which had possibly made part of a charge of grape as there were no swivels mounted entered Captain Piper's parlour window through the lower sash which it knocked to pieces together with the inside shutter; took the corner completely off a portable writing desk and fell expended in the apartment.  By half-past seven she had drifted over to the rocks on Bennelong's Point opposite Mr. Hook's stores and about a quarter before eight the long dreaded explosion of her magazine took place but not by any means so awful as had been expected; for by this time the whole of her upper works her decks and every substance that would have otherwise have resisted the force had been annihilated; and it is more than probable that she might have admitted a quantity of water which finding its way to the powder had destroyed a great part of it.  After this a number of boats approached her and several persons went alongside to gratify a nearer approach a curiosity which a more distant view of the awful spectacle had excited. They found the copper of her sides standing but the planks and timbers mostly consumed and they heard frequently the crash of weighty substances falling into the pile of ashes smoke and ruins that filled the small remainder of her hull which burnt all night and presented to the distant eye a spectacle exciting awe and sensible regret in the mind of everyone who witnessed the dreadful spectacle and was capable of reflecting on its consequences to those who are the sufferers by her loss.  The ESCAPE of the Whaler SERINGAPATAM from the American Pirate Frigate ESSEX.  SYDNEY 13 AUGUST 1814  Yesterday evening the SERINGAPATAM of London whaler arrived in this Port from the Marquesa Islands having been recaptured by 14 men at that place under circumstances of a very singular nature and affording a most praiseworthy instance of what bravery and resolution governed by prudence and discretion can accomplish.  It seems the SERINGAPATAM had sailed from London in March 1812 on a whaling voyage to the Coast of Peru; on which coast she captured the ship EDWARD of Nantucket laden with 1200 barrels of oil and sent her a prize to England; that shortly afterwards the SERINGAPATAM was taken by the ESSEX American frigate off the Gallipagoes Island nearly about the same time the ESSEX captured the NEW ZEALANDER and the CHARLTON whalers; that these ships were all carried by the Essex into Bankes's Cove and left there by that frigate who proceeded on another cruize; from which she returned having captured the SIR ANDREW HAMMOND and brought her also into Bankes's Cove.  That in a little time the SERINGAPATAM with the other captured ships were carried to the Marquesa Islands and the seamen continued prisoners there treated with a cruelty scarcely ever known to have been practised among enlightened Nations; that they were wrought in heavy irons exposed to every privation and doomed to linger in miserable captivity. But with a spirit peculiar to the Sons of Britain they bore their sufferings with resignation watching an opportunity to effect their deliverance from their unfeeling tyrants; and having frequently cautiously consulted together for that purpose were at length happily furnished with an opportunity on the 6th. May last.  The ESSEX was at sea on a cruize and expected very shortly to return having been 6 months out; her return would have frustrated all their hopes and therefore the crisis of deliverance was important; they seized the moment and what is more honourable to the interests of humanity effected their object without bloodshed or other personal violence than which was necessary to secure three Prize-masters who happened that day to be on board the SERINGAPATAM; our valiant Countrymen fourteen in number were employed in removing stores from the other captured vessels in that port on board the SERINGAPATAM; and on a signal given they rushed upon the Prize-masters whom they suddenly secured and bound and having also overpowered two other men four out of the fourteen got into a boat repaired directly with extreme caution on board the GREENWICH (another captured vessel) and rushing into the cabin secured all the fire-arms ammunition and weapons and having spiked the guns returned to the SERINGAPATAM where they lost no time other than what was necessary to despatch a small party on shore to spike the fort guns and bring off such ammunition as they could procure.  Having effected this object and returned on board they cut the cable and providentially aided by a light favouring breeze escaped from the port. On the 14th. May they came to an Anchor in Matavai bay in hopes of getting supplies of necessary things of which they were greatly in need. They found the Missionaries were removed to Eimeo but they were able to purchase fresh provisions and fruit and then got under way.  On the 18th they passed ulietea; on the 23rd. of the same month they saw an Island name unknown the Natives of which came alongside in their canoes. They seemed to have no knowledge whatever of even seeing a Ship or White Persons as when they came op board they smelt the crew and seemed to discredit that they were alive. On the 15th. June they sighted Norfolk Island and on the following 20th. Ball's Pyrand and Lord Howes's Island. On the 23rd. they sighted the Coast of New South Wales and were six days lying-too off the Coast until met by the ship CAMPBELL MACQUARIE Calcutta to Sydney which rendered the SERINGAPATAM assistance and both ships arrived safely in Port Jackson yesterday.  CALAMITOUS STATE OF DISEASE TYPHOUS FEVER &c.  in which the Convicts on the Transports GENERAL HEWITT THREE BEES & SURRY  Arrived in this COLONY.  SYDNEY New South Wales 30th September 1814  It appears that the General Hewitt a Ship of 960 Tons Earl master received on the 28th July 1813 from the Hulk at Woolwich 124 Convicts. She then dropped down to Gravesend where she remained sixteen days whence she went to the Nore and received 48 Convicts from the Hulk at Sheerness; on the 22d and 23d August two days after her arrival at Portsmouth she completed her Number 300 by 124 Convicts from the Hulks at Portsmouth and Langston; and finally sailed from England on the 26th of the same Month having on board in addition to Convicts 70 Soldiers 15 Women 8 Children and 104 Ships' Company besides several passengers in all 515 Souls having been twenty seven days from the embarkation of the first of the Convicts to the day of her Sailing during the whole of which time it is to be observed and regretted the Convicts were closely confined below.  That they were divided into Messes of 6 Men each Six of which Messes were admitted on deck in rotation during the day for the benefit of Air; this practice was continued till she arrived at Madeira when the prisoners were again kept be low for Nine days the time of her stay at that Island; on proceeding to Sea they were again admitted on Deck in the same number and usual manner until they made Rio Janeiro when they were once more closely confined for ten days by which time the Sickness which had commenced shortly after their quitting Madeira had increased to an alarming degree. In Consequence of this Sickness the Convicts were very properly allowed Access to the deck during the day for the remaining part of the Voyage. It was now Alas! too late. No care no exertion however it might lessen could now remedy the evil.  That there were two days in the Week Appointed for Shaving and cleaning the Convicts but this regulation was not persisted in with any regularity; they were however obliged to Appear Clean every Sunday on the quarter deck in Order to Attend divine Service till they Arrived at Rio Janeiro when this Salutary practice was neglected and the Convicts were suffered to become exceedingly filthy.  The Decks were Swept every morning Scraped and Swabbed twice a Week; they were Sprinkled with Vinegar weekly until they made Rio Janeiro when this was discontinued.  The Ship was also fumigated once a week for six weeks but was afterwards much Neglected. That three weeks previous to their arrival at Rio Janeiro their bedding was thrown overboard in consequence of having been wetted; from the want of which the Convicts when they Came into a Cold climate Suffered exceedingly. [73]   It appears that Captain Earl purchased the Convicts' Rations of Salt Beef for Nine Weeks paying them for it after they left Rio Janeiro in the following Articles at most Shamefully enormous prices Viz: - Coffee 4 shillings Sugar 1 Shilling and 6 pence Tea 20 Shillings Tobacco 5 Shillings per pound which was not less than 6 or 700 per Cent. on prime Cost. It also appears that this has been the Custom with the Masters of Several Transports to purchase the Salt ration during their passage through the tropics. Mr. Hughes the Surgeon of the General Hewitt reports that some of the Convicts were in a State of debility when received from the Hulks and unfit for the Voyage; that the Convicts were not examined after their embarkation by Any inspecting Medical Officer; but he Admits that there were none labouring under Contagious diseases until about a fortnight after Quitting Madeira 12 or 14 were Attacked with Dysentery which continued to increase combined with typhous fever and finally that 34 Convicts died on the Passage and a great number taken to hospital on arrival at Sydney.  The Three Bees with 219 Irish Convicts Sailed from Cork on the 27th. October 1813 and Anchored at Falmonth on the 30th. The weather during the time they were at Falmouth was exceedingly Cold and the Prisoners Suffered Severely. They finally sailed from England on the 7th December.  The Convicts were formed into five divisions each having a portion of the day on deck when the weather would Admit. In the Harbour of Rio Janeiro they were all on deck together every day. On which Occasions the Mercury in the thermometer fell in the prison 6 7 and 8 degrees. Here a Case of fever appeared and as it bore all the marks of Common Ship fever every precaution was used to prevent the Contagion from Spreading. The Subject of the fever died. They arrived at Rio Janeiro on the 3d February and left it on the 17th.  On the 27th a Strange Sail appeared and as she bore down had the appearance of an enemy. The Prisoners' bedding was used on this Occasion as a barricade and being kept on deck all night was quite drenched with rain. After Several fruitless endeavors on as many days to dry the bedding it was put into the Prison; at the same time the Prisoners were Cautioned not to use it. This injunction was disregarded and Scurvy which had been long lurking Among them made its Appearance. Seven men died of it ere they reached Port Jackson and fifty-five were sent to the Hospital in a dreadful State. Nine Convicts died on the Passage.  It appears that the Surry Paterson master completed its Number 200 Convicts on the 21st of January 1814 and sailed from England on 22d February. On the 7th of March John Stopgood sickened the first that laboured under a well defined case of Typhous or common ship fever. On the 12th John Ranson died of fever and Another fatal termination of fever Occurred on the 22d May. No Attempt appears to have been made towards Ventilating the prison and neither the Surgeon's representations nor his efforts met with that Attention or Assistance from the Captain and his Officers which it was their duty to have afforded him.  On the 22d of May Isaac Giles died of fever and on the 9th of June Aaron Jackson died of fever from which period the deaths became Awfully frequent. On the 26th July they fortunately fell in with the Transport Broxbornebury and being reduced to the greatest distress requested Captain Pilcher to send some person on board to take charge of the ship. Next day Mr. Nash from the Broxbornebury went on board and took charge of the Surry the Captain two Mates the Surgeon 12 of the Ship's Company 16 Convicts and 6 Soldiers were lying dangerously ill with fever. Captain Paterson died the same day. They Anchored on the 29th in Port Jackson Harbour when the ship was immediately put under quarantine regulations.  The sick were landed and taken into tents prepared for their reception on the north side of Port Jackson. Every plan was adopted and carried into effect that had a tendency to cut short the progress of contagion. The Measures adopted proved so effectual that but one Case of infection took place after the sick were landed.  There died in all 36 Convicts 4 Soldiers and 7 Seamen; Among whom is included the Captain Surgeon and two Mates. That the deaths of the Captain Surgeon and Mates may operate as an Awfull and useful lesson in future on the minds of the Officers of Transports is a consummation devoutly to be wished!  ... thare as been nothing else hear for this Twelve Months Past but Roberies Committed and driving Hurds of Cattle and focks of Sheepe in to thay woods it is Dun Principalley by Banditeys of men that are Rainging of thay wods I Expect you have heard of thay loss i Met with on thay ninth of March last in thay Ded of thay night sum malissis Scoundrells set fire to Two of my Corn Stacks which set fire to Five more and to my barn which was Consumed to hasshes without saving a single Busshell of weate out of aney of thay Stacks or aney Part of thay Corn thay fire was one of thay most Dredfull Sites i Ever saw no person Could git within fifty yards of it it was with a grate Difficulty that i Saved my Hows which was one Hundred yards from thay fire ad it not been discovered before it was Long on fire my wife and two Poure littell girls most likely would have been Burned in thare Beds which would have been thay worst Loss of all I did not luse less then two thowsend Bushelis of grane Likewise a barn which was thay best one that Ever was bilt in this Countaurey that Caust me Five Hundred Pounds Stirling Mr Humphreys Stacks were set fire to about fifteen minuts after mine according to thay best of my Jugment from thay apperince of thay fire wen i saw it about 1/2 a mile distent from mine - hee Lost about Eight Hundred Bushelis of weat It is Expected by thay Gentalman hear that Colnell Macquarie will in sum measure Remunirate us for our Loss and if he Shuld bee so inclined i trust that you will Stande my friende in aney thinge you Can say to Him on thay bisness.  THE REMARKABLE NARRATIVE of George Bruce THE NEW ZEALAND CHIEFTAIN  George Bruce son of John Bruce foreman and clerk to Mr. Wood distiller at Limehouse was born in the parish of Radcliffe-highway in 1779. In 1789 he entered on board the ROYAL ADMIRAL East Indiaman Capt. Bond as Boatswain's boy. Sailed from England for New South Wales and arrived at Port Jackson in 1790 where with the consent of Captain Bond he quitted the ship and remained in New South Wales.  At Port Jackson Bruce entered into the naval colonial service and was employed for several years under Lieutenants Robins Flinders and others in exploring the coasts surveying harbours head-lands rocks &c. During this time Bruce experienced various adventures which do not come within the design of this narrative. After being thus employed for several years in vessels of survey he was turned over to the LADY NELSON Captain Simmonds a vessel fitted up for the express purpose of conveying Tippahee king of New Zealand from a visit which he made to the government of Port Jackson to his own country. The king embarked and the LADY NELSON sailed on her destination.  During the passage Tippahee was taken dangerously ill and Bruce was appointed to attend him; he acquitted himself so highly to the king's satisfaction that he was honoured with his special favour; and on their arrival the king requested that he should be allowed to remain with him at New Zealand to which Captain Simmonds consented and Bruce was received into the family of Tippahee.  Bruce spent his first few months in New Zealand in exploring the country and in acquiring a knowledge of the language manners and customs of the people. He found the country healthy and pleasant full of romantic scenery agreeably diversified by hills and dales and covered with wood. The people Were hospitable frank and open; though rude and ignorant yet worshipping neither images or idols nor aught that is the work of human hand; acknowledging one Omnipotent Supreme Being.  As the king proposed to place the young Englishman at the head of his army it was a previously necessary step that he should be tattooed as without having undergone that ceremony he could not be regarded as a warrior. The case was urgent and admitted of no alternative. He therefore submitted resolutely to this painful ceremony; and his countenance presents a master specimen of the art of tattooing. Being now tattooed in due form Bruce was recognized as a warrior of the first rank naturalized as a New Zealander received into the bosom of the king's family and honoured with the hand of the Princess Aetockoe the youngest daughter of Tippahee a maiden of fifteen or sixteen years of age whose native beauty had probably been great but which was so much improved by the fashionable embellishments of art that all the softer charms of nature all the sweetness of expression were lost in the bolder impressions of tattooing.  Bruce now became the chief member of the King's family and was vested with the government of the island. Six or eight months after his marriage the English ship INSPECTOR the FERRET a South Sea whaler and several other English vessels touched at New Zealand for supplies and all of them found the beneficial influence of having a countryman and friend at the head of affairs in that island. They were liberally supplied with fish vegetables &c. &c.  Our Englishman and his wife were now contented and happy in the full enjoyment of domestic comfort with no wants that were ungratified blessed with health and perfect independence. [56] Bruce looked forward with satisfaction to the progress of civilization which he expected to introduce among the people with whom by a singular destiny he seemed doomed to remain during his life.  While enjoying these hopes the ship GENERAL WELLESLEY about twelve or fourteen months ago touched at a point of New Zealand where Bruce and his wife then chanced to be. This was at some distance from the king's place of residence. Captain Dalrymple applied to Mr. Bruce to assist him in procuring a cargo of spars and benjamin and requested specimens of the principal articles of produce of the island all which was cheerfully done. Captain Dalrymple then proposed to Bruce to accompany him to North Cape distant about twenty-five or thirty leagues where it was reported that gold dust could be procured and Captain Dalrymple conceived that Bruce might prove useful to him in search for the gold dust.  With great reluctance and after many entreaties Bruce consented to accompany Captain Dalrymple under the most solemn assurances of being safely brought back and landed at the Bay of Islands. He accordingly embarked with his wife on board the GENERAL WELLESLEY representing at the same time to Captain Dalrymple the dangerous consequences of taking the king's daughter from the island; but that fear was quieted by the solemn and repeated assurances of Captain Dalrymple that he would at every hazard re-land them at the Bay of Islands the place from which they embarked. Being at length all on board the WELLESLEY sailed for the North Cape where they soon arrived and landed. Finding that they had been entirely misinformed as to the gold dust the WELLESLEY made sail in order to return to New Zealand but the wind becoming foul and continuing so for 48 hours they were driven from the island. On the 3d day the wind became more favourable but Captain Dalrymple did not attempt to regain the island but stood on for India. Bruce now gently remonstrated and reminded him of his promises; to which Captain Dalrymple replied "That he had something else to think of than to detain the ship by returning with a valuable cargo to the island. Besides he had another and better island in view for him."  On reaching the Feejee or Sandlewood Islands Captain Dalrymple asked Bruce if he chose to go on shore and remain there? which he declined on account of the barbarous and sanguinary disposition of their inhabitants. Captain Dalrymple desired that he would choose for himself; and then took from him several little presents which he himself and his officers had given to him at New Zealand; these now were given to the natives of the islands in the boats then alongside the vessel.  Leaving the Feejee islands they steered toward Sooloo after visiting two or three islands in their passage. After remaining four or five days at Sooloo they sailed for Malacca; Captain Dalrymple Bruce went on shore. The latter was anxious to see the governor or commanding officer to state his grievances but as it was late in the evening when he landed he could not see him till the following morning by which time Captain Dalrymple had weighed from Malacca roads leaving Bruce on shore and carrying off his wife on board the WELLESLEY to Penang. Bruce acquainted the commanding officer Malacca with his case and expressed his wish to regain his wife and to return with her to New Zealand. The commanding officer endeavoured to console him; desired that he would patiently wait at Malacca for a short time as some ship might probably touch there on their passage from Bengal to New South Wales by which he would procure a passage for himself and his wife; and that in the mean time he would write to Penang desiring that his wife should be returned to her husband at Malacca. After waiting for three or four weeks accounts were received of Captain Dalrymple's arrival at Penang; upon which Bruce obtained the commanding officers permission and left Malacca in the SCOURGE gun-brig for Penang where upon arrival he found that his wife had been bartered away to Capt. Ross. On waiting on the governor of Penang he was asked what satisfaction he required for the ill treatment he had experienced? Bruce answered that all he wanted was to have his wife restored and to get a passage if possible to New Zealand. Through the interference of the governor his wife was restored to him. With her he returned to Malacca in hope of the promised passage to New South Wales; but as there was no appearance of the expected ships for that port he was now promised a passage for himself and his wife to England in one of the homeward bound Indiamen from China. By getting to England he hoped from thence to find a passage to New South Wales; but the China ships only anchored in Malacca Roads for a few hours during the night so that he had no opportunity of proceeding by any of the ships of that fleet. He then entreated the commanding officer to get him a passage in the SIR EDWARD PELLEW to Penang where he hoped to overtake the Indiamen. A passage for himself and his wife was accordingly provided on board the PELLEW; and on arrival at Penang he found the Indiamen standing still there; but he could not be accommodated with a passage to England without the payment of four hundred dollars. Not having that sum and without the means to raise it he came on with the SIR EDWARD PELLEW to Bengal where he and his wife the affectionate companion of his distress were hospitably received. An opportunity having occurred in the course of a few months of a passage to New South Wales they found no difficulty in regaining New Zealand.  A NARRATIVE OF THE ASTONISHING VOYAGE OF THE FRANCIS AND ELIZA  Convict Ship 377 Tons 4 Guns of London  It is often our sad Duty to relate of the enormities perpetrated by the Convicts on board Transports during their Voyages from England that the Behaviour of the Convicts on the Occasion of the Capture of the Ship Francis and Eliza by an American Privateer off the Island of Madeira on her passage hither is more than astonishing. It has been stated by the Commander and Surgeon of that Ship as well as by Mr. Frederick Garling the Solicitor a Passenger that both the Male and Female Convicts on board of her conducted themselves with great Discretion Moderation and Decency at the time of the Capture and whilst subsequent to the Ship being restored.  The Francis and Eliza Captain Harrison arrived at Sydney on Monday 7th. August 1815 having departed from Ireland with 54 Male and 70 Female Prisoners on board; two of the former and four of the latter description died on the passage which for its tedious length and other vicissitudes they were exposed to render it a matter of especial wonder that the mortality was so happily limited.  She sailed from Cork the 5th. December in convoy with the Canada (which arrived here last week) and had the misfortune to be captured on the 4th. January by the Warrior American Privateer Captain Champlin pierced for 22 guns but not all mounted and carrying 160 men.  Captain Harrison was removed on board the privateer and detained many hours but was afterwards liberated and restored to his own ship. His private losses are very severe indeed as are those of Mr. West ship's Surgeon from whom an investment of a thousand pounds was wholly taken together with most of his wearing apparel surgical instruments and the ship's medicine chest which latter loss but for the favour of Providence might have been followed by the most fatal consequences to the numerous persons on board.  Having also taken out all her arms and ammunition the Americans left her to her fate but only after several of the crew of the Francis and Eliza had deserted to the enemy. The Prisoners no longer submitted to the usual restraints but nethertheless conducted themselves with exemplary Propriety dividing themselves into watches and performing the duties of the vessel at a time we are sorry to relate the Ship's Company themselves had become refractory and insubordinate.  The Crew almost a score in number seized upon the spirits and other liquors which were treated as common plunder and the most dreadful scenes of riot and intemperance prevailed until their arrival at Santa Cruz five days later. But for the steady conduct of the Male Convicts it is certain that the Females on board would have received the unwelcome and lewd attentions of the debauched seamen who on several occasions set the Ship on fire during their drunken frolics.  At Santa Cruz the Captain received every friendly assistance from Mr. Duplex Chief Consul who thought it prudent to impose a ten days quarantine upon the vessel but took the necessary means to restore good order which was better accomplished by the transfer of the most disorderly of the Crew including the Chief Officer to a King's Ship then lying there.  At Teneriffe the Francis and Eliza re-joined the Canada which had had the better fortune to escape the vigilance of the American Cruizers and under the convoy of the Ulysses Frigate went with her to Senegal thence Goree and thence Sierra Leone. Here a detachment of the Royal African Corps commanded by Ensign Alt joined the Francis and Eliza to become the military guard and the two Ships then proceeded in company to the Cape of Good Hope and arrived here without further incident.  SYDNEY 7th October 1816  The brig Endeavour Mr Hammond master brought from Otaheite two of the crew of the ship Betsey of this port Mr Phillip Goodenough master and whose loss at New Zealand was reported some time since. These persons are Thomas Rodgers 2nd. officer and Thomas Hunt seamen who are the only survivors out of 13 that composed the crew when she last left Macquarie Island at which time there were also on board six lascars and Chinamen of whom four survived and were left at the Bay of Islands under the humane care of the Missionaries. The miseries endured by the ill-fated crew of this vessel are almost incredible as will appear from the following narrative taken from the journal kept by one of the survivors.  "The Betsey sailed from Port Jackson on a sealing and oiling voyage to Macquarie Island the 28th of December 1814 her crew consisting of 27 Europeans and six Asiatics under command of Mr Philip Goodenough. She arrived at her destination the 13th of February following where she landed 13 Europeans for the purposes of her voyage and then proceeded to Bristow's Island from whence she returned to Macquarie Island in August with the loss of one European (Thomas Wilman) and a lascar both of whom died of the scurvy which had considerably spread throughout the ship's company.  Shortly after arriving they were blown from the island by a westerly gale. They endeavoured in vain to recover the island and after three weeks of fruitless toil determined to bear up for Port Jackson in which they were also opposed by the setting in of heavy gales from the N.W. and they were reduced to the necessity of shaping for New Zealand.  The allowance of water was now limited to 3 half pints a man per diem the greater part of which they were obliged from the want of bread to mix with flour. They had a stock of salt pork on board but could not use it owing to the scarcity of water.  On the 18th of September the rudder was carried away and an attempt was made to steer with a cable which being too laborious for the few hands that were able to work a rudder was constructed which was carried away upon the 26th day of the same month when to steer with the cable became their only resource. The master and eight Europeans were now lain down with the prevailing malady which swelled the limbs contracted the sinews and gave excruciating pains. The lascars were of little service in the work of steering which was dreadfully fatiguing.  The allowance of water was reduced to a pint per day with 6 lbs of flour per week the sick only 4 lbs; and as the flour and water constituted their only ailment the few that were capable of exertion became too weakly and therefore lay the vessel to at sunset leaving her to the caprice of the currents which sometimes drifted her further out of the course she had adopted than she had gained the proceeding day.  On the night of September 28 died Laurenzo a Portuguese and John Wilson on the 30th. On the 5th of October James Moffat first mate was committed to the deep; and upon the 8th of October was followed by Cordoza a Portuguese when becalmed within sight of Cook's Strait.  The allowance of water being now reduced to half a pint a day the hope of being able to get on shore for a moment elated the minds of the unhappy sufferers; but the vessel was again blown off.  On the 23rd having a good offing from the land and well to the Northward of the Bay of Islands she endeavoured to run in but a sudden squall coming on the main-brace and topsail sheet gave way by which the topsail was blown to shreds and the jib and foretopsail were rent to pieces at the same time. She in consequence drifted again off the land as there was not sufficient strength left to repair the damage; and she thus drifted to and fro for several days experiencing repeated dangers of striking upon rocks or being overwhelmed in an unfathomable abyss. [76]   On the 28th the last cask was dry and all that still survived gave themselves over to despair. The boats became their last hope; and having with much exertion got a whale and a jolly boat water tight they left the ship 20 miles at sea on the morning of the 29th having previously committed the body of William Grab 3rd officer to the deep.  Four helpless men were put in the jolly boat to be towed ashore by the whale boat in which were 8 namely the master who was himself in the last stage of disorder Thomas Rodgers Thomas Hunt and 5 lascars a 6th having been shortly before drowned. But dreadful to imagine after rowing for upwards of an hour and a half without sensibly making way the melancholy determination was voted to cut the jolly boat adrift.  The sick boat was drawn alongside and a bag of flour taken out and that with the only exception of one of the unhappy men requesting to have his jacket given him as he complained of cold no conversation passed when they were abandoned to a dreary certain destiny. It was their opinion that the jolly boat could not have remained above water more than two hours owing to her leaky condition. The persons who were thus unhappily abandonned to be intombed alive within the watery waste were John Tire John Gable John Davis and Fred. Holstein.  The whale boat now unincumbered made way perceptibly and after 12 hours severe exertion reached one of the most inhospitable parts of the coast of New Zealand. Out of the 19 persons who were in the vessel 8 got on shore alive viz. the master (Mr. Goodenough) Thomas Rodgers Thomas Hunt and five lascars one of whom died shortly after landing as did also Mr. Goodenough on the 1st of November. A few days after reaching shore the survivors learnt that the Betsey had gone ashore at a distant part of the same coast and went to pieces.  They were all stripped by the natives their remnant of flour about 50 lbs. was taken from them and a few small potatoes given them. The survivors in constant apprehension of being massacred by the natives who disregarding their bodily sufferings drove them from place to place and frequently turned their spears upon them with furious menacing gestures.  The two Europeans were separated from the lascars and taken away at dusk in a canoe for the purpose as they were made to understand of being devoured; and after proceeding about a mile and a half they perceived a large fire on shore which confirmed them in the belief. They were here landed and received by a concourse of natives who obliged them to carry a basket of potatoes towards another group of men and women among whom were the four lascars; who on being questioned by Rodgers and Hunt as to the treatment they were likely to receive told them it had been resolved upon to eat them both to which dreadful expectation every circumstance concurred to give probability.  They were the same night (November 2nd) placed in a hut and next morning advanced further along the coast though sinking with fatigue and long fasting in addition to their other ailments. Being harassed for several days they at length received the gratifying information that their lives were to be spared upon the principle of their becoming the property of their first captors. The root of the fern and dried fish were the only articles of sustenance the place afforded and both these in very sparing quantity.  On the 9th a ship hove in sight but did not approach the land and on the 11th saw a brig coasting near in shore which the native chiefs consented they should go on board of if they could. Flattered with the hope of accomplishing this desired object they obtained and repaired an old canoe but could not afterwards reach the vessel.  On the 29th of January they left this place the native name of which is Mooramoota situate on the N.E. part of North Cape and went to Ringatan 35 miles N.W. of the former; but being worse off here then before they returned to Mooramoota. On the 23rd of February they were taken off by the brig Active the master of which had learnt their condition at Ringatan. The four lascars were left under the charge of the Missionaries at the Bay of Islands. The two Europeans proceeded in the Active to Otaheite where they joined the Endeavour and returned in her to this Port."  BENCH OF MAGISTRATES. - On Wednesday Ann Bass a crown servant was brought before a Bench of Magistrates charged with behaving in a riotous and disorderly manner to her mistress and attempting to quit her place without leave contrary to the Colonial Regulations. The charge being most clearly proved she was sentenced to be put in the stocks 8 hours at two different periods with an iron collar placed upon her neck and to be imprisoned in the county gaol for 3 months. The complaint was peculiar aggravating this woman having only been released from prison a few days back on a similar case.  John Gwynn a free man was fined five pounds for attempting to inveigle the above woman from her place.  We trust this example will be a warning to all young women who are assigned as servants in this Island; and cause them to remain peaceable and contented in the situation allotted them by Government and not to be seduced by those who in a short time may leave them friendless and distressed.  This day William Mason a crown servant and cooper of His Majesty's Store in this town was charged with stealing 7 lbs of sugar from the said store; for which offence he was sentenced to receive 100 lashes and to work 12 months in the gaol gang.  David M'Coy a settler and stock-owner was fined 20l. for killing a sheep without a licence contrary to Government and General Orders. William Smith a prisoner was also sentenced to work 2 months in the gaol gang for assisting in the same offence.  SYDNEY Thursday 30th. January 1817.  The Colonial vessel Mary arrived at this port yesterday from Port Stephens; brings the melancholy news of the discovery of part of the wreck of the Trial on a beach of a deep and extensive bay in latitude 30° 20' south.  For some time it had been reported by the natives that a vessel was on shore to the north of Port Stephens and on the 12th. inst. the Lady Nelson commanded by Mr. White left Newcastle for the purpose of running to the northwards to ascertain the fate of the survivors from the wreck.  It will be recalled that the brig Trial which was lying down the Harbour ready to sail from hence for Port Dalrymple as soon as the wind permitted was on the 12th. of September last piratically boarded by surprise and taken away from her anchorage which was near the Sow and Pigs by a banditti of villains whose names were as follows: - James Murphy (27 years of age) a mariner and a notorious offender; Manuel de Sylva (42) sailor and sailmaker; John Ferrara native of Portugal and a mariner - generally in company with de Sylva - he belonged to the Boat's crew; Patrick Doyle (23) horse shoer; Thomas Dalton (35) groom and servant; Charles Dyche (40) a sawyer; Hugh Ward (23) a brass-founder; Thomas M'Grath (26) a stonemason lately employed at Macquarie lighthouse tower; Nicholas Russell (28) ditto; Francis Harrison (30) ditto; James M'Mahon (25) Felix O'Neil (29) and Francis O'Hara (28) all in the stonemason's gang lately employed on Macquarie tower which at the time of the piracy was less than half completed.  The pirates from their advantageous post of observation had noted the proximity of the Trial and assisted by a dark night had achieved their evil purpose without difficulty. They found on board the master (Mr. Burnett) the crew and passengers among whom were Sergeant and Mrs. Annandale and two other females who were not landed by the miscreants. The pirates who by deliberately forcing away the Trial's people added to their premeditated crime of piracy the destruction of from eight to ten innocent and unsuspecting persons by whose unhappy destiny the calamity of the vessel's loss has been so intensely heightened as scarcely to admit a parallel in these parts.  The Colonial vessel Rosetta was despatched in pursuit of the banditti on the morning following the taking of the Trial but the chase proved unsuccessful.  A party of six soldiers who accompanied the recent excursion in the Lady Nelson were for several days employed in running through the woods to ascertain the fate of the unfortunate people who had been taken away in the Trial. The soldiers had finally hailed the Mary from the shore of one of the bays at the northern entrance of Port Stephens and it is from this party that we give the following interesting particulars.  Every enquiry with the natives by the soldiers proved abortive further than that a part of the people who were stranded in the vessel built a small vessel out of her planks and timbers and proceeded to sea. But whether they were swamped and went down or only disappeared from the view of the black spectators on shore could not be properly ascertained from the descriptive signs and gesticulations of the natives who communicated the intelligence.  The captain passengers and crew it is believed had endeavoured to get their way towards Newcastle by taking to the bush but of any of whom not a single trace or vestige was to be discovered. The unfortunate woman who it appears had secreted herself on board the Trial with a young child is supposed to be living among the natives in a state the 'most distressing.  Like the unhappy seizure of the Harrington and the melancholy business of the Venus brig which was cut out at Port Dalrymple by Lancashire and other prisoners the many examples of piracy have never succeeded nor can they possibly succeed. If the example of the Trial which is and it is hoped may ever remain the last of the disastrous catalogue what miseries would have a little previous reflection upon the terrors of their crime have saved to all the persons who unhappily embarked in it; - among the least of which may be mentioned the nearly inevitable certainty of shipwreck upon this long extended coast every spot of which is inhabited or rather infested by barbarous hordes of savages.  Preface Edward Curr  Narrative of the chief Atrocities committed by this great Murderer and his Associates during a Period of six Years in Van Diemen's Land.  THE following account of which some portions were published in Mr. Evans's work on Van Diemen's Land will be read with interest. It was originally printed in the colony in the year 1818.   The bush-rangers of Van Diemen's Land generally consist of men accused of crimes or of prisoners escaped from gaol who retiring to the forests and intricate passes amongst the mountains often contrive for a long time to elude the vigilance of their pursuers. But they invariably pay the forfeit of their temerity being either shot in the woods by their pursuers murdered by their confederates or executed upon the gallows.   Another class of bush-rangers consists of men who having been transported to Macquarie Harbour for offences committed in the colony attempt an escape from that secluded spot to the inhabited parts of the island. Of these the greater part have perished of hunger and fatigue in the pathless forests and mountains with which that port is surrounded. This also has doubtless been the fate of the military sent in pursuit of the runaways. In one of these expeditions which originally consisted of six convicts two out of the three survivors murdered their companion while asleep for the revolting purpose of appeasing their hunger and a few days afterwards having then wandered six weeks in various directions they found themselves in sight of the settlement from which they were attempting to escape. Here they surrendered themselves. [175]   They related the extremities to which they had been reduced with the dreadful consequences and to corroborate their story produced a part of their slaughtered companion. Their past sufferings proved fatal; they died after a few days in the hospital and utter reprobates as they were in looking at their sufferings we must cease to regret that justice was deprived of her victims.   The dreadful fate of these men availed their fellow-prisoners nothing. Another party immediately set out with undiminished ardour upon the same perilous discovery. Others had been disappointed in their efforts to reach the interior by a direct route over the mountains; but these taking a circuitous passage along the coast to the northward and then to the eastwardy succeeded in reaching the settlements and resuming their old habits of plunder were again apprehended. [176]   There has been one instance of a bush-ranger who was long outlawed in the woods without being suspected of any crime and indeed with the credit of being active in its prevention. It occurred during the period of the transactions related in the following pages. He was a seaman who having formed an attachment for a young woman in the colony deserted from his ship fled with her into the woods where he remained for a period of three years. They afterwards returned to Hobart Town where he acquired wealth and I regret to add that the poor reward he might have bestowed for her fidelity was withheld: he married another woman.   As the country becomes more populous and better explored instances of a long course of successful enormities become rare. During my residence in the island many criminals fled to the woods; but their course was generally short and they were soon apprehended and brought to justice.   E. C.   [177] Michael Howe T. E. Wells  Narrative of the chief Atrocities committed by this great Murderer and his Associates during a period of six Years in Van Diemen's Land: from authentic sources of information. - Hobart Town: printed by Andrew Bent.   Michael Howe who acted the principal part in the transactions about to be narrated was born at Pontefract in Yorkshire in the year 1787 and was bound apprentice to a merchant vessel at Hull; but he served only two years when he ran away and entered on board a man-of-war.   In the year 1811 he was apprehended for robbing a miller on the highway and tried at the York assizes following; but from an informality in the indictment the capital part of the charge was abandoned and he received sentence of seven years transportation. He arrived at this settlement in the ship Indefatigable Captain Cross in the month of October 1812. [178]   During his passage from England his habits were rather industrious and though always mischievously inclined he exhibited no symptoms of that daring and wanton conduct which manifested itself in his future Life unless we may consider as such his leaping overboard whilst the vessel was in port and swimming a considerable distance before he was taken.   As a leader of a band of desperadoes Howe may not unaptly be compared to Three-fingered Jack who was so long the terror of the peaceable settlers in the plantations of Jamaica; and who notwithstanding every exertion to take him long ranged the woods of that island committing the most cruel and daring acts of murder and robbery until from the large rewards offered by the Government he was arrested by the hands of justice.   Howe was only a few days at Government public labor before he was assigned as a Crown servant to Mr. Ingle a merchant and grazier; from whose service he eloped into the woods and joined twenty-eight felons at that time at large committing depredations.   With a view of inducing those deluded people to return to their duty to Government His Excellency Governor Macquarie on the 14th May 1814 was pleased to extend to them the Royal clemency for all offences committed during their unlawful absence (the crime of wilful murder excepted); provided they should return to their lawful occupations by the 1st day of December following; denouncing all who should neglect to do so as outlaws. [179]   This banditti now consisting of twenty-nine persons amongst whom were Michael Howe and John Whitehead an equally desperate offender availed themselves of the proffered clemency and surrendered to Government.   Although Howe and his companions must at this period have been sensible that their lives would have been forfeit to the Laws but for the mercy extended to them this reflection did not operate to amend their future conduct; for we soon after find Howe and Whitehead again in the woods with a new set of desperadoes adding murder to robbery.   After some minor depredations this band headed by Whitehead stripped nearly the whole of the settlers at New Norfolk of their portable property together with all arms and ammunition; and from thence proceeded to Pitt Water and robbed Mr. Fisk a new settler at that place.   In the night of March 10th they set fire to the wheat Stacks barns etc. of A. W. H. Humphrey Esqe. Police Magistrate and of Bartholomew Reardon district constable at Pitt Water within a few minutes of each other; destroying the produce of one hundred acres recently got in. A paper was found near the burnt stacks of Mr. Humphrey upon which were words of threatening import and the representation of a gun firing a ball at the head of a man.   It afterwards came out that Whitehead and Garland were the principal incendiaries in this wanton destruction.   On the 25th April 1815 the Band consisting of John Whitehead the leader Richard McGuire Hugh Burne Richard Collier Peter Septon John Jones James Geary a deserter from the 73rd Regiment and Howe accompanied by a black native girl named Mary with whom Howe cohabited again appeared at New Norfolk and robbed the house of Mr. Carlisle a settler there who immediately communicated the circumstance to his neighbour Mr. McCarty. [180]   The latter being apprehensive for the safety of his schooner the Geordy lying near in the Derwent with valuable property determined to meet the robbers; and accompanied by several persons on the spot who immediately volunteered commenced a pursuit.   Mr. McCarty's party consisting of himself Mr. Jemott Mr. James O'Birne master of the Geordy Keith Hacking mate Messrs. Carlisle Murphy James Triffit John Brown and --- Tooms armed with fowling pieces and pistols soon came up with the robbers and commanded them to surrender their arms; the gang instantly commenced firing under cover of and through a large hollow tree and wounded five of the party who had the disadvantage of being fully exposed to the fire of the former on every attempt to get a shot at them. Carlisle received a ball in the groin and three slugs in the breast of which wounds he died within an hour; Mr. Jemott was badly wounded by a ball passing through the thick part of the thigh in which part Triffit was also wounded and Murphy in the abdomen. O'Birne received a Ball in the cheek which perforated the Tongue and lodged in the neck causing his death in a few days. The Banditti availing themselves of the disabled state of Mr. McCarty's party in turn demanded him to lay down his arms which was refused and a slight firing continued until the wounded were removed with the exception of Murphy whose state obliged him to remain at the mercy of the Gang and they were about to add corporal punishment to their victory but were prevented by their leader Whitehead. [181]   In consequence of these murders military parties were sent in various directions in search of the banditti. A party of the 73rd Regt. in a few days came so close up with them as to find the remains of their fires and the skin of a sheep recently killed. A party of the 46th was also in pursuit and a number of the inhabitants of Hobart Town well armed went in search of the murderers of Carlisle and O'Birne.   Lieutenant Governor Davey adopted measures for their apprehension.   A Proclamation had previously to this been published offering a reward of fifty guineas to any person free or bond who would apprehend a bush-ranger and lodge him in safe custody; holding out encouraging prospects to such of the offenders themselves (not personally implicated in any act of felony) as should procure the apprehension of any of their associates; and it having been represented that the bush-rangers derived supplies from settlers and other fixed inhabitants a further reward of fifty guineas was offered to any person giving information of such abettors: for without secret assistance these depredations could not long have continued.   On the 10th of May the band of robbers visited the house of Mr. Humphrey at Pitt Water for the second time. [182]   About seven o'clock in the evening Whitehead Septon and Collier all armed burst open the door of the servants' hut and rushed in. Whitehead and Septon immediately presented their muskets cocked to the servants present and stood over them whilst Collier made them take off their neckcloths with which he tied their hands across behind their backs;- Whitehead and Septon threatening to shoot them if they stirred or resisted.   Howe then came in and taking a lamp from the hut went with others who had remained outside to the dwelling house occupied by Mr. Humphrey which they broke open and plundered while Whitehead Septon and Collier stood guard over the Servants.   After packing up every thing they found useful to themselves and breaking and destroying what they could not take away (which last they said they should have spared had they not perceived two pairs of irons in the house) they departed threatening if any one stirred out of the hut that he should be shot by sentries which they would place to look out while the others might get a sufficient distance.   The banditti shortly afterward revisited New Norfolk. Knowing Mr. McCarty was absent and meditating revenge for the opposition met with in their late encounter they repaired to his premises by night and wantonly fired a volley in at the window. It happily did no other injury than slightly wounding one soldier. On this occasion they met with an unexpected reception; for a party of the 46th Regt. who had been stationed in the house immediately commenced a brisk fire which killed their leader Whitehead. [183]   The party then rushed from the House to cut off the retreat of the banditti but from the darkness of the night were unable to do so.   When Whitehead received the fatal shot he ran a few yards towards Howe crying "take my watch - take my watch" and then dropped. Howe immediately took off his head; as well perhaps to prevent the body being recognised by their pursuers as in performance of an engagement which they had made to each other upon any one of them being killed a survivor should do this to prevent as they said any person from benefiting by rewards for taking in their heads.   The head of Whitehead was a considerable time afterwards found in the woods:- the body was brought to Hobart Town and gibbeted on Hunter's Island.   From this period Howe was considered the leader of the band.   In the early part of this year Lieut. Governor Davey established Martial Law in the Colony; which was kept in force till repealed by order of Governor Macquarie; soon after which a party in quest of the banditti in the neighbourhood of Tea-tree Brush descried their place of retreat from a smoke which they had made. Near the hut from which it proceded were McGuire and Burne (the rest being absent) who immediately darted into a thicket and disappeared eluding all search.   In the hut was found a number of articles belonging to various individuals whom they had at different periods plundered; besides ammunition musket balls fire arms and several kangaroo dogs. [184]   This discovery caused the separation of McGuire and Burne from the rest of the banditti and their speedier fall; for after wandering several days in the woods they applied to a settler near Kangaroo Point to procure them a boat for the purpose of proceeding to Bass's Straits; for which they promised the reward of a watch. The settler pretended to come into their views and left them with the assurance of going in search of the boat; but he privately repaired to Hobart Town and informed the Lieut. Governor of their intentions. A party of the 46th Regt. was immediately despatched who surrounded the place of their concealment and captured both. Burne was the most aged of the gang and was severely wounded in endeavouring to escape from the party. They were brought before a General Court Martial charged with being two of the banditti who murdered the unfortunate Carlisle were convicted and received sentence of death. They were accordingly executed and their bodies gibbeted on Hunter's Island near to that of Whitehead their leader when that murder was committed.   The banditti were now reduced to Howe Septon Jones Geary and Collier.   From the information of one of the gang who had been taken in the woods and afterwards admitted an evidence for the Crown a discovery took place of some of the abettors of the bush-rangers in the robbery of Mr. Fisk; in consequence of which William Stevens a crown prisoner and two youths born of European parents at Norfolk Island (who were stock-keepers near to the place where the robbery was committed and in whose possession some of the stolen property was found) were all apprehended as being concerned with the Bush-rangers in that robbery; of which they were afterwards convicted by a General Court Martial and sentenced to death. Stevens was executed and the two youths respited under the gallows which was fixed near to the gibbets on Hunter's Island; and the body of Stevens was buried within a few yards of the same place. [185]   In October following Martial Law was repealed by order of His Excellency The Governor in Chief.   These awful examples had no tendency to correct the vicious course of the remaining hardened offenders. They committed many acts of plunder in the September following;- they robbed the House of Mr. Stanfield at Green Point of every movable;- they also rushed into the house of Stines and Troy settlers at the plains of the Coal River and with horrid menace commanded every person to remain quiet in the dwelling while they rifled it of every portable article and a tradesman who was at work on the premises and who some time before had been of the party in pursuit of them narrowly escaped being shot.   After this month they retired again to the woods and were not again heard of till the 7th of November when they assailed the residence of David Rose Esqe at Port Dalrymple. Their conduct while plundering here was aggravated as on other occasions by every wanton atrocity. [186]   Upon this the Commandant repaired to the woods in person accompanied by a strong party of the 46th Regt. and the Chief Constable; they searched the interior of the country several days but were unable to come up with any of the Gang.   These miscreants were next visible at the farm of Mr. T. Hayes at Bagdad within eleven days and at the distance of 100 Miles from the scene of their last outrage. Mr. W. T. Stocker a person in the habit of trading between the settlements had halted at Hayes' for the night with a cart load of property of great value the whole of which the banditti forcibly carried off. It is to be supposed that they had previously been informed of Mr. Stocker's journey.   The property taken from individuals by this lawless gang must by this time have been immense and it is not to be conceived how it was appropriated but by their having confederates in society though unsuspected who not only purchased their booty but were channels of information as to the passing events in which they were interested;- and indeed we may safely ascribe the long period in which they eluded every exertion made to capture them to this secret support.   Soon after this the banditti increasing in hardihood in proportion with the number of atrocities as yet committed with impunity assumed a lofty tone and addressed a Letter to Lt. Governor Davey replete with ignorant and insolent threats. They however complained of being much harrassed by the pursuing parties from the settlements and the perseverance used to take them. In addition to the old gang the letter was signed by six felons who had lately absconded named Chapman Coine Parker Keegan Browne and Currie. Two native black girls armed as well as the men accompanied them. [187]   At this period a most vigilant and persevering search was continued in all directions by parties of military from Hobart Town and Port Dalrymple. Captain Nairn headed a detachment of 20 privates of the 46th Regt. and continued an indefatigable pursuit night and day. All efforts however were as yet unavailing.   The following information taken before A. W. H. Humphreys Esqe. J.P. as it shews their state of feeling and having reference to the letter sent to Lt. Govr. Dewey may be perused with some interest.   "John Yorke being duly sworn states - About 5 o'clock in the evening of Nov. 27th I fell in with a party of bush-rangers about 14 Men and 2 Women; Michael Howe and Geary were the only 2 of the gang I knew personally. I met them on Scantling's Plains - I was on horseback; they desired me to stop which I accordingly did on the high road; it was Geary that stopped me; he said he wanted to see every man sworn to abide by the contents of a letter. - I observed a thick man writing as I suppose to the Lt. Governor. - Geary was the man who administered the oath on a prayer book calling each man for that purpose regularly; they did not inform me the contents of the letter - Michael Howe and Geary directed me to state when I came to town the whole I had seen and to inform Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Wade to take care of themselves as they were resolved to take their lives and to prevent them from keeping stock or grain unless there was something done for them - that Mr. Humphrey might reap what grain he liked but they would thrash more in one night than he could reap in a year. They said they could set the whole country in a fire with one stick. I was detained about three quarters of an hour during which time they charged me to be strict in making known what they said to me and what I had seen. On my return from Port Dalrymple I called at a hut occupied by Joseph Wright at Scantling's Plains:- William Williams and a youth were there who told me the bush-rangers had been there a few days before and forced them to a place called Murderers' Plains which the bush-rangers called the Tallow Chandler's Shop where they made them remain three days for the purpose of rendering down a large quantity of beef fat which Williams understood was taken from cattle belonging to Stines & Troy." [188]   On the 25th February following the commandant of Port Dalymple sent out Ensign Mahon and a party of the 46th Regt. in pursuit of bush-rangers; [189] and after several weeks in the woods they fell in with Chapman Parker and Elliott lying in ambuscade at York Plains. On being called upon to surrender Chapman snapped his musket at the guide and with the rest ran off. Three of the soldiers then fired; Chapman was shot through the back and soon after expired; Parker was slightly wounded but fled into a thicket and escaped; Elliott was shot by Ensign Mahon and died instantly. The heads of Chapman and Elliott were taken off and sent into Launceston and the bodies interred on the spot. Parker was afterwards apprehended near the same spot in a wretched state.   In the early part of March it appears that some jealousy of Howe began to manifest itself in the old gang;- they conceived from the circumstance of his being absent at intervals without their knowledge or assigning any reason that he meditated betraying the rest. Howe was aware of their suspicions and feeling no longer secure among them suddenly eloped taking with him the native girl before mentioned.   In April 1817 Lt. Governor Sorrell arrived and assumed the government of the settlements on Van Diemen's Land; and about this period Howe and the native girl were pursued in the neighbourhood of Jericho by a small party of the 46th Regt.   His wantonly cruel disposation was strongly manifested on this occasion; for being hard pressed in order to facilitate his own escape he fired at this poor female companion who from fatigue was unable to keep pace with him; she received however little injury and together with his blunderbuss knapsack and dogs fell into the hands of the pursuers. [190]   This native girl afterwards became particularly valuable as a guide to the military parties from the quickness and sagacity peculiar to the black natives in tracing footsteps where Europeans would not suspect them. She led the party first to some of the places of the banditti's resort at the River Shannon. While employed in burning their huts in this quarter Howe Septon and Geary were seen at the other side of the river; the appearance of the military party however gave them no alarm as they knew the river could not be immediately crossed;- the banditti had therefore another opportunity of escape.   Continuing their search the soldiers next met with 50 Sheep in a remote place stolen from Mr. Stanfield and concealed by the bush-rangers for future supply.   After the loss of his knapsack and dogs - his confirmed breach with the rest of the banditti and his late narrow escape Howe now entirely alone appears to have determined upon carrying into execution a design which according to the report of the native girl he had for some time contemplated - viz that of chancing an extension of mercy upon surrender.   He accordingly found means to convey to Lt. Governor Sorell a letter offering to give himself up to an officer as well as to furnish important information of the friends and supporters of the old Gang and become the means of their final capture upon His Honor's assurance of present personal safety and a favourable representation to His Excellency the Governor in Chief with a request for pardon. The Lt. Governor immediately dispatched Captn. Nairn of the 46th Regt. to a place named with an assurance to that effect and this officer on the 29th April conveyed Howe to Hobart Town and lodged him in the county gaol. He now underwent various examinations by the magistrates. [191]   In the meantime the military parties remained in pursuit of the robbers still at large.   On the 10th of May the party commanded by Sergt. McCarthy arrived in Hobart Town after an arduous and persevering pursuit under circumstances of peculiar hardship and privation they had procured information of and tracked the banditti for several days until the loss of their flour in fording a river and a total want of provisions which reduced them to eat the skin mocassons from their feet compelled them to give up the pursuit for a time.   On the 19th of the same month the party stationed at Pitt Water commanded by Lt. Nunn received intelligence that the banditti were robbing the premises of Edward Lord Esqe. at Orielton Park. They hastened to the spot; and on their appearance the banditti fired several shots and slightly wounded Lt. Nunn. [192]   Some soldiers stationed at another part of the settlement were now seen by the bush-rangers approaching upon which the latter fled leaving behind them some flour which they had stolen from Mr. Lord.   About the end of June the Government long boat employed on the Port Dalrymple River in carrying provisions betwen George Town and Launceston was carried away by the bush-rangers with five more men and several stand of arms; but in consequence of bad weather their design of escaping to the islands was frustrated; and they were compelled to return. After burning the boat and other articles they were driven again to resume their former habits in the woods.   The old gang might now be considered to have received considerable accession; the number at large having amounted to twenty in the absence at this period of The Lieut. Governor at the other settlement.   On the 5th July a meeting of the principal inhabitants of Hobart Town was held under the sanction of His Honor in order to facilitate the views of Government by raising a sum of money to be applied in rewards for apprehending the banditti then at large when five hundred and twenty guineas were immediately subscribed. Upon the result of this meeting and the recent intelligence of the plunder and excesses at George Town The Lt. Governor issued a Proclamation holding out the following rewards for the apprehension of the old Gang. [193]   For Geary 100 guineas.  Septon; Jones; Collier each 80 guineas.  Browne; Coine each; 50 guineas.  and at the same time was offered a reward of 80 guineas for George Watts an old and mischievous Bush robber under Colonial Sentence to the Coal River but who had only associated with Garland (also an offender in the woods and who was engaged with Whitehead in burning the stacks at Pitt Water) supposed to be drowned in an attempt to cross the Derwent.   Two days after this Proclamation the banditti appeared at the Black Brush and on the following day were traced by Serjeant McCarthy's party to a settler's house at the Tea-tree Brush where they had dined. On perceiving the military they ran out of the house and posted themselves behind trees where the timber on the ground was very thick. An attack commenced on both sides and though the banditti had certainly the advantage of position Geary their leader by a well directed fire was wounded and fell; he died the same night. Smith and Tall runaways from Port Dalrymple who had joined the gang only a few days were also wounded and taken.   This success would doubtless have been followed up by greater in the military party but from its laboring under the disadvantages of great fatigue from incessant pursuit and that of a heavy rain which prevented their muskets from going off. The whole of the knapsacks and dogs of the banditti however fell into their hands; and it ought to be noted that this little party were at the moment totally unacquainted with the recent Proclamation and offered rewards;- from the latter of which they were however not allowed to remain long without benefiting. [194]   In the meantime Howe continued at the gaol of Hobart Town; but His Excellency the Governor in Chief having received favorably the request made by The Lieut. Governor in pursuance of the terms of Howe's surrender he could not altogether be considered a prisoner for close confinement; upon which account and his health being reported to be much impaired he was occassionally permitted to walk out in charge of a constable.   His examinations by the Magistrates were frequent and his depositions voluminous and tedious; but notwithstanding his promise of a full disclosure of the supporters of the bush-rangers little information of worth or utility could be gained from him.   It might have ben expected that Howe would at this period have placed some value on his improved situation; being in fact considered a pardoned offender to whom was afforded a last chance of atoning in some degree for his past crimes by an amended life; and having the prospect of speedily returning to Society: but a life of crime obtained with Howe a preference to all others; and on the 26th July by some means eluding the vigilance of the Constable to whose care he was entrusted he again escaped to the woods. [195]   He now felt himself too much a traitor and a villain for the safe admission of a companion or confederate and never after joined his old associates. He had indeed before him a well-founded apprehension of the consequences of his treachery even from those stamped with similar crimes should he be found once more in their power.   Thus we find the crimes of this man lead him on step by step till he is reduced to prefer the desperate situation of standing opposed to all mankind;- compelled unceasingly to watch for his life;- certain of seeing an enemy in every human face - certain that to suffer himself for a moment to sleep might terminate his miserable existence; certain too that in that sleep his enormities would at least visit him with horrid retrospective visions anticipations of torture - despair and death;- and certain that reality promised no other end:- preferring all these to the opportunity given him of a Life of penitence and a death at all events not hastened by the hands of justice.   Let us now turn to his old associates in guilt; whom justice seemed now to be quickly overtaking; for there remained at large besides Howe of the original gang who ran from the Derwent only Septon Jones and Collier - Coine and Browne who were implicated in their recent robberies were runaways from Port Dalrymple.   In a few days after the affair in which Geary was killed the banditti robbed several stock-keepers at the Carleton.   On the 3rd of August the little force of Sergt. McCarthy which had been unremittingly scouring the woods in all directions observed the print of feet on the beach and traced and discovered the banditti at Swan Port on the eastern shore. [196]   As soon as they perceived the soldiers they fled with precipitancy. One of the party fired and shot Jones their chief through the head; who instantly died. His body was buried on the beach after being decapitated and his head sent to Hobart Town.   Whilst the party proceeded to intercept the retreat of the remainder the fire of the banditti wounded Holmes (a runaway who had lately joined them) and he was taken; but from the intricacy of the woods and his wounded state he was with difficulty brought to Hobart Town.   We next find discontent and treachery among themselves hasten the destruction of the remainder of the banditti; for on the 25 of August a horrible transaction occurred at a Hut behind Gordon's Plains near Launceston.   They had on that day effected a robbery at the farm of Mr. Brumby in which it appears Wright and Hillier runaways from George Town had joined them. On that evening Wright left the rest and gave himself up at Launceston; but Hillier conceived the horrible project of murdering his companions Septon and Collier while asleep at this Hut (it appears Coine and Browne were absent at this moment) imagining as he afterwards said that he should receive the rewards offered by Government and screen himself from the punishment of his own crimes which he apprehended would speedily overtake him.   In the middle of the night this monster watching his opportunity with a razor cut the throat of Septon from ear to ear causing his immediate death. He then turned to perpetrate the same act on Collier who it seems had been slightly disturbed; he effected only a trifling wound on the neck of the latter who made his escape out of the hut; Hillier however having previously secured possession of the arms seized Septon's rifle gun and fired at Collier shattering his hand severely. [197]   A more treacherous assassination has seldom been heard of.   Hillier was soon after taken; as was also Collier in an enfeebled and helpless state. The former was sent to Sydney to take his trial for the murder of Septon in the ship Pilot with Collier who was sent to the same tribunal charged as one of the eight engaged in the murders at New Norfolk when Carlisle and O'Birne were killed; and he was the only one reserved to make a public expiation.   Upon intelligence of this last dreadful affair The Lt. Governor issued a further Proclamation and offered the following rewards for the only three bush-rangers at large on the 1st day of September viz.   For Howe 100 guineas.  Watts 80 guineas.  Browne 50 guineas.  all of whom were known to have no connection or communication with each other.   In this Month Browne surrendered to Government; Coine and Keegan had done so some time previously; and though capital punishment might have been inflicted on these last three yet as they had no connection with the heinous Murders committed by others of the banditti Government forbore to bring them before a Criminal Court. These men were chiefly companions of Parker who was taken as before noticed and with him were convicted by a Bench of Magistrates of various robberies and sentenced. [198]   Browne 150 Lashes and 4 years to Newcastle.  Parker; Coine; Keegan 100 lashes and 2 years to do.  We have now only Howe and Watts at large and it seemed ordained that the greater should be reserved for punishment of the lesser villain before called upon to receive the just reward of his great and manifold crimes.   On the 10th of October Howe again appears on the scene adding to the catalogue of murders already recorded one of the most savage character which will long be in the recollection of the inhabitants of the colony.   A person named William Drewe alias Slambow had charge of some sheep in the vicinity of New Norfolk for his master Mr. Williams of Hobart Town. Drewe had occasionally corresponded with Howe and had agreed along with his Master to take him on the first opportunity.   Howe had lately been at Williams's hut with a letter for the Lt. Governor; and soon after Watts who it should seem had some design upon Howe called to enquire of Drewe if he had seen him. Drewe informed Watts that he had seen Howe and was to meet him at sun-rise the following Friday when he said if Watts would come he would take him. On the Thursday Watts took away a boat from New Norfolk in which he crossed the Derwent and concealed himself near the path where Drewe had appointed till the next morning. At sun-rise Drewe arrived and told Watts that he was to meet Howe at a place called Long Bottom. They proceeded thither and Watts requested Drewe to conceal his Gun as probably Howe would not come up to them if he perceived it. Upon arriving at the spot Drewe called several times and was answered by Howe from the opposite side of the creek. When Watts came within 90 yards of Howe he desired him to knock out the priming of his gun promising to do the same: this was accordingly done by both and after proceeding 30 or 40 yards they made a fire. Soon after which Watts caught hold of Howe and threw him down; Drewe tied his hands and took from his pockets two knives. Watts and Drewe next prepared breakfast but of which Howe refused to partake. Before they proceeded to Hobart Town Drewe proposed to take his master's gun and dog to the hut; which was agreed to by Watts who desired him not to mention the occurrence of the morning to Williams; the latter had arrived the evening before at the hut to shear his Sheep. Drewe met his master who becoming by the absence of his man alarmed for his safety had proceded in search of him; upon Drewe's running towards him with his gun and dog Williams enquired the cause; Drewe replied that George Watts was stopping with Howe whom they had taken whilst he came to acquaint his master and deliver his musket as he had got Michael Howe's and Watts had his own; he also shewed Williams the two knives he had taken but declined the offered assistance of the latter as Howe was secured. Upon Drewe's return to Watts and Howe they all proceded towards Hobart Town; Watts with his gun loaded walking before Howe and Drewe behind. After walking about 8 miles Howe found means to disengage his hands and in an instant stabbed Watts with a knife which he had remaining secreted about his person. Watts fell and dropped his gun which Howe seized at the moment and with it shot Drewe dead. Watts now dreaded a similar fate; for on asking Howe if he had killed Slambow he replied "Yes and I'll serve you the same as soon as I can load the piece." Watts then ran about 200 yards and lay down amongst some brush being faint and cold from loss of blood. As soon as he was able to walk he contrived to reach a settler's house not far distant and after being put to bed told the owner that he had been stabbed by Howe requesting the district Constable might be sent for to take him to town. Upon the arrival of the latter Watts could only utter his own name; but the next morning he told the Constable that Drewe was killed. The body was found about half a mile from the house where Watts lay and was conveyed to Hobart Town for a Coroner's Inquest whose verdict was "That the deceased William Drewe was murdered by Michael Howe." [199] [200]   Watts was conveyed to gaol in a weakly state; he was a runaway from Newcastle and was sent to Sydney in the Pilot but under no criminal charge where he died in the General Hospital of the wounds received from Howe in three days after his arrival. [201]   As soon as the melancholy circumstance of the murder of Drewe was communicated to The Lt. Governor he issued another Proclamation promising in addition to the former reward of 100 guineas. for the apprehension of Howe a strong recommendation for a free pardon and passage to England to any Crown prisoner who would be the means of apprehending that great Murderer. He was however not again seen for some time.   On the 25th of October Collier was tried before the Criminal Court at Sydney and convicted on the clearest Evidence of being one of the murderers of Carlisle and O'Birne; he received sentence of death to be executed at Hobart Town and his body to be dissected. In December he was sent back to this settlement and suffered the sentence of the law on the 26th of January 1818. From the moment of this man's being taken he professed to entertain no hope of mercy but to prefer death to the life he had lately led: he died penitent.   The once formidable gang and the system of bush-ranging as an armed banditti producing in its progress great terror and mischief to the community checking the views and paralysing the efforts of the settlers of this infant colony might now be considered annihilated; for though Howe the most hardened (and sanguinary of the whole) still remained to be taken yet he was cut off from association with man.   After the murder of Drewe he was supposed to have buried himself in unknown and inaccessible parts of the woods; the necessity of procuring ammunition and supplies to prolong his wretched existence compelled however an occasional appearance; and these supplies he obtained by robbing distant stock-keepers' huts; when he generally bore away with him as much as he could carry threatening instant destruction to any person who would attempt to follow him or trace his steps. [202]   But his race was nearly run; and though after the murder of Drewe and Watts few would choose to risk a personal encounter with him yet the confidence was pretty general that he could not long exist under his present circumstances.   One or two fruitless attempts were made to take him by strategem. In the month of September however McGill who was the previous year emancipated for services against the bush-rangers with the 46th Regt. and who at different periods continued an assiduous pursuit after him came so closely upon him that in his hurry to escape Howe left behind him his arms ammunition dogs and knapsack which fell into the hands of McGill and were brought to Hobart Town.   The loss of his pistols on this occasion was a serious and irreparable one to Howe.   In his knapsack was found a sort of journal of dreams which shew strongly the distressed state of his mind and some tincture of superstition.   From this little book of kangaroo skin written in kangaroo blood it appears that he frequently dreamt of being murdered by natives of seeing his old companions Whitehead Jones Geary and Collier of being nearly taken by a soldier; and in one instance humanity asserts itself even in the breast of Michael Howe for we find him recording that he dreamt of his sister. [203]   It also appears from this memorandum book that he had always an idea of settling in the woods; for it contains long lists of such seeds as he wished to have of vegetables fruits and even flowers!   After this period but one or two trifling Robberies are heard of in one of which he furnished himself with a gun and anxiously enquired for pistols before we come to the closing scene of the career of this desperado.   In the month of October a person named Warburton in the habit of hunting kangaroo for skins who had occasional opportunities of seeing Howe communicated to a Crown prisoner named Thomas Worrall stock-keeper to Edward Lord Esqe. a scheme for taking him. Worrall agreed to the trial and with Private William Pugh of the 48th Regt. a man of known courage and recommended by Major Bell for this service determined to lay in wait at a hut on the Shannon River likely to be visited by Howe for supplies. Warburton was to look out for the approach of Howe and to induce him to come to the hut under a promise of ammunition; at the same time to signify his approach by a whistle. This plan proved successful. On the 21st of October Howe met Warburton near the place already mentioned; he however exhibited must distrust of the intention of the latter and great hesitation in advancing near the hut - often disappearing to see if any one were watching him. At length after three hours indeterminate consideration allured by promises of ammunition which Warburton said was in the hut he ventured to enter the door his musket cocked and levelled; when Pugh instantly fired but missed him; Howe simply exclaimed "Is that your game" and precipitately retreated but at the same time fired and missed also. Pugh and Worrall immediately rushed out to run him down and the latter fired but none of the shots took effect. Pugh and Worrall gained upon Howe; and now he must for once have felt appalled;- deprived of his pistols shortly before no time allowed for a second charge and his pursuers gaining ground - nothing but a miracle could effect his deliverance. Pugh and Worrall had now come up with him; a severe encounter ensued; and finally from well-directed blows on his head with their Muskets fell and expired without speaking - the last of a lawless murderous Banditti! - Exhibiting in his career and end the strongest proof of slow but certain retributive justice; which though it was baffled for a season in the end over-whelmed this wretched violator of its most sacred laws with more striking vengeance; after making him directly or indirectly the instrument of destruction to those connected with him in his dreadful outrages he himself closed the scene! - an awful example which cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of all those who are inclined to prefer to the wholesome and mild laws of civilized society a licentious life of unrestraint; which can only be maintained by robbery and violence and which will surely end in murder and an ignominous death. [204] [205]   Howe was of athletic make; he wore at the time of his death a dress made of kangaroo skins had an extraordinary long beard and presented altogether a terrific appearance. His face perhaps in some degree from associating with it the recollection of his crimes exhibited strong marks of a murderer. During his long career of guilt he was never known to perform one humane act. His body was interred on the spot where he fell; his head was brought to Hobart Town and suffered to be seen by the people to whom the end of this monster afforded an inconceivable degree of satisfaction.   The reward due to the zeal and bravery of the persons engaged in ridding the world of this murderer was universally acknowledged to be well merited. His Honor Lient. Governor Sorrell issued a Government and General Order in which he strongly commended the activity intelligence and spirit of Private William Pugh whom His Honor recommends to His Excellency the Governor in Chief for the greatest favor he can receive. The deserving conduct of Thomas Worrall His Honor also brings under the notice of His Excellency accompanied by a strong recommendation for a free pardon and passage to England in pursuance of the terms of the Proclamation.   The reward for Howe's apprehension was adjudged to be divided in the following manner; to Pugh £50; to Worrell £40 and to Warburton (who was not personally engaged) £15. [206]   The following account of the unhappy end of Edward Edwards and John Bowles and the sudden disappearance of Thomas Davenport all Crown servants as connected with Howe's crimes and adding to the number of those who fell by his murderous hand proceed from the same authority:-   After the banditti in an early stage had taken a Government boat from Port Dalrymple they robbed Captain Townson of a cask of pork and went to King's Island where they hid a Box of Tools in the sand: they next went to Cape Barren where they disagreed and separated;- a further dispute arose when Howe it is stated deliberately shot Edwards in the presence of Jones and Whitehead.   On a subsequent occasion at a creek on Salt-pan Plains Bowles having sportively discharged a pistol over Howe's head the latter in a wanton and cruel manner tied Bowles hand and feet and then coolly shot him dead.   Thomas Davenport who was an assigned servant to Mr. D. Stanfield obtained his master's permission to hunt kangaroo in the interior of the country taking with him a musket dogs and other necessaries. He had not been absent more than three days when his dogs returned without him; this circumstance created much anxiety which was increased by Davenport's not being heard of and all enquiry after him proving unavailing for some time. At length Warburton (mentioned in the foregoing narrative) in a conversation with Howe was told by him that Davenport was killed by the native. The general belief however is that Howe had met Davenport and in some way been the cause of his death;- perhaps sacrificed him on a refusal to join in his enormities. [207]   The public have thus a brief narrative of the chief events of the last six years of Howe's life; comprising a series of crimes committed with the coolest indifference. Many of less enormity have been omitted and most of the information given by himself disregarded as proceeding from such a man.   The bush-rangers had no fixed place of general rendezvous or any regular system;- they were of necessity conseqently moving about the Woods frequently without the common support and necessaries of life and exposed to much hardship. They could never have become formidable had not the peculiar circumstances of the colony admitted of their becoming better acquainted with the interior than other Men and it is nearly impossible that any bands of future bush-rangers will be formed or if formed that they can exist so long unsubdued as those now happily exterminated.  Honoured Sir  With feelings of the most respectful nature we beg you to accept our most heartfelt acknowledgments for the many comforts and indulgences we have received from you during the passage from England and for which we are indebted to your kindness and humanity.  Were it possible honoured Sir for us to show you in a more striking manner the high sense we entertain for the many kindnesses we have received we should consider ourselves completely happy; but as that perhaps may never occur we now with sentiments of the highest esteem for your kindness return you our most grateful and sincere thanks; and remain  Honoured Sir  Your most obedient and very humble servants  THE CONVICTS.  The covert aim of these men is to convert the ignominy of the great body of the people into an hereditary deformity. They would hand it down from father to son and raise an eternal barrier of separation between their offspring and the offspring of the unfortunate convict. [309] They would establish distinctions which may serve hereafter to divide the colonists into castes; and although none among them dares publicly avow that future generations should be punished for the crimes of their progenitors yet such are their private sentiments; and they would have the present race branded with disqualifications not more for the sake of pampering their own vanity than with a view to reflect disgrace on the offspring of the disfranchised parent and thus cast on their own children and descendants that future splendor and importance which they consider to be their present peculiar and distinguishing characteristics. Short-sighted fools! they forsee not the consequences of their narrow machinations! They know not that they would be sowing the seeds of future discords and commotions and that by exalting their immediate descendants they would occasion the eventual degradation and overthrow of their posterity. Such would be the result of their ambition; for it is the curse of injustice that it brings with it sooner or later its own punishment. [...]. Shall they in the short space of thirty years forget the benevolent designs for which this colony was founded and convert what was intended as an asylum for repentant vice not into a house merely of salutary correction which may moderate with reviving morality and cease entirely with complete reformation but into a prison of endless torture where though the sufferings of the body may terminate the worst species of torture the endurements and mortifications of the soul are to end only with existence? Shall a vile faction be allowed to inflict on the unfortunate convict a punishment infinitely greater than that to which he has been sentenced by the violated majesty of the law? Has not a jury of impartial freemen solemnly investigated the case of every individual who has been transported to this colony? And have not the measure and duration of their punishments been apportioned to their respective offences? Is it then for any body of men to assert that the law has been too lenient and that it is necessary to inflict an ulterior punishment which shall have no termination but in the grave? Shall the unhappy culprit exiled from his native shore and severed perhaps for ever from the friends of his youth the objects of his first and best affections after years of suffering and atonement still find no resting place - no spot where he may hide his shame and endeavour to forget his errors? Shall the finger of scorn and derision be pointed at him wherever he betake himself? And must he for ever wander a recreant and outcast on the face of the earth seeking in vain some friendly shore where he may at length be freed from ignominious disabilities and restored to the long lost enjoyment of equal rights and equal protection with his fellows?  FIRST FRUITS OF AUSTRALIAN POETRY  [3] BOTANY-BAY FLOWERS   "juvatque novos decerpere flores  "Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam  "Unde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae."  LUCRETIUS lib. I.  "Fairies use flowers for their charactery."  SHAKESP. Merry Wives.  GOD of this Planet! for that name best fits  The purblind view which men of this "dim spot"  Can take of THEE the GOD Of Suns and Spheres!  What desert forests and what barren plains  Lie unexplor'd by European eye  In what our Fathers call'd the Great South Land!  Ev'n in those tracts which we have visited  Tho' thousands of thy vegetable works  Have by the hand of Science (as 'tis call'd)  Been gather'd and dissected press'd and dried  Till all their blood and beauty are extinct;  And nam'd in barb'rous Latin men's surnames  With terminations of the Roman tongue;  Yet tens of thousands have escap'd the search  The decimation the alive-impaling  Nick-naming of GOD'S creatures - 'scap'd it all.  Still fewer (perhaps none) of all these Flowers  Have been by Poet sung. Poets are few  And Botanists are many and good cheap. [4]   When first I landed on AUSTRALIA'S Shore  (I neither Botanist nor Poet truly  But less a Seeker after Facts than Truth)  A Flower gladden'd me above the rest  Shap'd trumpet-like which from a palmy stalk  Hung clust'ring hyacinthine crimson red  Melting to white. Botanic Science calls  The plant epacris grandiflora gives  Its class description habitat then draws  A line. The Bard of Truth would moralize  The Flower's beauty which caught first my eye;  But having liv'd the circle of the year  I found (and then he'd sing in Beauty's praise)  This the sole plant that never ceas'd to bloom.  Nor here would stop: - at length first love and fair  And fair and sweet and sweet and constant pall  (Alas for poor Humanity!) and then  The new the pretty and the unexpected  Ensnare the fancy. Thus it was with me  When first I spied the Flowret in the grass  Which forms the subject of this humble Song  And (treason to my wedded Flower) cried: -   Th' Australian "fringed Violet"  Shall henceforward be my pet!  Oh! had this Flow'r been seen by him  Who call'd Europa's "violets dim  Sweeter than lids of juno's eyes"   He had not let this touch suffice  But had pronounc'd it (I am certain)  Of Juno's eye the "fringed curtain" -   Pick'd phrase for eye-lid which the Poet  [5] Has us'd elsewhere; and he will know it  Who in his dramas is well vers'd:  Vide The Tempest Act the First. -   But I am wand'ring from my duty  First to describe my fringe-ey'd Beauty.  'Tis then a floss-edg'd lilac Flower  That shuts at early ev'ning's hour  When the Sun has lost his power  Like a Fairy's parasol  (If Fairies walk by day at all);  Or it may quicker gain belief  To call it her silk neckerchief  Dropt before she blest the place  With her last night's dancing grace:  For surely Fairies haunt a land  Where they may have the free command  Of beetles flowers butterflies  Of such enchanting tints and dyes:  Not beetles black (forbidden things)  But beetles of enamel'd wings  Or rather coats of armour boss'd  And studded till the ground-work's lost:  Then for all other insects - here  Queen Mab would have no cause to fear  For her respectable approach  Lest she could not set up her coach.  Here's a fine grub for a coach-maker  Good as in Fairy-land Long-Acre;  And very-long-indeed-legg'd spinners  To make her waggon-spokes the sinners!  And here are winged grasshoppers;  And as to gnats for waggoners  We have musquitoes will suffice  [6] To drive her team of atomies.   If therefore she and her regalia  Have never yet been in Australia  I recommend a voyage to us  On board the Paper Nautilus;  But I incline to the opinion  That we are now in her dominion;  For we dream all those self-same dreams  Which (from Mercutio) it seems  We owe to her deliv'rancy  As midwife and queen faëry.  Puck talks of putting round the earth  In forty minutes time a girth:  Ob'ron tho' he "the groves may tread  "Till th'eastern gate all fiery red  "Open on Neptune with fair beams  "And turn to gold his salt green streams."  Yet chuses he "in silence sad  "To trip after the night's shade:  "He the globe can compass soon  "Swifter than the wand'ring moon:"  And Queen Titania's made to say  That she had been in India;  And had a mortal vot'ress there;  As I hope too among the Fair  Of this young land of Shakespeare's tongue  [7] That she has here: - I've else judgy'd wrong.  Enough then of the Fairies and the Flower;  And as mistaking Puck I must sure have squeez'd  The juice of that same little purple flower  (Why may it not ye Botanists be call'd  A species of Love in Idleness?  Only because perhaps Jussieu would say  It is no violet ) and dropt the liquor  Into my sleeping eyes to make me change  My love as erst Lysander did to Helen  From Hermia: so may the Fairy King  Just Oberon see good to break the spell  With the epacris' juice of virtuous might  To take from eyes all error that when next  They wake all this may seem a fruitless dream.  "My heart with that but as guest-wise sojourn'd  "And now to this flow'r is at home return'd  "Thereto remain.  "Be as thou wast wont to be;  "See as thou wast wont to see:  "Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower  "Hath such force and blessed power."     [9] THE KANGAROO   "Mixtumque genus prolesque biformis."  VIRG. Aen. vi.   KANGAROO Kangaroo!  Thou Spirit of Australia  That redeems from utter failure  From perfect desolation  And warrants the creation  Of this fifth part of the Earth  Which would seem an after-birth  Not conceiv'd in the Beginning  (For GOD bless'd His work at first  And saw that it was good)  But emerg'd at the first sinning  When the ground was therefore curst; -   And hence this barren wood!  Kangaroo Kangaroo!  Tho' at first sight we should say  In thy nature that there may  Contradiction be involv'd  Yet like discord well resolv'd  [10] It is quickly harmoniz'd.  Sphynx or mermaid realiz'd  Or centaur unfabulous  Would scarce be more prodigious  Or Pegasus poetical  Or hippogriff - chimeras all!  But what Nature would compile  Nature knows to reconcile;  And Wisdom ever at her side  Of all her children's justified.  She had made the squirrel fragile;  She had made the bounding hart;  But a third so strong and agile  Was beyond ev'n Nature's art;  So she joind the former two   In thee Kangaroo!  To describe thee it is hard:  Converse of the camélopard  Which beginneth camel-wise  But endeth of the panther size  Thy fore half it would appear  Had belong'd to some "small deer"  Such as liveth in a tree;  By thy hinder thou should'st be  A large animal of chace  Bounding o'er the forest's space; -   Join'd by some divine mistake  None but Nature's hand can make -   Nature in her wisdom's play  On Creation's holiday.  For howsoe'er anomalous  [11] Thou yet art not incongruous  Repugnant or preposterous.  Better-proportion'd animal  More graceful or ethereal  Was never follow'd by the hound  With fifty steps to thy one bound.  Thou can'st not be amended: no;  Be as thou art; thou best art so.  When sooty swans are once more rare  And duck-moles the Museum's care  Be still the glory of this land  Happiest Work of finest Hand!     [15] ON READING THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN LORD BYRON AND MR BOWLES   Anticipation is to a young country what antiquity is to an old.  WHETHER a ship's poetic? - Bowles would own  If here he dwelt where Nature is prosaic  Unpicturesque unmusical and where  Nature-reflecting Art is not yet born; -   A land without antiquities with one  And only one poor spot of classic ground  (That on which Cook first landed) - where instead  Of heart-communings with ancestral relicks  Which purge the pride while they exalt the mind  We've nothing left us but anticipation  Better (I grant) than utter selfishness  Yet too o'erweening - too American;  Where's no past tense the ign'rant present's all;  Or only great by the All hail hereafter!  One foot of Future's glass should rest on Past;  Where Hist'ry is not Prophecy is guess -   If here he dwelt Bowles (I repeat) would own  A ship's the only poetry we see.  For first she brings us "newsof human kind"  [16] Of friends and kindred whom perchance she held  As visitors that she might be a link  Connecting the fond fancy of far friendship  A few short months before and whom she may  In a few more perhaps receive again.  Next is a ship poetic forasmuch  As in this spireless city and prophane  She is to my home-wand'ring phantasy  With her tall anch'ring masts a three-spir'd minster  Vane-crown'd; her bell our only half-hour chimes.  Lastly a ship is poetry to me  Since piously I trust in no long space  Her wings will bear me from this prose-dull land.     [17] SONNET ON VISITING THE SPOT WHERE CAPTAIN COOK AND SIR JOSEPH BANKS FIRST LANDED IN BOTANY BAY   HERE fix the tablet. This must be the place  Where our Columbus of the South did land;  He saw the Indian village on that sand  And on this rock first met the simple race  Of Australasia who presum'd to face  With lance and spear his musquet. Close at hand  Is the clear stream from which his vent'rous band  Refresh'd their ship; and thence a little space  Lies Sutherland their shipmate; for the sound  Of Christian burial better did proclaim  Possession than the flag in England's name.  These were the commelinae Banks first found;  But where's the tree with the ship's wood-carv'd fame ?  Fix then th' Ephesian brass. 'Tis classic ground.    [18] SONNET ON AFFIXING A TABLET TO THE MEMORY OF CAPTAIN COOK AND SIR JOSEPH BANKS AGAINST THE ROCK OF THEIR FIRST LANDING IN BOTANY BAY   I HAVE been musing what our Banks had said  And Cook had they had second sight that here  (Where fifty years ago the first they were  Of voyagers whose feet did ever tread  These savage shores) - that here on this south head  Should stand an English farm-hut; and that there  On yon north shore a barrack tow'r should peer;  Still more had they this simple Tablet read  Erected by their own compatriots born  Colonists here of a discordant state  Yet big with virtues (though the flow'ry name  Which Science left it has become a scorn  And hissing to the nations) if our Great  Be Wise and Good. So fairest Rome became!  The Colony of New South Wales is I believe the only one of our possessions exclusively inhabited by Englishmen in which there is not at least the shadow of a free government as it possesses neither a council a house of assembly nor even the privilege of trial by jury. And although it must be confessed that the strange ingredients of which this colony was formed did not at the epoch of its foundation warrant a participation of these important privileges it will be my endeavour in the sequel to prove that the withholding of them up to the present period has been the sole cause why it has not realized the expectations which its founders were led to form of its capabilities. [...]   To those who are acquainted with the local situation of this colony - who have traversed the formidable chain of mountains by which it is bounded from north so south who have viewed the impregnable positions that the only connecting ridge by which a passage into the interior can be effected every where presents to those who are aware that this ridge is in many places not more than thirty feet in width and have beheld the terrific chasms by which it is bounded chasms inaccessible to the most agile animals of the forest and that will for ever defy the approach of man to those. I say who are acquainted with all these circumstances. she independence of this colony should it be goaded into rebellion. appears neither so problematical nor remote as might otherwise be imagined. Of what avail would whole armies prove in these terrible defiles which only five or six men could approach abreast? What would be the effect of artillery on advancing columns crowded into so narrow a compass? A few minutes exposure to such a dreadful carnage would annihilate the assailing army: or at best only preserve its scattered remnants from destruction by raising an intervening barrier of the carcases of its slaughtered martyrs.  If the colonists should prudently abandon the defence of the sea coast and remove with their flocks and herds into the fertile country behind these impregnable passages what would the force of England gigantic as it is profit her? She might indeed if they were unassisted in their efforts by any foreign power cut off their communication for a while with the coast; but her armies entirely dependent on external supply and at so great a distance from the centre of their resources would gradually moulder away as well by the incessant operation of a partisan warfare as by defection to their adversaries whom her troops would be led to combat only with regret. [77] They would not enter into a war of this description with the same animosity and desire of vengeance that might actuate their leaders. They would behold in their opponents Britons or the descendants of Britons placed in hostile array against them unwillingly and not from any ancient and inveterate spirit of hatred and rivality but from constrained resistance to tyranny and in vindication of their most sacred and indubitable rights. Nor would they in the midst of their disgust for so unjust and unnatural a contest behold the beauty and fertility of the country without drawing a comparison between their condition and what it would be were they to quit the ranks of oppression and to become the champions of that independence which they were destined to repress.  Such will be the consequences of the impolitic and oppressive system of government pursued in this colony; such the probable results of the contest to which it must eventually give rise. If I have been unqualified in expressing my reprobation of such unwise and unjust measures; if I have evinced myself the fearless assertor of the rights of my compatriots; and if I have spoke without reserve of the resistance which the violation and suppression of those rights will in the end occasion. I must nevertheless protest against being classed among those who are the sworn enemies of all authority and who place the happiness of communities in a freedom from those restraints which the wisdom of ages has established and demonstrated to be salutary and essential. I hope therefore that my principles will not be mistaken and that I shall not be exposed to the hue and cry which have been justly raised against those persons who are inimical to all existing institutions. There is not a more sincere friend to established government and legitimacy than he who mildly advocates the cause of reform and points out with decency the excrescences that will occasionally rise on the political body as well from an excess of liberty as of restraint: such a person may prevent anarchy; he can never occasion it.  All the bays and harbours which have been just described abound with right whale at a particular season of the year. These leviathans of the deep quit the boisterous ocean and seek the more tranquil waters of these harbours when they are on the point of calving. This happens in November and they remain there with their young between two and three months. During this period there are generally every year a few of the colonial craft employed in the whale fishery; but the duties which are levied in this country on all oils procured in vessels not having a British register amount to a prohibition and completely prevent the colonists from prosecuting this fishery further than is necessary for their own consumption and for the supply of the East India market. Between two and three hundred tons annually suffice for both these purposes.  The whales frequently go up the river Derwent as far as the town; and it is no uncommon sight for its inhabitants to behold the whole method of taking them from the moment they are harpooned until they are finally killed by the frequent application of the lance. This sight indeed has been occasionally witnessed by the inhabitants of Sydney; since it has sometimes occurred that a stray fish has entered the harbour of Port Jackson while some of the South-sea whalers have been lying there and that these have lowered their boats and killed it.  All the bays and harbours in Van Diemen's Land and most of those likewise which are in Bass's Straits and on the southern coast of New Holland abound with these fish at the same season. [98] If the colonists therefore were not restricted from this fishery it would soon become an immense source of wealth to them: and I have no doubt that they would be enabled to export many hundred tons of oil annually to this country. But it is vain that nature has been thus lavish of her bounties to them; in vain do their seas and harbours invite them to embark in these inexhaustible channels of wealth and enterprize. Their government - that government which ought to be the foremost in developing their nascent efforts and fostering them to maturity - is itself the first to check their growth and impede their advancement. What a miserly system of legislation is it which thus locks up from its own subjects a fund of riches that might administer to the wants and contribute to the happiness of thousands! What barbarous tantalization to compel them to thirst in the midst of the waters of abundance!  The harbour of Port Jackson is perhaps exceeded by none in the world except the Derwent in point of size and safety; and in this latter particular I rather think it has the advantage. It is navigable for vessels of any burden for about seven miles above the town i.e. about fifteen from the entrance. It possesses the best anchorage the whole way and is perfectly sheltered from every wind that can blow. It is said and I believe with truth to have a hundred coves and is capable of containing all the shipping in the world. There can be no doubt therefore that in the course of a few years the town of Sydney from the excellence of its situation alone must become a place of considerable importance.  The views from the heights of the town are bold varied and beautiful. The strange irregular appearance of the town itself the numerous coves and islets both above and below it the towering forests and projecting rocks combined with the infinite diversity of hill and dale on each side of the harbour form altogether a coup d'oeil of which it may be safely asserted that few towns can boast a parallel.  The neighbouring scenery is still more diversified and romantic particularly the different prospects which open upon you from the hills on the South Head Road immediately contiguous to the town. Looking towards the coast you behold at one glance the greater part of the numerous bays and islands which lie between the town and the heads with the succession of barren but bold and commanding hills that bound the harbour and are abruptly terminated by the water. [101] Further north the eye ranges over the long chain of lofty rugged cliffs that stretch away in the direction of the coal river and distinctly mark the bearing of the coast until they are lost in the dimness of vision. Wheeling round to the south you behold at the distance of seven or eight miles that spacious though less eligible harbour called "Botany Bay" from the prodigious variety of new plants which Sir Joseph Banks found in its vicinity when it was first discovered and surveyed by Captain Cook. To the southward again of this magnificent sheet of water where it will be recollected it was the original intention though afterwards judiciously abandoned to found the capital of this colony you behold the high bluff range of hills that stretch away towards the five islands and likewise indicate the trending of the coast in that direction.  if you afterwards suddenly face about to the westward you see before you one vast forest uninterrupted except by the cultivated openings which have been made by the axe on the summits of some of the loftiest hills and which tend considerably to diminish those melancholy sensations its gloomy monotony would otherwise inspire. The innumerable undulations in this vast expanse of forest forcibly remind you of the ocean when convulsed by tempests; save that the billows of the one slumber in a fixed and leaden stillness and want that motion which constitutes the diversity beauty and sublimity of the other. Continuing the view you arrive at that majestic and commanding chain of mountains called "the Blue Mountains" whose stately and o'ertopping grandeur forms a most imposing boundary to the prospective.  If you proceed on the South Head Road until you arrive at the eminence called "Belle Vue" the scenery is still more picturesque and grand; since in addition to the striking objects already described you behold as it were at your feet although still more than a mile distant from you the vast and foaming Pacific. In boisterous weather the surges that break in mountains on the shore beneath you form a sublime contrast to the still placid waters of the harbour which in this spot is only separated from the sea by a low sandy neck of land not more than half a mile in breadth; yet is so completely sheltered that no tempests can ruffle its tranquil surface.  The town of Parramatta is situated at the head of Port Jackson Harbour at the distance of about eighteen miles by water and fifteen by land from Sydney. The river for the last seven or eight miles is only navigable for boats of twelve or fifteen tons burden. This town is built along a small fresh water stream which falls into the river. It Consists principally of one street about a mile in length. It is surrounded on the south side by a chain of moderately high hills; and as you approach it by the Sydney road it breaks suddenly on the view when you have reached the summit of them and produces a very pleasing effect. [102] The adjacent country has been a good deal cleared; and the gay mimosas which have sprung up in the openings form a very agreeable contrast to the dismal gloom of the forest that surrounds and o'ertops them.  The town itself is far behind Sydney in respect of its buildings; but it nevertheless contains many of a good and substantial construction. These with the church the government house the new Orphan House and some gentlemen's seats which are situated on the surrounding eminences give it upon the whole a very respectable appearance. There are two very good inns where a traveller may meet with all the comfort and accommodation that are to be found in similar establishments in the country towns of this kingdom. The charges too are by no means unreasonable.  The population is principally composed of inferior traders publicans artificers and labourers and may be estimated inclusive of a company which is always stationed there on a rough calculation at about twelve hundred souls.  There are two fairs held half yearly one in March and the other in September; they were instituted about five years since by the present governor and already begin to be very numerously and respectably attended. They are chiefly intended for the sale of stock for which there are stalls pens and every other convenience erected at the expense of the government; for the use of these pens etc. and to keep them in repair a moderate scale of duties is paid by the vender.  This town has for many years past made but a very inconsiderable progress compared with Sydney. The value of land has consequently not kept pace in the two places and is at least 200 per cent less in the one than in the other. As the former however is in a central situation between the rapidly increasing settlements on the banks of the Hawkesbury and Nepean rivers and the latter the great mart for colonial produce landed property there and in the neighbourhood will without doubt experience a gradual rise.  The public institutions are an Hospital a Female Orphan House into which it is intended to remove the orphans from Sydney and a factory in which such of the female convicts as misconduct themselves and those also who upon their arrival in the colony are not immediately assigned as servants to families are employed in manufacturing coarse cloth. There are upon an average about one hundred and sixty women employed in this institution which is placed under the direction of a superintendent who receives wool from the settlers and gives them a certain portion of the manufactured article in exchange: what is reserved is only a fair equivalent for the expense of making it and is used in clothing the gaol gang the re-convicted culprits who are sent to the coal river and I believe the inmates of the factory itself.  There is also another public institution in this town well worthy of the notice of the philanthropist. [103] It is a school for the education and civilisation of the aborigines of the country. It was founded by the present governor three years since and by the last accounts from the colony it contained eighteen native children who had been voluntarily placed there by their parents and were making equal progress in their studies with European children of the same age. The following extract from the Sydney Gazette of January 4 1817 may enable the reader to form some opinion of the beneficial consequences that are likely to result from this institution and how far they may realise the benevolent intentions which actuated its philanthropic founder.  On Saturday last the 28th ult. the town of Parramatta exhibited a novel and very interesting spectacle by the assembling of the native tribes there pursuant to the governor's gracious invitation. At ten in the morning the market place was thrown open and some gentlemen who were appointed on the occasion took the management of the ceremonials. The natives having seated themselves on the ground in a large circle the chiefs were placed on chairs a little advanced in front and to the right of their respective tribes. In the centre of the circle thus formed were placed large tables groaning under the weight of roast beef potatoes bread &c. and a large cask of grog lent its exhilarating aid to promote the general festivity and good humour which so conspicuously shone through the sable visages of this delighted congress. The governor attended by all the members of the native institution and by several of the magistrates and gentlemen in the neighbourhood proceeded at half past ten to the meeting and having entered the circle passed round the whole of them enquiring after and making himself acquainted with the several tribes their respective leaders and residences. His Excellency then assembled the chiefs by themselves and confirmed them in the ranks of chieftains to which their own tribes had exalted them and conferred upon them badges of distinction; whereon were engraved their names as chiefs and those of their tribes. He afterwards conferred badges of merit on some individuals in acknowledgment of their steady and loyal conduct in the assistance they rendered the military party when lately sent out in pursuit of the refractory natives to the west and south of the Nepean river. By the time this ceremony was over Mrs Macquarie arrived and the children belonging to and under the care of the native institution fifteen in number preceded by their teacher entered the circle and walked round it; the children appearing very clean well clothed and happy. The chiefs were then again called together to observe the examination of the children as to their progress in learning and the civilised habits of life. Several of the little ones read; and it was grateful to the bosom of sensibility to trace the degrees of pleasure which the chiefs manifested on this occasion. Some clapped the children on the head; and one in particular turning round towards the governor with extraordinary emotion exclaimed "Governor that will make a good settler - thars my Pickaninnyr (meaning his child). And some of the females were observed to shed tears of sympathetic affection at seeing the infant and helpless offspring of their deceased friends so happily sheltered and protected by British benevolence. [104] The examinations being finished the children returned to the institution under the guidance of their venerable tutor; whose assiduity and attention to them merit every commendation.  The feasting then commenced and the governor retired amidst the long and reiterated acclamations and shouts of his sable and grateful congress. The number of the visitants (exclusive of the fifteen children) amounted to one hundred and seventy-nine viz one hundred and five men fifty-three women and twenty-one children. It is worthy of observation that three of the latter mentioned number of children (and the son of the memorable Bemni-long was one of them) were placed in the native institution immediately after the breaking up of the congress on Saturday last making the number of children now in that establishment altogether eighteen; and we may reasonably trust that in a few years this benevolent institution will amply reward the hopes and expectations of its liberal patrons and supporters and answer the grand object intended by providing a seminary for the helpless offspring of the natives of this country and opening the path to their future civilisation and improvement.  CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR  Having withdrawn myself from my late companions I now became very circumspect in my proceedings; and as Bromley had neither the appearance nor the manners of a gentleman I only made use of him occasionally in the course of my practice keeping him in the back ground to receive and carry any articles which I purloined and never suffering him to converse with or approach me except in private. I generally spent the mornings that is from about one o'clock to five P. M. (which are the fashionable hours for shopping) in visiting the shops of jewellers Watchmakers Pawnbrokers &C. Having conceived hopes that this species of robbery would turn to a good account and depending upon my own address and appearance I determined to make a circuit of the town and not to omit a single shop in either of those branches: and this scheme I actually executed so fully that I believe I did not leave ten untried in all London for I made a point of commencing every day in a certain street and went regularly through it on both sides the way.  My practice was to enter a shop and request to look at gold seals chains broaches rings or any other small articles of value; and while examining them and looking the shopkeeper in the face I contrived by slight of hand to conceal two or three (sometimes more) in the sleeve of my coat which was purposely made wide. On some occasions I purchased a trifling article to save appearances; at other times I took a card of the shop promising to call again; and as I generally saw the remaining goods returned to the window or place from whence they were taken before I left the shop there was hardly a probability of my being suspected or of the property being missed.  In the course of my career I was never once detected in the fact though on two or three occasions so much suspicion arose that I was obliged to exert all my effrontery and to use very high language in order as the cant phrase is to bounce the tradesman out of it; and my fashionable appearance and affected anger at his insinuations had always the effect of convincing him that he was mistaken and inducing him to apologize for the affronts put upon me. [151] I have even sometimes carried away the spoil notwithstanding what had passed and I have often gone a second and third time to the same shop with as good success as at the first. To prevent accidents however I made it a rule never to enter a second shop with any stolen property about me; for as soon as I quitted the first I privately conveyed my booty to Bromley who was attending my motions in the street and herein I found him eminently useful. By this course of depredation I acquired on the average about ten pounds a week though I sometimes neglected shopping for several days together.  This was not indeed the only pursuit I followed but was my principal morning's occupation; though if a favourable opportunity offered of getting a guinea by any other means I never let it slip. In the evenings I generally attended one of the theatres where I mixed with the best company in the boxes and at the same time that I enjoyed the amusements of the place I frequently conveyed pocketbooks snuff-boxes and other portable articles from the pockets of their proprietors into my own. Here I found the inconvenience of wanting a suitable companion who might have received the articles I made prize of in the same manner as Bromley did in the streets; but though I knew many of the light-fingered gentry whose appearance fitted them for any company yet their faces being well known to the police-officers who attend the Theatres they would not have been suffered to enter the house: and herein I possessed an advantage which many of these gentry envied me; for being just arrived in England and a new face upon the town I carried on my depredations under the very noses of the officers without suspicion. Having therefore at first no associate. I was obliged to quit the Theatre and conceal my first booty in some private spot before I could make (with prudence) a second attempt.  Upon the whole I was very successful in this pursuit also at least as to the number of articles I filched and had their value been reasonably proportionate to what I expected I need not long have followed so hazardous an employment. I have very frequently obtained nine or ten pocket-books besides other articles in an evening; and these being taken from gentlemen evidently of fortune and fashion I had reason to expect I should sometime meet with a handsome sum in Bank-notes; but fortune did not favour me therein for during near twelve months almost nightly attendance at one or other of the public places I never found more than twenty pounds in a book and that only on one occasion. I several times got five ten or eleven pounds but commonly one two or three pounds and most generally four books out of five contained nothing but letters memorandums and other papers useless to me. [152]   At the same time I knew frequent instances of the common street pick-pockets getting a booty of fifty one hundred and sometimes three or four hundred pounds. However I never failed to pay the expenses of the night and if I gained nothing I enjoyed at least a fund of amusement which was to me the highest gratification. It sometimes happened that the articles I got (particularly pocketbooks) were advertised by the losers within a few days as "Lost" and a reward offered for their restoration: where this reward was worth notice I frequently restored the property by means of a third person whom I could confide in and whom I previously tutored for the purpose.  In the mean time the manner in which I spent my life abstracted from the disgraceful means by which I supported myself was (as I have formerly hinted) perfectly regular and inoffensive. Though I lived by depredation yet I did not like the abandoned class of common thieves waste my money and leisure time in profligate debauchery but applied myself to the perusal of instructive and amusing books my stock of which I daily increased. I occupied genteel apartments in a creditable house the landlord of which understood me to hold a situation under Government and every part of my conduct at home tended to confirm his opinion of my respectability. I was scrupulously exact in paying my rent as well as the different tradesmen in the neighbourhood with whom I had occasion to deal; nor did I ever suffer any person of loose character to visit me but studiously concealed from those of my acquaintance my place of residence.  I was sometimes indeed so imprudent as to resort for company's sake to some of those public-houses frequented by thieves and other dissolute characters the landlord of which is himself commonly an experienced thief or returned transport. When I had a mind to relax a little or grew tired of domestication I disguised my appearance as much as I could and repaired to a house of this description sometimes taking my Dulcinea with me whom I shall shortly introduce to the reader and whose person and dress I was not a little proud of exhibiting in public.  This fondness for flash-houses as they are termed is the rock on which most persons who live by depredation unhappily split and will be found in the sequel to have brought me to my present deplorable condition; for the police officers or traps are in the daily habit of visiting these houses where they drink with the thieves &c. in the most familiar manner; and I believe often obtaining by various means from sonic parties respecting the names characters pursuits &c. of others. [153] By this imprudent conduct I also became personally known to many of the officers which was productive of great danger to me in the exercise of my vocation; whereas had I avoided such houses I might have remained unknown and unsuspected by them for a series of years.  I ought not to omit what may perhaps gratify the reader as much as the act did myself namely that as soon as I became possessed of a moderate sum I remembered the kindness shewn me by the good women at Gosport and wrote her a letter of thanks enclosing a five pound bank-note which no doubt proved highly acceptable. I also from time to time assisted my aged mother whose circumstances were extremely narrow and her support derived solely from the earnings of my two sisters whose success depending on the caprice of fashion and of milliners both alike inconstant was but precarious. They as well as my other relations in S-shire were indeed totally ignorant of my unhappy relapse into a life of infamy but believed my assertion that I had a liberal salary from Mr. Belt and was still employed under that gentleman in the Crown-office.  About three months after my return to London and whilst in the zenith of my success I was introduced by one of my former dissolute companions to the acquaintance of a young woman who like myself had been well and tenderly brought up but having been seduced by a young man equally inexperienced with herself to quit her friends and cohabit with him as his wife she had thereby forfeited the countenance of her family. and her paramour having died after a year's cohabitation she had been driven to the usual refuge in such cases a life of prostitution. At the period of my introduction however she had been only a few months upon the town and I clearly perceived that her mind was yet but very slightly contaminated. As there were many reasons which rendered a female companion in whom I could place confidence desirable and in fact necessary to me; and as this young woman's misfortunes had placed her in such circumstances that I had no obstacle to surmount on the score of delicacy I proposed to her after a few days' acquaintance that we should live together; to which as she was heartily tired of her present course of life she willingly consented. She knew enough of the world from her late experience to surmise in what manner I obtained my living of which however to avoid all duplicity I fully possessed her. Having informed my landlord that my wife whom I had not before mentioned to him was arrived in town from a visit she had been paying in the country I accordingly took her home; and in a very few days we had arranged a pretty snug system of domestic economy and provided every requisite for the family life I meant in future to live. [154]   My companion was the daughter of an industrious mechanic who having a numerous offspring had only been enabled to give her a common education; but her mother had instructed her in the duties of housekeeping and she was perfectly conversant in all the qualities requisite to form a good wife. She was about nineteen years of age agreeable in her person and of the sweetest disposition imaginable; and what was most gratifying the company she had latterly mixed with and the disgusting examples before her eyes had not been able to eradicate an innate modesty which she naturally possessed; so that her manners and conversation were such as fitted her for any company to which I might be inclined to introduce her.  I informed my mother and sisters that I was on the point of contracting a union with this young woman and having made them personally acquainted the three young ladies soon became very intimate. As my mother and sisters but rarely called at my lodgings and then merely en passant I had no difficulty in concealing the connexion from them until I could with propriety declare my marriage to have taken place.  We had the happiness of finding ourselves mutually pleased with each other and I considered my meeting with so amiable a friend as one of the greatest blessings of my life. In a few weeks after our junction my partner discovered evident symptoms of pregnancy which with her affectionate behaviour and real attachment to my interest endeared her still more to me. In a word  I now felt myself as happy as any man daily risking his liberty and life and exposed to the reproaches of his own conscience could possibly be. [155]     CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE  Having now settled myself in a manner much to my satisfaction and happily met with a faithful friend to whom I might confide my most secret thoughts who would sincerely participate my joy when success crowned my pursuits; and who in the hour of adversity would condole with and cherish me I applied myself with redoubled assiduity to the acquirement of money with a full resolution in the event of my meeting with one good booty or realizing by degrees a sufficient sum to quit the hazardous course of life I had embarked in to establish myself in some honest line of business. To this prudent measure I was also strongly prompted by my companion who could not hide her fears and anxiety on my account and was never easy during my absence from home on a depredatory excursion.  I continued to visit the shops as usual in the morning and the theatres in the evening with tolerable success; and my partner having expressed a desire to accompany me in the hope of rendering me service I was induced to gratify her. As her figure and address were both extremely prepossessing and her air perfectly genteel I soon found her eminently useful; for she not only received from me the property I purloined but with much ingenuity would contrive to engross the attention of the shop-keeper while I robbed his counter or by artful gallanting with a gentleman at a public place facilitate my design upon his pockets. At all times when disengaged from these hazardous practices we lived a life of perfect domestic happiness our chiefest pleasure being centred in each other's company.  As our mutual affection increased my companion whom I had informed of the outlines of my past life and who was aware of the dangers to which I was daily exposed being filled with tender fears of losing me for ever and prompted by sincere affection suggested the idea of uniting ourselves indissolubly by marriage; in the hope that should I unhappily experience a reverse of fortune and be again banished from my native country she might obtain permission to share my misery and contribute by her society to lessen my sufferings. [156] This proposal so fully convinced me of her undisguised attachment and had so much reason on its side that I gave into it with ardent pleasure; and the necessary preliminaries being adjusted we were accordingly married at St. Paul's Covent-Garden on the 21st of July 1808 her mother to whom she had become reconciled and who (judging by appearances) had a favourable opinion of the match assisting at the ceremony.  Soon afterwards I communicated the event to my mother informing her that weighty reasons had rendered it necessary to observe privacy on the occasion; and hinting to the unsuspecting old woman that I had acquired by this marriage a considerable pecuniary advantage. This intimation gave my mother great pleasure and I took care by increased liberality towards her and my sisters to confirm them in the opinion of my veracity. The behaviour of my wife became every day more exemplary; and had I been free from that remorse which must ever accompany a guilty life and enabled to procure those necessary comforts which I knew so well how to enjoy by upright means I should have considered myself supremely happy.  In the beginning of the month of October my wife who was far advanced in her pregnancy accompanied me one evening to Drurylane theatre; and the performance over we were descending the stair-case from the box-lobby when I attempted to possess myself of a gentleman's pocket-book; but by some accident he suspected my design and publicly accused me therewith. Unfortunately several other gentlemen who had been robbed in the course of the evening being on the spot and beginning to compare notes agreed unanimously that they recollected my person as being near them about the time they were robbed and did not scruple to insinuate that I ought to be detained and searched.  This conversation naturally attracted the attention of the company immediately round us; but while it took place all the parties were obliged by the pressure of the throng behind to continue descending and we in fact quitted the theatre all together. Being arrived in Little Russell-street the gentlemen surrounded me to the number of about a score and our altercation became loud and vehement. Fortunately for me no police-officers happened to be near the spot; for although I had nothing to fear from a search yet the circumstance would have made me personally known to the latter and would of course operate to my disadvantage on my future appearance at the theatre. I exerted every art of expostulation and finally had recourse on my part to threats affecting to feel highly insulted by their insolent insinuations; declared myself a gentleman of character which I would prove to their cost; offered to give my card of address or to retire to a coffee-house and send for respectable persons who knew me but all my rhetoric proved ineffectual; some were for giving me in charge to an officer; others still more violent were for having me pumped. [157]   At this moment a person named G-ge W-k-n now in this colony who had been himself exercising his vocation in the pit of the theatre happened fortunately to come up and seeing a crowd collected stopped to ascertain the cause. He immediately perceived the critical situation in which I stood and having the appearance of a man of fashion he stepped forward and hearing the various motions of my persecutors strongly advised them to forbearance and caution how they treated a gentleman as I evidently appeared to be; urging that they must certainly be mistaken in their conjectures that my proposal of giving my address or a reference ought to be sufficient and particularly dwelt on the impropriety of taking the law into their own hands. These arguments of my friend W-k-n carried so much weight that the gentlemen began to waver and grow less clamorous; till at length they dropped off one by one; and W-k-n assuming a haughty tone said taking me by the arm "Come Sir you have been sufficiently exposed and long enough detained on a charge which I am confident there is no foundation for; allow me to conduct you from this spot; if you are going towards St. James's I shall be glad of your company and let me see (raising his voice and cane together) who will dare to insult you further."  So saying he led me away in triumph tipping the wink to my poor wife who had stood all the while at a small distance much terrified and agitated by various emotions which so much affected her that though we lived within two hundred yards of the theatre she had scarcely power to walk home; and we had no sooner quitted our kind conductor who attended us to the door than she fainted away and was for sometime insensible. The consequences of this untoward event were still more seriously afflicting for her tender constitution was not proof against the shock and she was the next day prematurely delivered of a male child which however only lived eight hours and was a subject of infinite regret to us both.  [158] [159] [160] [161 [162]   Then addressing me his worship inquired my name place of abode &c. I answered that my name was James Hardy but I must beg to decline giving any further account of myself as it appeared his worship was determined to commit me for trial and I should therefore not trouble my friends until a future day. Mr. Moser now remarked on some of the articles found upon me inquiring with a sarcastic grin how long I had worn barnacles? As to the knife he said it was evidently a thief's knife; and turning to Armstrong one of his officers he asked him if that was not such a blade as they used for starring a glaze? The knife and scissors his worship called my working-tools. It was in vain I assured this facetious justice that these things were my own lawful property and offered to prove where I had purchased them all: he insisted on detaining them and was hardly persuaded to return the money taken from me.  I was then committed to New Prison Clerkenwell to which I was conveyed about nine o'clock at night. Arriving there I desired to be accommodated between-gates and after paying the usual fees &c. I was conducted to a bed in the same room I had occupied on a like occasion in the year 1800. Having now leisure to reflect on the occurrences of the day I began to consider my situation hopeless enough; the snuff-box having been traced to me the circumstance of the pocket being cut the scissors found &c. altogether furnished a chain of evidence too strong I feared to be overruled by my bare assertion that I had found the property; a defence the most flimsy but the most commonly resorted to. I therefore laid my account with being transported at least.  What heightened my present distress was that my poor wife would be grievously alarmed at my not returning home this night; and it would be a difficult matter even the next day to inform her of my situation as I knew the officers were intent upon discovering if possible my place of abode in order to ascertain my character and mode of life. The morning being come I was fortunate enough to meet with an intimate acquaintance by whom I despatched a message to my wife requiring her to visit me immediately and in an hour's time I had the pleasure of seeing her appear. Her distress may be easily conceived. I comforted and encouraged her as well as I could; and giving her a strict caution not to suffer herself to be followed or watched in her return desired she would wait with patience and hope for the approach of the session which would decide my fate. [163]   During the interval of my second examination I read the following advertisement inserted by the officers of Worship-street: Stopped upon a suspicious person now in custody the undermentioned articles  supposed to be stolen; (here they were all minutely described.) Any persons having lost such goods are desired to attend at this office on Friday next when the said person will be brought up for re-examination &c."  On the 18th of November" I was accordingly reconducted to Worship-street my wife being permitted to accompany me in the coach. Being again brought before Mr. Moser that gentleman inquired if any body was in attendance to claim the property found on me; and being answered in the negative he expressed himself confident that claimants would appear but said he would however finally commit me to Newgate and that the articles in question should be detained until the day of my trial; when if not owned before the court would no doubt restore them on my application; nor could all my asseverations or arguments convince him of the property being my own or induce him to alter his decree respecting them. I was accordingly conducted to Newgate accompanied by my wife whose uniform attention to me in this and every other distress proved the sincerity of her attachment.  As the session was to commence on the 30th I had no time to lose in preparing for my trial. I therefore drew up a brief for counsel in which I dwelt strongly on the open and public manner in which I had acted with Mrs. Andrews; the improbability that I should have taken so much trouble had I been the thief who stole the box full of snuff as the prosecutor described it to have been and on every other point which I thought might prove of moment or afford the counsel an opportunity of shewing his wit or ingenuity but still deceiving even him by stoutly adhering to my first story of finding the property.  This brief I sent by my wife with the usual fee to Mr. Knapp a gentleman of whose abilities I entertained a high opinion. Notwithstanding all this I had at the bottom very little hopes of escaping conviction; and persons best experienced in such matters who heard the circumstances declared nothing but a miracle could save me. I however concealed these unpleasing ideas from my wife and assured her that I felt confident of being acquitted.  The grand jury being met I soon heard that a true bill had been returned by them; and on the following Wednesday the court opening I was taken down for trial but was not put to the bar until Friday the 2d of December. [164] Previous to my leaving the ward of the prison in which I lodged a fellow-prisoner with whom I had become intimate knowing the circumstances of my case and the nature of my intended defence had in a half-jocular manner offered to lend me his snuff-box which he advised me to display to the court and occasionally to take a pinch from it during my trial; this he observed would strengthen my assertion that I was in the habit of using snuff and give a colour to my defence; and he good-naturedly added that he hoped it would prove lucky to me. I thankfully accepted the proffered favour of which I did not fail to make use at the proper season.  Being arraigned at the bar I stood capitally indicted for stealing a silver snuff-box value two pounds the property of Thomas Imeson privily from his person. Mr. Imeson having given his evidence my counsel in cross-examining him said "I take for granted Sir you can't take upon yourself to swear whether you were robbed of your snuff-box or whether it fell through the hole in your pocket; all you know is that you found your pocket torn and the box among other articles missing?" Answer "Certainly I cannot."  The landlady then stated in a faltering voice and evidently much embarrassed at being examined before so large an assembly the manner in which I had applied to her &c. and in answer to a question from Mr. Knapp said that she could never suppose I should have acted in the open manner I did if I had stolen the box. The constable who searched me was the next witness; and he having described that proceeding and produced the articles found upon me the Recorders who presided on the bench said "I suppose Mr. Bell there were a great variety of characters attending this meeting which was held for the purpose of obtaining parliamentary reform?"  Ans. "Certainly my lord."  Recorder. "No doubt there were many persons freeholders as well as not freeholders?"  Ans. "Yes my lord."  Recorder. "I dare say people of all descriptions tag-rag and bobtail?"  Ans. "There might my lord."  I now began to entertain strong hopes perceiving that the tide of prejudice ran in my favour. I was dressed in a very genteel but becoming manner and had not the least appearance of a thief. I had put on the most modest air and countenance I could assume and I thought the court and jury appeared to view me with favourable eyes. [165] I therefore took another pinch from my friend's box and waited the event with patience being prepared with a good defence when called upon to make it. But I was not put to that trouble; for the Recorder addressing the jury said "Gentlemen I must in this stage of the trial deliver it as my opinion that I cannot see any grounds for charging the prisoner with felony. Gentlemen the accident of finding a snuff-box might have happened to one of yourselves  to me or to any other honest man; and it would be hard indeed if such an accident should subject the finder to a prosecution for felony. If you are of my opinion it will be unnecessary to recapitulate the evidence or put the prisoner upon his defence."  His Lordship then paused and I leave the reader to imagine the state of suspense I was for some moments in. The jury having whispered together one of them stood up and said "My lord we wish to ask a question of Mrs. Andrews namely whether at the time the prisoner brought her the box he delivered it as his own. or said he had found it?" Mr. Knapp eagerly catching at this question desired Mrs. Andrews to stand up and said to her "Mrs. Andrews the jury wish to ask you whether the young man at the bar told you it was his own snuff-box or whether he said he had found it?" The poor simple woman confused and trembling and not comprehending the drift or importance of the question answered in a low voice "He said he had found it gentlemen."  Mr. Knapp having obtained this answer with a smile or rather laugh of satisfaction turned to the jury repeating her words "He said he had found it. I hope Gentlemen you are now satisfied." He then folded up my brief and handed it to an officer of the court to whom he made a motion with his hand to return it to me. I received it with a respectful bow of acknowledgment and Mr. Knapp threw himself back in his seat and began playing with his watch-chain as much as to say "the business is settled I have successfully done my duty and saved my client;" and so indeed he had for the foreman immediately pronounced the welcome verdict of "Not Guilty."  An Electric fire-ball wrecks government-house PARRAMATTA.  SYDNEY TUESDAY 9th. NOVEMBER 1820  On Saturday last government-house at Parramatta was visited by a tremendous thunderstorm. Between nine and ten o'clock in the morning after an immense burst of thunder the house was struck in the roof by an electric fire-ball which descended from one floor to another until it finally made its passage out partly by the windows shivering them in pieces and partly through the solid wall itself; which it perforated in His EXCELLENCY the Governor's Office leaving a hole rather larger than that of a musket ball.  The lightning entered through a dormant window in the roof thence burst through the upper ceiling and pulling down the plaister for the space of about a yard square it struck against the chamber doors with such violence as to drive several of them off their hinges and to throw them in the opposite sides of the rooms shattering them and their casements in several places; thence ranging along the lobby it descended by the great staircase into the back. hall where it committed similar destruction as above.  Entering His EXCELLENCY'S Office it struck the chair His EXCELLENCY was accustomed to sit on; but providentially he was at the time absent on his tour through New Western Country. This portion of the electric matter after shattering also an umbrella passed through the wall and become spent only afterwards breaking a hole through a pane in a window at the end of the house.  The other portion of the electric matter burst through the back windows of the hail and then became finally expended. Several hundred panes of glass were broken into minute particles by this terrific explosion and the house was almost in one instant of time left nearly a wreck and full of a suffocating smell of sulphur. Indeed the smoke was so great that it was for some time imagined that the house was on fire but this was nothing more than the result of the bursting of the immense ball of electric fire.  Perhaps there was never a more awful visitation of the kind than this; and it is a matter of astonishment that no personal harm was sustained by any of the numerous family contained in Government-house. Most providentially it happened that Mrs. MACQUARIE with her darling boy had that morning breakfasted in an apartment which was the only one in the house not visited by this scourge and to this cause may be attributed their almost miraculous escape.  On Friday 26th. of January 1821 the above Court assembled at ten in the forenoon and proceeded on the trial of four out of the thirteen convicts who took out of the port of the River Derwent in the night of the 27th. of February 1819 the Young Lachlan schooner which was afterwards burnt to the water-edge upon an island on the coast of Java and the four now placed at the bar were brought back to this Colony from India in the ship St. Michael which arrived in this port on the 28th of September last.  It will be recalled that the Young Lachlan which for the convenience of loading had been anchored in the river abreast the owner's the late and respected Captain Howard residence and store on Macquarie Point and that the master of the vessel had gone into the country to arrange the completion of the cargo; but that contrary to the Port Orders the master had left the schooner with its lower sails bent on and had only unshipped but had not landed the vessel's rudder.  These circumstances had been noted by a party of convicts viz: Daniel Clarke 43 a seaman; Malcolm Campbell 26 a seaman; John Wallis 21 a seaman; Robert Edon 21 a seaman; George Young 26 a labourer; Patrick Cotton 42 a labourer; Samuel O'Hara 21 a house - painter; John Cartwright 40 a slater; William Evans 25; all these convicts had been transported for life. William Green 28 a gunsmith transported for 14 years and Obadiah Savage 25 a nuller and baker; Henry Cooper 23 a pastry - cook and Christopher Read 19 a printer; the three last-named convicts transported for 7 years.  The pirates found on board the Young Lachian four seamen her crew asleep and whom were quickly secured. [87] There being at the time a strong land wind the night very dark and the vessel conveniently anchored outside the harbour proper enabled the pirates to get her away without being observed. She was not seen by the guard at Mulgrave Battery and only at daybreak had the event become known.  Two Government boats and Mr. Birch's sloop had been promptly sent in pursuit but they had returned the following Wednesday after rescuing the four seamen belonging to the crew of the Young Lachlan who had been put ashore by the pirates on Bruni Island.  The Young Lachlan had been provisioned but was without water and in consequence the sufferings of the unfortunate men had been extreme on their perilous passage to Java where they endeavoured to sell the stolen schooner to pay for their passages to England. In that endeavour they were unsuccessful and when the Dutch Officials demanded the vessel's papers they could not be produced and the pirates hastily departed. They then reached the decision to burn the schooner Young Lachlan and to continue their voyage in the vessel's boat.  Subsequently the whole of these convicts were seized and imprisoned at Batavia where following their terrible privations several of them died from fever. Of the five who were returned to Hobart Town one was admitted an evidence on the part of the Crown against the others; and the four left to be tried were Daniel Clarke Samuel O'Hara Patrick Cotton and Christopher Read a youth. Malcolm Campbell was the approver.  In this case the prisoners were not contrary to expectation indicted for piracy as the crime was not committed on the high seas but on a navigable river within the country. They were therefore charged with cutting out and stealing goods on board of the Young Lachlan schooner in the Derwent River.  The first witness examined was the mate of the schooner Richard Maynard whose evidence with that of other witnesses among whom was John Hebden who was also on board of the vessel at the time she was taken away together with the testimony of Malcolm Campbell the accomplice disclosed all the facts connected with the case and clearly proved the guilt of the prisoners as charged against them in every particular.  The prisoners varied in the matter of their defence ; - some asserted their innocence by escaping from the Colony in an open boat and others in a ship called the Venus.  His Honour the Judge Advocate upon the evidence being closed observed that as the prisoners in the case stood charged on the 24. Geo. II. chap. 45 with the cutting out and stealing goods on board the Young Lachlan schooner the nature of this case would not of course come within the meaning of piracy; inasmuch as to constitute piracy it was necessary that the crime in question should have been committed on the high seas; whereas in fact it was clear that the Young Lachlan was taken out of an harbour called Sullivan's Cove.  The Judge Advocate took occassion to remark that the Court of course would look with great jealousy on the evidence of an accomplice. As far as his evidence was corroborated it was certainly entitled to credit; but how much further was for the court to determine; but at the same time if they did believe his testimony there would be no doubt but that Clarke did navigate the vessel and acted as the master throughout the voyage.  If the prisoners got away from the Colony in any other vessel but the Young Lachlan then of course the prisoners should be entitled to the judgement of not guilty; but if on the contrary the Court were satisfied that the prisoners did cut out the Young Lachlan for the purpose of effecting their escape and converted the cargo for their own use then Public Justice demanded that an example should be made of the prisoners to deter others from the commission of a crime in which so many lives had been lost and which led to such mischievous effects as to the general security of persons and property. If the Court had any doubt that doubt would of course be given in favour of the prisoners; but it was for the Court to determine under all circumstances of the case the guilt or innocence of the prisoners.  The Court then retired for nearly an hour and adjudged all the prisoners - GUILTY!  Next day the prisoners were again arraigned before the Court to hear the judgment when the awful sentence of DEATH was declared to be their punishment.  FATAL EFFECTS OF EATING The TOAD FISH  A Warning to all and sundry.  A report on the Coroner's Inquest held this day April 18 1821 at Parramatta on the body of JOHN BUFF who came by his death in the following manner: - The unfortunate man had been fishing during the afternoon at Duck-river Bridge about three miles from the town of Parramatta on the Sydney Road and had caught a few TOAD-FISH. On his return to Parramatta the place of his residence he broiled the fish for his supper and eat them accordingly.  In about ten minutes afterwards he expressed himself as being nearly insensible; his tongue became much swoln; he laid himself prostate on the ground and requested to have some water given him complaining much of extreme thirst.  As soon as he had drank the water he begged to be turned on the other side which last request of the poor man was scarcely complied with before his soul took her flight into eternity. From the time he had eaten the fish to the time of his death was about 20 minutes.  The verdict on this occasion was - Died by eating the TOAD-FISH.  We have one remark to make upon the cause of the unfortunate man's death - the TOAD-FISH.  It is of all others of the small finny tribe the most forbidding to behold; it has a bull-head runs tapering to the tail and in length never exceeds 6 inches; it is always found about the beaches coming in and receeding with the tide; and is proverbially known and has ever been declared to be poisonous since the formation of our Colony.  Animals have eaten of this fish and soon after died. The deceased must have been a stranger to the Colony or those who saw him dress the fish must have been alone ignorant of what almost everyone else is aware; for the very appearance of the animal is sufficient to excite abhorrence.  It is worthy also of observing that the deceased expressed no feeling of bodily pain but went off as it were in a slumber. Persons that have been bitten by snakes have been affected much in a similiar way and have sometimes expired as quickly.  Report of the Commissioner of Inquiry into the State of the Colony of New South Wales.  My Lord  Before I proceed to lay before your Lordship a statement of the manner in which the Convicts are employed and managed in the settlements of New South Wales and Van Dieman's Land I have thought it expedient to preface such a statement with a few observations upon the transportation and treatment of them during the passage as it is now conducted; upon the manner in which their disembarkation is effected; and the general circumstances that attend their introduction to the scenes of their future servitude and punishment.  I  Condition und Treatment of Convicts during the passage to New South Wales.  The transportation of convicts as far as it regards their health appears to have undergone very considerable improvement since the mortality that occurred in the ships General Hewit Surrey and Three Bees in the year 1814.  The investigation that took place at Sydney at that period into the conduct of the masters of those vessels and the report made to Governor Macquarrie by Mr. Redfern the assistant-surgeon on the colonial establishment have furnished to His Majesty's government ample and very accurate means of providing against the recurrence of similar calamities.  The recommendations that were made by Mr. Redfern under the several heads of clothing diet air and medical assistance appear in as far as they have been adopted to have been amply justified by the diminished mortality in the voyages performed by convict ships from England to New South Wales; and of those that have not yet been adopted there appears only to be one that is of material importance.  It has been truly observed by this gentleman that in the voyages that are commenced in the later periods of the European winters or the commencement of spring and which terminate with the same seasons in New South Wales and in Van Dieman's Land or the latitudes in which the latter part of the voyages are most frequently made the convicts are exposed to great and sudden vicissitudes of climate; the greatest and most prejudicial being found to be that which occurs in the first removal of the convicts from the hulks to the transports in cold seasons and when dressed in much lighter clothing than that to which they have been previously accustomed. The change of climate likewise that occurs after passing the Cape of Good Hope in the 40th degree of south latitude from the months of May and June to the months of September and October requires greater warmth of clothing than that which can be afforded by the present allowance; and by indisposing the convicts to be as much upon deck as before is the cause of obstructing the ventilation of the prison.  As a remedy for this evil Mr. Redfern has suggested that for convicts who are exposed to it there should be provided woollen instead of duck trowsers together with flannel drawers and waistcoats.  Upon this recommendation I would observe and to meet the objection that Mr. Redfern has anticipated of the greater danger of contagion and of the want of cleanliness from the use of woollen rather than of linen clothing that cloth or woollen trowsers and shirts are constantly worn by sailors in warm climates and that with a view to secure the principal objects of additional warmth and cleanliness two pair of flannel drawers to each convict to be worn with the duck trowsers might be advantageously substituted for the additional woollen trowsers that he has proposed. [2]   Food. It seems to be generally admitted that the allowance of food provided by the present scheme of victualling is amply sufficient during the voyage; and the only evil against which it is necessary now to provide is the abstraction of any portion of the quantity allowed or the substitution that is not unfrequently attempted of the good provisions found by government for those of inferior quality with which the transport ships either through the avarice of their owners or the fraud of their agents are sometimes supplied.  An important check upon this abuse has been afforded by that article of the instructions to the surgeon superintendent by which he is directed to attend the opening of every cask of provisions and to note it in his journal. It would appear however from the evidence of the principal superintendent of convicts William Hutchinson that complaints are most frequent from them respecting the short issues of provisions during the voyage and that the captains of the transport ships on approaching the port of destination are in the habit of making compromises with the convicts in money to the amount of the quantity kept back. This appears to have taken place on board the Daphne convict ship and was considered by the magistrates to whom the complaint of the convicts was referred as sufficient ground for dismissing it.  The practice also observed by the captains of convict ships and permitted by the commissariat officers of receiving back from the remains of provisions and stores delivered at Sydney the allowance of eighths for issuing them seems to have admitted great opportunity as well as temptation for a fraudulent abduction of the government provisions.  This practice has now been checked by a particular instruction from the Navy Board by which the captains of transport ships are expressly prohibited from making or receiving such deduction; and the allowance of eighths is only made when they pass their accounts to the satisfaction of the Victualling Board in London. As a further check however upon any fraudulent change in the issue of provisions that may escape the attention of the surgeon superintendent it will be found useful to establish a regulation that one person from each of the messes into which the convicts are distributed should be required to attend in rotation at the delivery and weighing of the provisions. In some of the transports this duty has been confined to one and the same individual of the mess throughout the whole voyage; but as it is obvious that the chances of successful corruption or imposition are less when tried with many than with few the daily change in the delegation of individuals from the mess is much to be preferred to the other mode and is not found to be attended with any inconvenience.  The complaints however of the convicts are not entirely confined to a subtraction of the proper allowance of their provisions. It frequently happens that various articles of store or of wearing apparel furnished by their friends on leaving England are put on board the ships for the convicts and according to the evidence of William Hutchinson the superintendent they have not been always punctually delivered; and in some cases they have been damaged or their contents purloined and appropriated by the sailors.  The communication that necessarily takes place between the convicts and the sailors during the passage and the disposition that is common to both to dissipate their resources for the sake of some temporary enjoyment to indulge their passion for gambling or excite it in others will render the decision of their complaints very difficult to the magistrates at Sydney.  It is not desirable generally that the convicts should arrive in New South Wales with money or the means of procuring it; and it is still less desirable that their possession of it should be known except to the surgeon superintendent the captain and mate of the ship. But in order to prevent the feeling of disappointment or exasperation that the loss of their property must occasion and to diminish the temptations to gamble for it during the voyage it would be advisable that a list of all packages allowed to be put on board for the convicts should be made out and attested by the captain and mate of each vessel previous to sailing; that they should be kept in a separate and secure place during the passage; and that the captain and mate should be held responsible for their delivery on the arrival of the ship at Sydney. [3] This arrangement would doubtless exclude access to the packages during the voyage and interfere perhaps with the object of sending them on board; but to this it is a sufficient answer that the possession of property leads only to thefts and consequently to augmented punishment; and that the encumbrance of packages in the prison deck if left in the possession of the convicts themselves would be a great obstruction to ventilation and cleanliness.  The instructions furnished by the Navy Board to the surgeon superintendent do not specify the frequent admission of the convicts on deck as an important means of preserving their health; but as the instructions furnished to the master require him to comply with the applications of the surgeon for that as well as other purposes beneficial to the convicts it was doubtless intended to leave a discretion to be exercised by the surgeons as well in regulating the frequency of their access to the deck as to their numbers at one and the same time. The exercise of this discretion depends of course upon the state of the weather and the capacity of the deck but it likewise depends upon the experience of the surgeon superintendent and the degree of confidence that this experience may lead him to place in the character of the convicts. It accordingly happens that those surgeons and masters to whom this particular service is new will not allow more than one half of the prisoners to remain on deck at one time and will not take off their irons till an advanced period of the voyage: others on the contrary allow as many of them as please to come upon deck and encourage them to remain there as long as they do not interfere with the operations of the ship and frequently take off their irons or a part of them in a fortnight after having England.  The advantages arising from allowing the convicts a free access to the deck in giving effectual ventilation to the prisons and in preserving their health are justly and strongly described by Mr. Redfern in his report to Governor Macquarrie; and these advantages and the feelings that accompany the enjoyment of them are so important in preserving discipline as well as health during the voyage that they ought not to be risked from au unwarrantable distrust of the convicts or from an apprehension of any combined attempt to obtain possession of the ship. As the release from the incumbrance of irons is always an indulgence to the convicts so is the return to the use of them a salutary punishment that may supersede the necessity of having recourse to flogging.  The fear of combinations amongst the convicts to take the ship is proved by experience of later years to be groundless; and it may be safely affirmed that if the instructions of the Navy Board are carried into due effect by the surgeon superintendent and the master and if the convicts obtain the full allowance of provisions made to them by government as well as reasonable access to the deck they possess neither fidelity to each other nor courage sufficient to make any simultaneous effort that may not be disconcerted by timely information and punished before an act of aggression is committed. A short acquaintance with the characters of the convicts promises of recommendation to the governor on their arrival in New South Wales and an ordinary degree of skill in the business of preventive police will at all times afford means of procuring information; and with a view to afford those of more complete protection against any open violence during the day when the convicts are on deck it is expedient that the ships that are taken up for this service should if possible be provided with poops upon which the military guard may at all times be posted. They are thus more completely separated from the convicts in the hours of duty or of exercise; and they are sufficiently elevated above the deck to observe their motions and if necessary to control them.  Although in time transportation of female convicts to New South Wales the preservation of their health has been more easily and generally accomplished than that of the males yet no scheme of superintendence has yet been devised by which their intercourse with the crew can be entirely prevented. From the evidence of Mr. Cordeaux Mr. Gyles and Mr. Walker who were passengers on board the convict ship Friendship prostitution appears to have prevailed in a great degree and the captain and surgeon at last connived at excesses that they had not the means to resist or any hope of suppressing. The account given by Mr. Cyles of the proceedings of the voyage differs very materially from the testimony of Mr. Cordeaux and Mr. Walker; and the accounts of all are still more pointedly contradicted by the evidence of the superintendent Hutchinson who states that the female convicts from the ship Friendship declared on their arrival at Port Jackson that they were perfectly satisfied with the conduct of the captain a declaration that is further confirmed by the result of Mr. Secretary Campbell's muster of them at the conclusion of which it is stated "that no complaints were made." [4] The characters likewise given by Mr. Gyles of several of the female convicts differ as materially from those that were given by the master and surgeon superintendent of the Friendship on their arrival at Port Jackson.  Mr. Gyles has asserted that no precautions were adopted by the captain or surgeon to prevent an improper intercourse between the crew and the convicts; and it certainly appears by the evidence of Mr. Cordeaux that the very simple and obvious one of depositing the keys of the prison in a place of security during the night was not resorted to till after a complaint was made at St. Helena by the surgeon to Admiral Plampin. In consequence of this neglect a very general intercourse took place between the crew and the female convicts; and after it had been once permitted the captain and the surgeon though not without a sense of the advantages that they expected to derive from a strict performance of their duty had lost that authority over their subordinate officers that might have enabled them to have enforced some restraint upon the crew; their attempts to restore it were ineffectual and in making them they were opposed by the vicious inclinations of the women themselves.  The conduct of the captain has been censured by Mr. Gyles for inhumanity especially in the infliction of punishment; but it does not appear that in any instance it exceeded the compulsory but injudicious use of a wooden collar. The want of cleanliness that has been stated by the same person in his letter to Mr. Marsden as the effect of negligence on the part of the captain and surgeon is imputed by Mr. Cordeaux to the perverse dispositions of the women and the reluctance of the captain to have recourse to force by which alone he thinks their dispositions could have been controlled.  The circumstances that took place on board the female convict ship Janus are detailed in the minutes of evidence that were taken by myself upon the investigation ordered by Governor Macquarrie of the complaint of two female convicts that had been assigned to Mr. Bayley. It is to be remarked that the advanced state of pregnancy in which these women were found to be previous to the departure of the captain and mate of the ship from Port Jackson occasioned their complaints to be preferred through Mr. Bayley their master to the governor although at the muster that took place on board the ship no complaint of any kind is recorded by Mr. Secretary Campbell to have been made to him nor was any complaint addressed to any other quarter. From the evidence however it appears that all the evils that unrestrained intercourse between the crew of the ship and a number of licentious women could produce existed to their full extent in the voyage of the Janus from England during the stay of the vessel at Rio dc Janeiro and its arrival at New South Wales. The death of the surgeon superintendent on the passage from Rio de Janeiro to Port Jackson has necessarily deprived the inquiry of satisfactory proofs of the attempts made by him to check the profligacy of the officers and crew; but it appears that the attempts of the captain were neither sincere nor effectual. With the knowledge indeed that the sailors could not fail to obtain of his participation as well as the mate's in the same intercourse in which they had so freely indulged it was not to be expected that their admonitions if sincere could have been effectual. The captain has denied that his intercourse with Mary Long was of an improper or immoral kind; but the testimony of the Rev. Mr. Conolly and Mr. Therry both agree in the frequency and long duration of the visits of this woman to the captain's cabin; and it is also to be observed that he has not denied the allegation made by her upon oath of his being the father of the child with which she was pregnant when the inquiry took place.  Of the degree of resistance that may be expected to be made to all attempts to impose restraint upon the crews of female convict ships during their passage from England to New South Wales the journal of Dr. Reed surgeon superintendent of the ship Morley may afford some means of forming a judgment. All the influence both in the captain surgeon and passengers that could be derived from good example and all the advantages of a most patient and courageous resistance to the vicious inclinations of the crew were not sufficient to prevent them from obtaining access to some of the women who had yielded to their persuasions. [5] It is necessary however to observe that in the fitting of female convict ships for transportation a greater degree of attention seems to have been paid to the comfort of the prisoners than is consistent with the prevention of intercourse between them and the sailors. There seems to be no reason for not giving the same degree of strength to the stauncheons that surround the fore and after hatchways that has been found so effectual in those of male convict ships; and with this precaution there is less to be apprehended from the destruction or temporary removal of the wooden gratings that cover the hatchway or the padlocks by which they are fastened. The most assailable points of the prison are the two small fore-hatchways that give light and air to the hospital; and here it is necessary that the iron gratings should be of the strongest description for the descent from them to the hospital is easy and the attempts to break through them are in a great measure removed from the observation of the officers of the deck.  The apartment for the free women and children should always be placed between the sailors birth and the prison and the partition should be made of exactly the same thickness and strength as that which separates the same apartments in the male convict ships.  In taking a review of the circumstances that have attended the transportation of male and female convicts from England and Ireland to New South Wales and the gradual improvement that has taken place in the system during the last six years it appears certain that the voyage may be performed. with perfect security to the health and persons of the convicts. For attaining these objects nothing more seems necessary than a strict adherence to the instructions issued by the Navy Board to the surgeons superintendent at the commencement and during the progress of the voyage and a determination manifested by the proper authorities in New South Wales to listen to and investigate any complaints that may be made known to them on its termination.  The course that has been adopted by Governor Macquarrie certainly affords opportunities for the convicts to make complaints; but from the evidence of the superintendent Hutchinson they are in many cases not effectual: and it appears that if the captain of a transport succeeds in making a pecuniary compromise with the convicts previous to their arrival in port and in silencing them at the muster the conduct of the master is altogether withdrawn from judicial investigation and does not come to the knowledge of that authority in England that alone has the power of punishing him by witholding or making a deduction from the promised gratuity or by mulcting the owners of the vessel in a portion of the freight.  The doctrine that has been held by the magistrates in Sydney upon this subject can only apply to the complaints of the convicts before them ; but it is clear that the pecuniary satisfaction paid to them for a subduction of time proper quantity of food by the captain constitutes no satisfaction to the government whose instructions he has violated and who also in ignorance of that violation may award remuneration instead of punishment. In the detection of attempts to diminish the quantity of food allowed by government to the convicts on the passage the authorities in New South Wales cannot exercise too much vigilance. An important control may however be beneficially exercised in England by the agents of the Navy Board in seeing as well as certifying that the several articles that are covenanted to be found by the owners of the transports are actually on board before the ships leave their port. To no article of this description does the observation apply so materially as to the quantity of water; for its scarcity or its bad quality (especially when taken in when the tide is high in the river Thames) furnishes the most specious pretext for stopping at Rio de Janeiro; and as the consumption of water on board the female convict ships is greater generally than in the male and more essential to the preservation of their health a larger supply than that of 120 gallons to each person should be laid in even if the supply of animal food should be diminished.  The supplies of medicine that are sent for the use of the convict ships seem to comprise every article of use or of comfort that can be found necessary; but from the great accumulation of lime-juice and bark that has taken place in the Sydney hospital it would appear that larger quantities of these medicines are supplied than the experience of several years seems to require; and that on the other hand it would be advisable to increase the quantities of every species of purgative medicine this alteration embracing equally the demand that exists during the voyage and in the hospitals in New South Wales. [6]   The accommodation now afforded to convicts in the prisons of the transport ships by allotting eighteen inches to each convict in every sleeping birth is quite sufficient; and the only improvement that seems to be required in the fitting of these vessels is one that would contribute to enforce discipline by affording a Separation of the well conducted convicts from the refractory and turbulent. It would however effect a change in the present construction of the hospitals that seems to have been adopted upon some consideration of the advantages and disadvantages attending their position in the fore or after part of the vessel and which although condemned by very many of the surgeons appointed to this service has certainly been confirmed by a successful experience of four years.  The fore part of the ship that is now devoted to the hospital would indisputably form the best situation for a separate place of confinement for offenders as all the inconveniences arising from bad or suspended ventilation increased motion leakage and opening of the sides of the vessel in bad weather are necessarily felt there in a greater degree than in the other parts of the ship. These reasons equally concur in rendering the same place unfit for an hospital. It is asserted however that the introduction of the hospital into the after parts of the ship whereby it would be placed next to the crew and guard might augment the dangers of infection to them ; and that the men whose lives are the least valuable ought to incur the greater risk. It is further alleged that any arrangement by which the personal inspection of the surgeons is frequently directed to the whole of the prison (which must be the case if they have to traverse it on their visits to the hospital) ought not to be exchanged for another and more commodious position of that apartment unless the advantages of such a change are clear and decisive. The advantages on one side consist of a greater degree of comfort and better ventilation to the hospital patients with the means of providing in separate place of confinement for the refractory and ill disposed in a portion of the space at present occupied by the hospital ; and on the other a more constant inspection of the prison by the surgeons superintendent economy of space in the ship the appropriation of the best and most airy part of it to the separate use of the juvenile convicts; and that immediate control over the others that is now afforded to the military guard which would be lost if the hospital were interposed between their apartment and the prison.  In making the present arrangement it does not appear that any medical authority was consulted; and if the danger of infection formed one of the reasons for making it it may well be doubted whether that danger is not augmented by confining it to that part of the ship where there must always be the least degree of ventilation and the greatest degree of damp. As a strict examination of the convicts both male and female by the surgeon superintendent before admission into the ship and a determined rejection of any that are infected with contagious disorders has during the last few years prevented the introduction of them into convict ships their occurrence during the voyage has been very rare; but in case such a calamity should occur the present situation of the hospitals would not only render the cure of such diseases more difficult but must necessarily expose a greater number of persons to their influence than if they were placed in the after part of the ship between the apartment of the sailors and the guard and the prison. The control of the guard over the prison would certainly be removed; but until some medical authority has sanctioned the present situation of the hospital it would appear that the object of security from any sudden violence of the convicts has been preferred to that of security from the contagion of disease.  The present plan of fitting the convict ships does not admit of any classification of the prisoners beyond that of appointing the best conducted to the situation of wardsmen; nor can any plan be devised that will not in a greater or less degree impede ventilation. The separation of the boys from the men has sometimes been attended with this consequence; and although the introduction of schools during the voyage should by all means be encouraged it appears doubtful whether greater mischiefs did not arise from placing the boys by themselves during the night than by distributing them in small numbers amongst the other convicts: a separate birth should continue to be provided for facilitating the means of their instruction during the day and all the arrangements for separating them at night should be left to the discretion of the surgeon superintendent.  The space that is allotted for the seamen and military guard being scarcely adequate to their accommodation for so long a voyage it is of importance that no addition should be made to the number of passengers for which the arrangements are first calculated. [7] Instances have occurred in which free passengers and wives of soldiers of the guard have been permitted to embark after the convicts and much inconvenience and a great deal of ill-will has been created by the difficulty of providing for their accommodation. This observation applies more particularly to the female convict ships in which & great number of free women and their children are always allowed to embark; but more especially those that touch at Cork to complete their number; and it has moreover been observed that the admixture of Irish female convicts with the English and the delay that is consequent to their reception at Cork while it prolongs the voyage interrupts a course of discipline which when once established it is material to maintain and which is found to be much checked by any delay of the ship in a foreign harbour.  The exercise of authority over the convicts during the passage and the doubts that have arisen respecting its nature are points that require some consideration.  The several acts of parliament that regulate the transportation of offenders to places beyond the seas have in most cases adopted the provisions of the 4th Geo. 1. c. 11 by which a property in the services of the convicts is assigned to the person who contracts to transport them. The security of the contractor and the interest that he feels in safely conveying the convicts to their place of destination and in discharging the obligations of his bond naturally pointed out him or his agent as the persons in whom the chief control over them was to be vested. By the charter party the owner covenants that the captain of this convict ship shall obey all orders that he may receive from the Commissioners of the Navy and that he shall attend to all such requisitions as may be made by the surgeon superintendent to admit the convicts upon deck and to promote cleanliness und ventilation "as much as possible consistent with safety." By the instructions of the Navy Board likewise with which every master of a convict ship is furnished he is directed to comply with such regulations as the surgeon superintendent may think necessary respecting the management of the convicts and their treatment while on board.  The apparent contradiction that arises from giving a property in the services of the convicts and the custody of their persons to the master of the ship while his orders as well as the covenants entered into by the owner of the vessel enjoin him to comply with the directions of the surgeon superintendent has given rise to frequent altercations between them during time voyage; the surgeon superintendent contending that the master is bound to comply with all directions that he may give him touching the management of the convicts and under all circumstances that do not affect the safety of the ship.  This qualification has likewise been construed by some to be limited only to the safe navigation of the vessel and not to comprise the possible case of a mutiny amongst the convicts. The masters on the other hand maintain that they have a greater share of authority over the convicts and that the personal interest they have at stake in safely conveying them as well as from the interest of their owners in the vessel they are fitter judges of all circumstances that may affect their security.  The two points in which such a collision of authority have most frequently occurred are the admission of the convicts to the deck and the taking off their irons at an early period after leaving England; both it has been observed of considerable importance to the maintenance of their health and discipline.  It is the interest of the surgeon superintendent to deliver the number intrusted to him in a good state of health; it is the interest of the master to deliver them only in safety; and the heavy penalty into which he enters for the punctual fulfilment of this part of his duty must naturally outweigh the contingent value of the remuneration that is promised for his general good conduct and humane treatment or the consideration of prejudice or loss that an opposite line of conduct may occasion to his owners.  It is the opinion of Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde that to remedy these doubts and the discussions that take place between the masters and the surgeons superintendent of convict ships the authority of the surgeon should be more defined and that to him should also be given the property in their services and the safe custody of their persons. [8]   It would however be too great a risk for the government to separate the responsibility for the custody and delivery of the persons of the convicts from the individual in command of the ship or from those who hold a property in it. While that responsibility remains with the captain it is difficult to take away from him all discretion whatever in support of it. The surgeon superintendent has the power of entering upon his journal the refusal of the captain to comply with his request and of causing an investigation of this refusal to be made on the arrival of the ship in New South Wales; and the faithful and fearless exercise of this power by time surgeon forms the only security for a compliance with his requests that the nature of the service will admit.  The necessity of resorting to corporal punishment of the convicts during the passage and the assumption of authority for this purpose by the surgeon in some cases and in others by the master have likewise furnished ground for disputes between them. The power of inflicting it is not at present given to either by any law or instruction; and those who have had recourse to it have been content to rest their justification upon the circumstances of each particular case.  Complaints of undue severity of corporal punishment during the passage have been very rare of late; and as a resort to it on some occasions is necessary where the use of handcuffs and double irons are found to be ineffectual it appears that some legislative sanction should be given to the infliction of moderate corporal punishment and that the power of ordering it should be vested in the surgeon superintendent rather than in the captain of the transport. To the same officer should likewise be confided all discretion in the application of the military force; and to prevent misunderstandings to which the want of instructions on this head have given rise the officer commanding it should be ordered to comply with such requisitions for assistance as the surgeon superintendent may think necessary. The want of authority to inflict punishment on the soldiers of the guard. in case of repeated drunkenness or misconduct has been felt on several occasions ; and as the detachments that are sent on this duty generally consist of young recruits it is expedient that all temptation to excess should be as much as possible avoided or diminished. With this view the regulation that prevails in the issue of spirits to troops on service of diluting them with a proportion of two-thirds of water should be strictly enjoined except on the occurrence of any cold or wet weather.  Considering the difficulties that always attend the adjustment of authority on board vessels employed in the transport of troops as well as of convicts it does not appear to be expedient or practicable to vary the measure or the principle upon which the Present distribution of it proceeds further than by giving a power of ordering moderate punishment to the surgeon superintendent and impressing upon the minds of the captains of transports the penal consequences to themselves and their owners of an unwarrantable Opposition to the surgeon's requests.  A subject of no less difficulty occurs in providing means of employment to the male convicts; and it does not appear that any have been recommended that would not in a great degree endanger the safety of the vessel or interfere with the space required for stores and provisions.  The establishment of schools under the authority of the surgeon and especially amongst the boys has always been attended with good effects; and although there has been no want experienced latterly in the supply of religious books and of bibles and testaments yet it does not appear that they are accompanied by any of the common elementary school books; a supply of both should be sent to the surgeon for distribution and use on the voyage; and he should be instructed to deliver them to one of the resident chaplains at Sydney and held to produce his receipt for them.  The employment of the convicts in such parts of the navigation of the vessels as are not performed aloft may safely and advantageously be resorted to. They are generally willing to take part in it and the mechanics find it their interest to make themselves useful in return for occasional indulgences of food and freer admission to the deck. The greater proportion however during the passage are sunk in indolence to which the ordinary duties of washing and cleansing the prisons though highly salutary in themselves and performed with great regularity afford but slight interruption.  The practices of thieving from each other quarrelling and gambling for their allowances of wine and lime-juice are the common offences that occur during the voyage; and they are most easily restrained and punished by depriving the convicts of money and keeping it in deposit for them; and by strictly observing that the allowance of wine and lime-juice is taken by every convict in the presence of an officer at the place of distribution. [9] The issue of these two articles is rightly left to the discretion of the surgeon superintendent; and a temporary deduction of the allowance of wine is not unfrequently resorted to as a salutary punishment and is rendered more effectual by obliging the offending individuals to attend and administer the allowance they have forfeited to those who conduct themselves well.  It is generally observed that the convicts from London are found to be more seriously affected by scurvy debility and pneumonic diseases than those of more robust habits and who have been accustomed to agricultural pursuits; and it is equally observable that the moral habits of the first of these classes of convicts are more depraved and that they are consequently less easily controlled than those from the country.  The convicts embarked in Ireland generally arrive in New South Wales in a very healthy state; and are found to be more obedient and more sensible of kind treatment during the passage than any other class. Their Separation from their native country is observed to make a stronger impression upon their minds both on their departure and during the voyage; and the ignorance in which most of them are respecting their future fate tends to preserve those salutary impressions until its termination.  The aged and the infirm convicts frequently suffer so much from debility and the use of salt provisions that the surgeons find it necessary to support them with a constant diet of preserved meat and other medical comforts; and unless such convicts have received sentences of transportation for life it seems to be a great aggravation of their bodily sufferings as well as great augmentation of expense to send them to New South Wales for any shorter periods.  Mental suffering forms but a small part of the punishment of the voyage. Instances have occurred in which it has both produced disease and aggravated it; and this has unfortunately occurred in cases where it would have been more desirable to have diminished punishment than to have augmented it. The pressure of the voyage where it is felt at all weighs most heavily upon those feelings that are most respectable and which are perhaps the last that the worst men lose. Such instances are rare and as the voyage is now conducted it produces no greater degree of bodily inconvenience to ordinary men than many are exposed to who are not in a state of punishment and certainly it is not found to be productive of injury to their constitutions. The uninterrupted association however amongst the convicts to which it gives rise and the habitual indolence that it encourages are strong reasons for abridging its continuance.  The experience of many years has now established the safety as well as ease with which the voyage to New South Wales may be performed. No ships have arrived in a disabled state in consequence of disasters at sea and none have occurred in that part of the voyage where they are most to be apprehended viz. in Bass's Straits. The principal causes of delay Have arisen in cases where ships Have attempted to keep too near the West coast of Africa before they have passed the Equator or when they have arrived on the western coast of New South Wales in the months of December January and February. In the first of these events they have generally repaired to the Island of St. Helena for a fresh supply of water; and in the latter some inconvenience has been sustained from its exhaustion and from the delay in making a passage through Bass's Straits against easterly winds or in rounding the south-west cape of Van Dieman's Land.  With a view to meet these difficulties an accurate calculation of the supply of water should be made soon after passing the Equator as it is during that period of the voyage that the consumption is the greatest and that disease most generally begins to show itself.  It is from a consideration of both these circumstances that the expediency of resorting to Rio de Janeiro or to the Cape of Good Hope or the possibility of making the voyage direct should be regulated; and the supply of water should be required to be stated on the log-book of the captain and the journal of the surgeon as the principal justification of stopping at either of these ports. The detentions at Rio de Janeiro and the difficulties experienced in obtaining water there together with the introduction of spirits among the convicts are evils of serious importance. [10]   The attention of the captain and surgeon instead of being devoted to the care of the ship and convicts is much interrupted by commercial speculations of their own. The convicts for the sake of security are ordered to resume their irons; and it may well be doubted whether these circumstances combined with the effect of a very warm temperature do not counterbalance the advantages of a temporary change in their diet and a more abundant supply of water.  The Cape of Good Hope is a better place of resort for convict ships except in the three winter months of June July and August; and it may be remarked that the detention of vessels at that place has not been so protracted as at Rio de Janeiro.  Circumstances may arise in the passage from England to the Line and so much delay and consequently such an exhaustion of the stock of water may take place that a resort to one or other of those places may become unavoidable; but the captains and surgeons superintendent should be enjoined to make time voyage direct if possible and should be held to give a very clear proof of the necessity of any deviation.  A reference to a return of voyages performed by different convict ships from England and Ireland to New South Wales from the year 1810 to the end of the year 1820 with which I was favoured by the Commissioners of the Navy Board and the abstract that I have since made from it will show the comparative advantages attending the three different courses. The average length of 44 direct voyages made during the above periods is found to be 27 days. The number of convicts so conveyed was 7657 and out of these 71 died on the passage and 97 were landed sick. The average length of 38 voyages touching at Rio de Janeiro in the passage is found to be 156 days; and out of 6470 convicts conveyed 132 died and 123 were landed sick. The average length of 11 voyages and touching at the Cape of Good Hope is found to be 146 days; and out of 1912 convicts conveyed nine died on the passage and 57 were landed sick.  The advantages therefore of the direct passage from England to New South Wales are very apparent both in the point of economy of the lives as well as the subsistence of the convicts.  The temptations to the masters and to the surgeons superintendent to touch at Rio de Janeiro and to purchase sugar and tobacco there have at all times been great. The profits upon the sale of these adventures in New South Wales and Van Dieman's Land will always tempt them to create pretexts for the circuitous passages as long as it is understood that they will be allowed to land their goods on their arrival.  The circumstances under which that permission has been given and continued will more properly be discussed when the subject of the trade of New South Wales is considered. I will at present only remark that a great temptation to a violation of the rules prescribed to them by the Navy Board has been held out to such of the surgeons superintendent as were proceeding to New South Wales on appointments from England by a practice that has long prevailed in the colony of allowing such persons the liberty of importing both spirits and tobacco free of duty. The last instance in which it occurred was that of Dr. Bromley surgeon of the female convict ship Wellington; who it appears was allowed to land 150 gallons of spirits one hogshead and six dozen bottles of wine and 10 baskets of tobacco at Port Jackson. Dr. Bromley likewise availed himself of the very unusual and protracted stay of the ship Wellington at Rio de Janeiro to put on board several articles that he conceived would be useful to him in the colony limiting their extent only to the tonnage that had been allowed to him in England.  The transportation of female convicts to New South Wales is a subject that presents more difficulty than any that occurs in the subjects now under consideration.  In consequence of the freer admission to the deck that is allowed to the female convicts during the passage their health is rarely affected by the same causes that are prejudicial to that of the male convicts; and the proportionate loss occasioned during a period of ten years appears to be considerably less.  The allowance of provisions and medical comforts to the female convicts is ample; and it appears that change of climate and regularity of diet have operated very favourably on the constitutions of many that had been debilitated by previous habits of licentiousness and vice. [11]   The same complaints respecting the conduct of the masters of the transports in withholding the due allowance of provisions are found to occur amongst the female convicts as amongst the males and the same compromises of that offence take place on their approach to the port of destination.  The moral effects of separation from their native country are less sensibly felt by the female convicts; and when the first sensations of the sea voyage are subdued their minds are more elevated by the prospects before them than depressed by the recollection of those they have just quitted.  It has been found that the establishment of schools and the continuance as far as circumstances will permit of that salutary system of instruction and discipline that has been introduced into the female wards of Newgate has tended materially to preserve good order and decent conduct. The want of means of employment for the women is one of the great difficulties with which the most zealous promoters of this system have had to contend. Of the means that have yet been devised those are obviously the best that are the most simple and that are likely to afford a regulated profit at the end rather than in the middle of the voyage. Of these the most practicable appear to me to be the employment of weaving and making straw hats for the use of the male convicts in New South Wales; and that of making up the striped linen shirts that are issued to them there as part of their allowance of clothing. A portion of the profits of their labour might be allowed to be received on landing and the remainder might be held in deposit and liable to be forfeited by misconduct.  All employments that have a tendency to encourage a passion for dress should be studiously avoided; and the female convicts should be compelled to consider that the dress that is provided by the government is that which is most suitable to their condition: nothing indeed can be more unsuitable to it than the appearance that they have been allowed to make on their arrival in New South Wales and nothing that ought to be more speedily checked whenever a proper place of reception is completed for those who are not assigned to individuals on their first arrival.  For the superintendence of the labour of the female convicts during the voyage it would be very desirable to employ one of the numerous free women that are allowed to take their passage in the female convict ships. The selection of one female convict for the superintendence of all the rest produces jealousy of her power without obedience to it; whereas a delegation of a small portion of authority to a married female of good character who has opportunities that the surgeon cannot and personally ought not to have of watching and detecting misconduct both during the night and day will enable him to punish with more certainty and effect and to avoid that suspicion of guilty connivance which if once established amongst the convicts or crew becomes a prelude and pretext for their disorders. The performance of this duty on board a female convict ship must be subject to the direction and authority of the surgeon who should also have the power of recommending a remuneration to be given by the governor of New South Wales regulated by the merits of the individual and not exceeding ten pounds.  The instructions issued by the Navy Board to the surgeons superintendent and the masters of female convict ships impose strict injunctions upon them to afford good example to their officers and crew and to use their utmost endeavours to prevent improper intercourse between them and the female convicts. The repeated instances in which these injunctions have been violated prove the difficulty and perhaps the impossibility of entirely preventing it; and the best security against that violation is to be found in the characters of the surgeons and masters to whom this difficult task is assigned.  The instance of the ship Morley commanded by Captain Brown and superintended by Dr. Reed and the occurrences that took place upon the voyage together with the behaviour and appearance of the females upon their arrival in New South Wales strongly attest the benefits that are derivable from good example employment and attention to religious duties during the voyage. That these advantages were neither wholly attained nor permanent in this instance are facts that take away nothing from the merit or the importance of the service: under other circumstances its value to the colony of New South Wales is capable of being realized and at the present moment is well worth estimating either in comparison with every instance that preceded it or is a proof of what is practicable for the future. The difficulty that is most embarrassing arises from the want of means of punishing the women and the sailors during the voyage for the improper intercourse that takes place between them. [12]   The confinement of the women to the prison-deck is not an effectual punishment and it frequently causes a greater degree of annoyance to the well-conducted prisoners than to the parties themselves. Deprivation of the ordinary comforts the use of a wooden collar and shaving the head are the only practicable punishments that can be resorted to and they are in some degree effectual though their operation is unequal and depends upon the character and the greater or less degree of sensibility to shame in the party that suffers them.  The use of violent and indecent language is one of the worst consequences of the intercourse between the women and the crew and the efforts made to correct it by the master and the officers of the ship only lead to fresh insults and to greater provocation. The punishment and correction of the women therefore should be left as much as possible to the direction of the surgeon superintendent. The punishment of the crew for holding improper intercourse with them in the voyages from England to New South Wales is according to the present state of the law not provided for; and as no master of a ship however well disposed will incur the risk of a mutiny of his crew for the sole purpose of preventing it or the great degree of personal responsibility that would accrue from the infliction even of a moderate degree of corporal punishment it would be advisable that the provisions of 37 Geo. III. c. 73 which at present are confined to ships trading to His Majesty's colonies and plantations in the West Indies should be extended to those employed in conveying male and female convicts to New South Wales.  The punishment provided by that act consists of a forfeiture of the wages and property of any seaman guilty of disobedience of such lawful commands as the master may think necessary to issue for the effectual government of the vessel and for suppressing vice and immorality of all kinds.  To give the master a power of inflicting corporal punishment for such an offence would be dangerous; but as the forfeiture of wages may afford some check though not an effectual one over the licentious conduct of the sailors it would be expedient to give it; and the power of awarding the forfeiture should be given to two or more magistrates of New South Wales and Van Dieman's Land subject to an appeal to the Vice-admiralty court at Sydney.  A great improvement has undoubtedly arisen in the transportation of convicts from the appointment of naval surgeons to the superintendence of the ships taken up for this service. Much attention has been paid by them to the instructions of the Navy Board that enjoin an attention to the performance of religious duties; and their efforts in preserving health have been no less conspicuous and successful. In promoting these it does not often happen that they meet with direct opposition from the masters of convict ships; but as there are points in their conduct respecting which no other individual than the surgeon can be expected to hold a control or afford information it is of 110 small importance to make the surgeons as independent as possible of the favour of the master and the bounty of the owners.  During the continuance of peace it is not likely that any difficulty will be experienced in obtaining the services of the naval surgeons in the transportation of convicts; but as the knowledge that they acquire by one voyage in the management of the convicts gives them a confidence that is eminently advantageous on the second it seems desirable that such as return to England with as much expedition as possible and bring certificates of their good conduct should have the preference of a second appointment. This arrangement when established will have the twofold advantage of stimulating them to a faithful performance of their duty and of detaching them from those considerations of personal advantage which they not unfrequently have sought by stipulating with the owners for a continuance of their medical services in the ships that proceed from New South Wales to India. This stipulation is also very generally connected with that of extending them to the officers and crew of the convict ships in the passage from England in return for a table allowance found either by the captain or the owners; and an instance occurred lately in which a surgeon of a convict ship recovered from the captain in an action brought in the Supreme court of New South Wales the estimated amount of medical advice and services performed by him for the captain and the crew during this period. [13] It does not appear very clearly from the printed instructions of the Navy Board that are given to the surgeons whether the medical attendance of the ship's officers and crew is included in the duty to which they are appointed; and as it is of importance to remove from the minds of the surgeons all expectation of reward from any other quarter than that from whence they derive their appointment in the first instance or may hereafter hope to receive another it is expedient that all further doubt upon this point should be removed. On the other hand it is only reasonable that the surgeons should receive the full amount of the sum that they have to pay for their passage from New South Wales to England which cannot be estimated at less than 95l. when it is made direct as well as an allowance for lodging money during their residence in Sydney. The augmentation of expense occasioned by these allowances will be amply compensated by the inducement that they will hold out to men of respectability to engage and to continue in the service; and it will leave no excuse for want of vigilance in observing and of fidelity in exposing the corrupt application of the liberal provision that is made by government for the use of the convicts.    II.  Debarkation and Muster of the Convicts Male and Female.  The interval that elapses between the arrival of a convict ship in New South Wales and the debarkation of the convicts is one that affords the fullest exercise for their ingenuity in the arts of imposition and concealment and also in devising the means of their future indulgence.  The selection of mechanics for the government works is so much dreaded for the reasons that will be stated hereafter necessary to award a punishment to all those who should be their trades.  The vigilance of the chief engineer at Sydney is particularly directed to this object; and if he fails in accomplishing it when the convicts are yet on board the superintendent Hutchinson is not slow in acquiring information by which the concealed mechanic is taken from the employment of the individual who may have secured him and is made to join one of the government gangs.  It will likewise happen that from a hope of being employed in Sydney several will declare themselves to be mechanics who have little or no knowledge of the trade they profess. Those who have brought money or goods with them are actively employed in placing or selling them advantageously; in acquainting their friends with their arrival or in soliciting those to whom they may be recommended or those whom they can afford to pay to apply for them as assigned servants.  The position that the convict ships take in the harbour during the interval between arrival and debarkation is not such as to insure a proper degree of vigilance in preventing communication with the shore; all are anchored and sometimes crowded in Sydney cove; whereas it would not be attended with any real inconvenience if they were made to anchor in front of Dawes's battery where they would lie between the guns and the observation of that work and those of the new fort on Bennelong's Point and would be compelled to remain there until the morning appointed for the debarkation. The sentries on board are ordered to prevent persons from visiting the ships without a permission of the naval officer; but this duty is feebly performed; and until the establishment of the police guard boat there were no effectual means of preventing communication between the ships and the shore. Even at present the government and other boats manned with convicts are frequently seen hovering round the convict ships; and the naval officer's boat in which they are first visited is manned by convict sailors and steered by a coxswain who is an emancipated convict.  Whereas on Saturday Night last the 15th Instant between 9 & 10 O'clock at the South End of Prince-street Mr. Robert Howe was most barbarously and cruelly stabbed with an old Rusty Bayonet by some Ruffian with an evident Intent to murder him: - The above Reward of Fifty Pounds will be paid at the GAZETTE OFFICE to any Person or Persons who will give such Evidence as shall lead to a Conviction of the Perpetrator of this bloody Deed.  GAZETTE OFFICE SYDNEY June 16 1822.  Few transactions are recorded in the annals of human guilt that are stamped with so deep and horrid an atrocity or so destitute of every circumstance that could soften and mitigate the crime as that which it is now our painful task to relate.  On the evening of Saturday last the 15th instant a little after 9 o'clock as Mr Robert Howe the printer and publisher of the SYDNEY GAZETTE was walking from the Mission-house in Prince-street he observed a suspicious man crossing the street opposite the chapel; but apprehending nothing serious he proceeded along the foot-path and the man continued to walk before him at the distance of six or seven yards; till on coming to an abrupt curvature in the street the villain suddenly turned back rushed on Mr Howe plunged a bayonet into his breast and instantly disappeared.  The dreadful cry of "Murder!" alarmed the whole neighbourhood - multitudes hurried into the street - but it was too late to overtake the cowardly assassin who concealed by the dark mantle of night but too well eluded pursuit.  Mr Howe ran as far as Mr Scott's door where exhausted by the effort he fell into the arms of his dismayed friends and was carried into the house weltering in his blood and apparently in the agonies of death. Surgical aid being immediately called in it was ascertained to be a ragged triangular punctured wound about two inches from the left breast externally perforating into the cavity of the thorax. The lung appeared very fortunately to have escaped Unwounded; a circumstance perhaps solely attributed to the point of the instrument having been broken off. Had the wound perforated the viscus there is too much reason to dread from its proximity to the larger blood vessels that its effects would have been instantly fatal.  The weapon with which the foul deed was perpetrated was found in the street at a short distance from Mr Howe's hat; and it was truly the most horrid kind of instrument which could be thrust into the human body. It was an old bayonet fastened to the end of a poll about four feet long; the blade thickly encrusted with rust about an inch of the point broken off and the edges hacked like the teeth of a saw. When picked up it was stained with blood about four inches deep; which shews with what desperate force the stab must have been given and how narrow was the escape from instant death.  But from what motives could this deed of horror have been perpetrated? It is obvious that the cold-blooded assassin sought only his defenceless victim's life; for no sooner had he given the deadly thrust than he uttered a shout of exultation threw down the weapon and without the least attempt at robbery hurried from the spot.  His only motive must have been - REVENGE. But Mr Howe's character was too just and inoffensive to have given any reasonable cause for so diabolic a passion. The infatuated man must have long brooded over some fancied injury till his passions were wrought into a frenzy fit for the most ruthless deeds.  Though the night was too dark for the ruffian's person to be distinctly recognized Mr Howe had an instant suspicion of one of two individuals both of whom were immediately lodged in custody; but one has since been liberated being able to prove that he was in his own house at the time the attack was made. The other remains under suspicion for futher examination.  Monday 7th October 1822.  This spring month is the fittest to make this excursion in. The winter nights are too cold and the summer days too hot. In the autumn the flowers are not in bloom.  The difficulties of the travel commence at Emu Ford over the river Nepean a branch of the Hawkesbury. Crossing this stream is always a work of such time and trouble and sometimes of such difficulty and danger that the traveller should send forward his cart or baggage-horses to overcome it half a day before he rides or rows through it himself. The ferry is the property of government who have hitherto delayed either to provide a punt themselves or to suffer the stock-holders of the colony to build one by subscription. The consequences are frequent losses of cattle in swimming and injury of sheep in boating over. [13] Although the river was not unusually high we were obliged to unload our cart before it could be drawn through the ford; and thus lost several hours in transporting the baggage by one small boat and in reloading the cart.  On the banks of the Nepean I saw almost the only deciduous native tree in the territory namely the white cedar (melia azedarach) the common bead-tree of India beautiful in itself and congenial to me from that singularity. All the other indigenous trees and shrubs that I have seen are evergreens; the eternal eucalyptus with its white bark and its scanty tin-like foliage or the dark casuarina tall and exocarpus funeral; all as unpicturesque as the shrubs and flowers are beautiful: - the various justly called proteaceous banksia and the hesperidean mimosa the exquisite epacris the curious grevillea xanthorrhoea the sceptre of Flora telopea the magnificent and thysanotus the lovely. New South Wales is a perpetual flower garden but there is not a single scene in it of which a painter could make a landscape without greatly disguising the true character of the trees. They have no lateral boughs and cast no masses of shade; but in return it is to this circumstance which causes so little vegetable putrefaction that the healthiness of the climate is mainly to be attributed. "A part of their economy (says Mr Brown the botanist) which contributes somewhat to the peculiar character of the Australian forests is that the leaves both of the eucalyptus and acacia by far the most common genera in Terra Australis and if taken together and considered with respect to the mass of vegetable matter they contain (calculated from the size as well as the number of individuals) nearly equal to all the other plants of that country are vertical or present their margin and not either surface towards the stem both surfaces having consequently the same relation to light." Can this circumstance be partly the cause of their unpicturesqueness - of the monotony of their leaf? Or is it merely their evergreenness? "In the Indies (says Linnaeus) almost all the trees are evergreen and have broad leaves; but in our cold regions most trees cast their foliage every year and such as do not bear acerose that is narrow and acute leaves. If they were broader the snow which falls during the winter would collect among them and break the branches by its weight. Their great slenderness prevents any such effect and allows the snow to pass between them." But snow is not unknown to the eucalypti and acaciae of New Holland; and may not the verticalness of the broad leaves of some of them answer the same snow-diverting purpose as the acerose-leavedness of European evergreens? Yet the foliage of the eucalypti is always scanty; that of the acaciae acerose; and the snow of Australia is apt to melt. Be this as it may no tree to my taste can be beautiful that is not deciduous. What can a painter do with one cold olive-green? There is a dry harshness about the perennial leaf that does not savour of humanity in my eyes. There is no flesh and blood in it: it is not of us and is nothing to us. Dryden says of the laurel:   From winter winds it suffers no decay;  For ever fresh and fair and every month is May. [14]   Now it may be the fault of the cold climate in which I was bred but this is just what I complain of in an evergreen. "For ever fresh" is a contradiction in terms; what is "for ever fair" is never fair; and without January in my mind there can be no May. All the dearest allegories of human life are bound up in the infant and slender green of spring the dark redundance of summer and the sere and yellow leaf of autumn. These are as essential to the poet as emblems as they are to the painter as picturesque objects; and the common consent and immemorial custom of European poetry have made the change of seasons and its effect upon vegetation a part as it were of our very nature. I can therefore hold no fellowship with Australian foliage but will cleave to the British oak through all the bareness of winter. It is a dear sight to an European to see his young compatriot trees in an Indian climate telling of their native country by the fall of their leaf and in due time becoming a spring unto themselves although no winter has passed over them just as their fellowcountrymen keep Christmas though in the hottest weather and with fresh fruits about them affect the fare and sometimes the fireside of old England. "New Holland (says Sir James Smith) seems no very beautiful or picturesque country such as is likely to form or to inspire a poet. Indeed the dregs of the community which we have poured upon its shores must probably subside and purge themselves before any thing like a poet or a disinterested lover of nature can arise from so foul a source. There seems however to be no transition of seasons in the climate itself to excite hope or to expand the heart and fancy."  Yet let me do justice to the evergreens of New Holland. It is to the scantiness of their foliage that the grazier owes the dry wholesomeness of the native grasses however thin; and it is to the undecaying and aromatic myrtaceous perennial leaf that the colonists attribute the healthiness of their climate. No miasmata come from the marshes or fallen leaves of Australian forests. Intermittent fevers are unknown here. An opinion has obtained in North America that evergreens increase cold. In New South Wales the cold is found to be increased by clearing the land of them although they certainly retain the night air so long in the valleys that the hills are warmer than those in the winter. In the summer the hills are cooler from the sea breeze. I should therefore say build on a hill. The climate of New South Wales is becoming generally cooler as the colony gets cleared of timber. While I am comparing the trees of America and Australia it is important to agriculture that I should mention that the stumps of the eucalypti from the quantity of gum they contain do not rot in the ground soon after the trees have been cut down as those of the American and Norfolk Island timbers do. [15]   They must be grubbed up or burnt out by piling the surrounding sods over them like a kiln.  At Emu Plains or Island (for it is sometimes insulated by the washings of the mountains when the Nepean is flooded) there is a government agricultural establishment of 350 men and a few women with a good brick house for the superintendent and wooden huts for the convict labourers. Here are grown for the benefit of the crown wheat maize and tobacco; but experience everywhere proves the loss at which government raises its own supplies. These plains are not naturally cleared; but they will soon be free from stumps by the labour of these convicts and will then leave a rich tract of arable land for favoured grantees.  It is this river whether we call it Hawkesbury or Nepean that is the Nile of Botany Bay; for the land on its banks owes its fertility to the floods which come down from the Blue Mountains and which have been known to swell the waters nearly a hundred feet above their usual level; and as these floods are uncertain and often destructive of the growing crops I once thought that government (if it is to farm at all) had better have kept the whole of this precarious garden in its own hands; since it is only public foresight that would provide against the loss of a harvest and only public wealth that could support it. After the flood of 1817 the government ration was reduced from eleven to three pounds of wheat per week; but since that period so much wheat has been grown in the fine districts of Appin and Airds and in the island of Van Diemen's Land that the colony is now almost independent of these flood-farmers; and they are yearly going out of fashion for the benefit of the state. Nothing can be more uncertain than the heavy rains of the climate. Sometimes (but not of late years) the country is worse afflicted with long droughts in which the woods take fire and consume the grass and the cattle have perished for want of water. Often do the rains descend and the floods come when the Hawkesbury corn is in the ground and the colony has sometimes suffered from the improvidence of these farmers in not building their wheat stacks out of the reach of the devouring waters. The extraordinary fertility of these flooded lands which have borne a crop of wheat and a crop of maize in each year for the last five-and-twenty years has naturally induced their tenants to rely too much upon this lubberland sort of farming just as the inhabitants of Vesuvius cannot be induced to abandon that mountain after a lava-flood from its volcano and see nothing in present ruin but the prospect of future riches. "So the Ohio (says Mr Birkbeck) with its annual overflowing is unable to wash away the inhabitants of Shawnee Town." But it is surely impolitic to grant away such precarious and hotbed lands. In so indifferent a general soil as that of New South Wales a better system of agriculture should be taught; and what encouragement is given to the general farmer to bedew his land with the sweat of his brow when he sees that of his idle neighbour on the banks of the river irrigated by the flood and producing as good a crop with no other labour than that of hoeing and strewing? [16] It is only upon the chance of the flood's devouring instead of feeding that the general farmer can calculate for occasional remuneration; and when this calamity happens the river farmer whose rapid gains induce him as rapidly to spend is found entirely unprovided and his whole district is reduced to subscription and beggary. This in itself is not one of the least of the political evils of such a system. It is an encouragement to future improvidence and fosters a disposition too literally to take no thought of the morrow but to consider and imitate the gigantic lily (doryanthes excelsa) - a disposition which must be supposed to be already too natural among the small settlers who have emerged from the conditions of convicts. Another good reason against granting away this land and suffering it to be cleared is that the floods wash the fallen timber into the channel of the river and obstruct the navigation. The removal of the trees from its banks has not only contributed to choke the river by their falling in but has occasioned derelictions on one side and alluvions on the other.  But we shall never get our cart up Lapstone Hill at this rate; and it is so steep and long that we were obliged to shift our baggage twice in ascending it notwithstanding Governor Macquarie's Government and General Order of the 10th of June 1815 says that "the facility of the ascent to Spring Wood excited surprise and is certainly not well calculated to give the traveller a just idea of the difficulties he has afterwards to encounter." I found Lapstone Hill as difficult as any in the journey except Mount York; and we did not reach Spring Wood (twelve miles and a half from the river) where alone there is a space enough in the forest to encamp upon till after 9 o'clock at night. There is little or no grass here and the timber consists principally of those species of eucalyptus called by the colonists stringy and iron-bark. Here is stationed an acting corporal's party of the 48th regiment in a small barrack.  The settler at such an immense distance from home begins now to feel the difficulties of his situation especially when every kind of useful thing is enhanced three times its real value by the avarice of the merchants; who however it must be admitted certainly run great risk in selling their goods; but if they get half they charge they are well paid.  I shall now attempt to describe the river Derwent from Hobart Town upwards. This river in a nautical point of view is of the greatest value as there is plenty of water for any vessel six or seven miles above Hobart Town and I think there are at least 14 feet at high tides up to New Norfolk the first settlement of any consequence situated on the banks of the river. New Norfolk is about 22 miles by water and much the same by land. The scite of a new town is marked out on the left side of the river on an eminence called Richmond Hill. The town is to be named Elizabeth Town. The situation is well chosen; and when it is considered that it will be the shipping place for all the settlements at new Norfolk it will most likely in a few years become a town of some note; at present there are not more than 23 or 24 houses. [34] Government intend to erect a school and other buildings as they may be required.  It is not until you come up to New Norfolk that you discover the value of Van Dieman's land in an agricultural point of view. You there observe corn barley &c. thriving well under the management in general of only very indifferent farmers who with confined means contrive to get a few acres of wheat sown. The agriculturists are completely kept down by the merchants and political causes. Government is the principal purchaser; and it only takes off a limited quantity for the purposes of feeding the convicts that are employed at public works. That demand has lately increased owing to the immense number of persons sent out more particularly to Van Dieman's Land which colony has proved itself the granary of New South Wales.  Those parts I visited present a complete belt of mountains encircling plains something similar to the downs we have in England. [35] On the slopes of these lands are many fine situations for arable and pasture farms. The country is peculiarly adapted for sheep; and that animal thrives uncommonly well and increases astonishingly. The wool at present is of little value being coarse and hairy; but this is not natural to the climate as its wool has decidedly improved. The attention of the proprietors is directed to produce fine wool; several merinos from the flocks of John M'Arthur Esq. and other gentlemen having been sent to this colony; and in two or three seasons there is no doubt the flocks will improve in quality. The country is not particularly well watered; yet taking its climate into consideration it is much superior to Australia where the burning heats in summer dry tip every thing. At present few attempts have been made either to sink wells or form tanks which will be the case when the country is more fully peopled.  The wheat of this colony is uncommonly fine. Hitherto barley and oats have not been cultivated excepting small quantities of the former for brewers which trade at present is at a very low ebb. [36] A brewery is about to be begun by a gentleman which will most likely supersede the necessity of importing malt liquors by making beer &c. of a good quality. This gentleman has advertised to give 7s. per bushel for barley. Any person would naturally think this would encourage agriculture; but the facility of procuring the necessaries of life being great and little energy in the agriculturist improvement does not increase in the rapid way it would were industry the order of the day. Under the present Governor the country is likely soon to become of importance as every exertion is making towards improving and making roads and also laying the foundation of such public works as will be of great use to the community.  The executive is much cramped by orders of rigid economy from home; yet if England has a colony which will be of great importance this is one; to which under proper management she ought to extend a liberal hand. I have no doubt but the returns from these settlements will by good management and with reasonable advantages become of great value. [37]   This colony has for some years supplied New South Wales with grain as well as with great quantities of animal food such as salted beef mutton and pork.  Last season fifty thousand bushels of wheat were exported from the settlements of Hobart Town Pitt Water and Port Dalrymple besides many tons of salted provisions. Indeed without the Derwent the settlements in Australia would be in danger of want; the heavy rains of 1820 having made the Governor in Chief afraid of a short supply he gave a tacit permission to the captain of the Surry to import a cargo. That ship loaded at Valparaiso and arrived in June 1821 with 15000 bushels of wheat. The alarm which had been caused by the floods however proved groundless; yet wheat at the time of the Surry's arrival brought 12s. per bushel particularly Van Dieman's Land wheat. The price of this article in Sydney market fell in consequence of this arrival. The high price which it commanded shews that it was wanted. In so limited a market in very abundant crops there being no means of foreign export the prices are exceedingly low; but Government always give 10s. per bushel for a certain quantity taking it from every settler in proportion to the number of acres he has in cultivation. [38] When wheat is cheap he of course swells the statement of his lands in cultivation to as great amount as he can. These small matters of finesse are however too trifling to be of any very great consequence. As the country becomes more populous the regulations of the Colony will be better attended to; and though the Governor and persons connected with the Commissariat are frequently accused of partiality in the distribution of the advantages to be derived from the sales of produce or the gifts of lands yet it may be believed that they are as impartial as they possibly can be; considering that some power must be entrusted to them and they ought alone to be judges of many acts which were perhaps highly expedient and necessary either for the benefit of government or the public weal. In small governments and more especially in a government of the nature of that of New South Wales the Governor being necessarily vested with arbitary [sic] power is subject to much animadversion from private individuals; who though they dare not openly express their ideas of his conduct yet are still privately misrepresenting all his public acts. [39] These ideas necessarily suggest themselves from the common conversation which occurs in most parties. Perhaps it is natural for an Englishman to be dissatisfied with those who have the charge of affairs; and if such be the case dissatisfaction and constant finding fault do not lose by conveyance to a southern hemisphere; for men have their opinions and parties on political management there as well as in the mother country. At present there is only one newspaper published which perhaps is fortunate for the future improvement of the Colonies; otherwise half of the time of the people would be employed in venting their party spleen. Though decidedly a friend to freedom of discussion when it has a tendency to improve the real knowledge of mankind I am an enemy to that freedom so soon as it indulges itself in any other way or becomes a mere vehicle of misrepresentation and abuse. [40]   The River Derwent is capable of cultivation on both sides except some particular parts where the mountains are very steep.  The district of the Coal River is perhaps as good as any land in the country. It is about ten to sixteen miles from Kangaroo Point where you cross the river to Hobart Town. In fact almost all the best parts settled are on the opposite side to the capital. In the Pitt Water districts which I visited there are as fine farms as any in England and erections which have cost from £2000 to £3000.  Inclosures are however too much neglected; and those regulations with respect to this which have been issued should now be strictly enforced so that the country may be fully equal to its wants without the supply of materials from other countries.  Flour for exportation would answer very well in many parts; but that article is not at present of so much consequence until the quantity of wheat land accumulates beyond the consumption of the island and New South Wales. [41]   The rearing of horses in the present stage of the colony is also very desirable as they have not at present a sufficiency at a reasonable price to carry on any extensive operation of farming.  I was offered five hundred pounds to bring a good horse out for the improvement of the mares to produce a race with more bone; those they now have being by no means deficient in blood. The horses are mostly of the Cape breed and a few gentlemen have Arabs.  With respect to the production of the orchard or kitchen garden every thing may be grown in great plenty and of exceeding good flavour as good as in the counties near London. Hitherto some of our fine fruits have not yet been imported but when they are there is little doubt but the most choice wall-fruit will be produced; the raspberry and strawberries are excellent; cherries are as yet scarce but they only want our best sorts to produce any quantity. In countries so thinly inhabited there is not much attention paid to the rarer sorts.  Gooseberries are at present scarce; [42] but this fruit as well as red and white currants will soon be very plentiful. The potatoes are also excellent and every species of vegetables are in the greatest plenty with those families who take the trouble to rear them. The climate is similar to that of England excepting that the nights are considerably colder in summer; so much so indeed that it is not uncommon to have a fire in summer in the evenings. There are only two ports at present in this settlement; viz. Hobart Town on the river Derwent and Port Dalrymple on the Tamar a river not so safe as the Derwent yet I am inclined to think it will be a very desirable situation as the land on the banks of the river is much superior to the land in the immediate vicinity of the Derwent.  Port Dalrymple lies north of the river Derwent and of course somewhat warmer from what information I could collect. The river Tamer has a rapid stream and a flow of from 10 to 18 feet water is navigable for 45 miles to Lanceston for vessels drawing 10 to 12 feet water and at George Town cove five miles within the heads is safe for vessels of from 12 to 19 feet water where they can lay afloat at low water tide. [43] There is a bar about half a mile below Lanceston which the vessels take the opportunity at high tide to cross when they lay near the wharf. The tides here are slight.  The banks of the river are generally low lands sufficiently above the level of the sea. Boats can penetrate 10 miles above Lanceston. Such parts as are elevated are generally iron stone other parts mud. The Supply river a small stream which unites itself into the Tamer runs from the western hills is 16 miles above George Town. About a mile from its entrance there is fresh water. There are not many streams on the banks of the river; but that deficiency of water may be supplied by sinking wells. There are three wells at George Town which give excellent water. George Town contains at present including Military Civil Officers Prisoners about 700 persons; Lanceston about five hundred. The latter place is more for merchants settlers &c. than the former. There are said to be many fine districts of land in the vicinity of Port Dalrymple; and it will no doubt soon be a thriving settlement. [44] It is the intention of Government to form a settlement at an early day at Oyster Bay on the east side of the island. It has a commodious safe harbour and the land in the vicinity is considered good. From its situation it will no doubt be a desireable settlement. In June 1821 the commencement of this settlement had not taken place. The south sea whalers frequently put in as the black whale visits all the bays on this coast. Last year several whales were caught within sight of Hobart Town in the Derwent; and in Storm Bay passage they were very common during the winter months. A great deal of oil is of course made from those whales and Basses Strait seals; where as well as in the bays and rivers these fish are very abundant. As their quarters however are getting much disturbed it is likely that they will remove to where they may be less so. Great quantities of seal skins and oil are sent to Sidney and shipped for England. But as vessels now go regularly to Van Dieman's Land they will probably shortly send vessels home direct. [45] Van Dieman's Land was originally peopled from Norfolk Island; which place was abandoned eighteen years ago it not having an anchorage where a vessel could lay with safety. The population at Van Dieman's Land has been increased since by the most refractory and worst description of convicts and lately by a good many settlers from England. The society till lately was therefore on a very moderate scale and crimes are very frequent. Men rendered desperate retreat to the woods; or as it is termed go a bush-ranging and rob to supply their wants and often commit worse crimes. There were executed in 1821 above 10 persons besides a number sent to the coal works at Newcastle. This in a small population of 6000 persons is very lamentable. A number of free settlers having lately gone with their families will improve the colony by setting a good example to those born of convict parents many of whom are fast approaching to maturity.  The immoderate use of spirituous liquors is the great bane of these colonies; [46] a plentiful supply of that and of Brazil tobacco is their summum bonum. It is at the same time gratifying to say that a great proportion of the children of the first settlers are not so addicted to drinking; and would with proper care and having a good example before them become useful members of society. A merchant told me there was more profit to be made of a puncheon of rum than of the best farm in Van Dieman's Land. That however can now no longer be the case as rum is plentiful; and so perverse is human nature that the desire will decrease in proportion as the facility of procuring a favourite indulgence is increased. The children born in those colonies and now grown up speak a better language purer more harmonious than is generally the case in most parts of England. The amalgamation of such various dialects assembled together seems to improve the mode of articulating the words. The children are tall and well made.  The Aborigenes of the country are not numerous sometimes 60 to 80 men women and children are met with. [47] They are perfectly harmless more from ignorance than any other cause. A man with a single musket will make them run. There have however been instances of stock-keepers at distant stations having been murdered. They are a distinct race from the New Hollanders having woolly hair like the negroes whereas the New Hollanders have coarse lank hair quite black. Both races are in the lowest scale of human beings.  As in all small societies there is not so much of that liberal feeling which prevails in large cities so in Hobart Town the different families are not upon that footing of mutual good will which would be productive of happiness to themselves and of great advantage to the rising prosperity of the colony.  From what has been said it may he necessary to give an opinion of Van Dieman's Land as a colony. It is certainly not a well watered country (with small streams such as water our own country) but probably springs yet undiscovered may be found on the sides of those hills with which this island abounds. [48] It is mostly a woody country except those large extensive plains found in different parts which would maintain large flocks of sheep as well as the hill sides themselves.  To clear the land requires great labour There are two or three modes of clearing. One is by cutting the tree down and then stump-rooting it as it is called; which is done by digging round the roots cutting the various branch roots and then completely drawing it out from the earth The tree and its branches are then disposed as near each other as possible a fire is made with dry wood every 8 or 10 feet along the tree which burns right through it; so that trees 20 to 40 feet long are cut by fire when they are more easily burnt by drawing them together and with dry brush-wood completely burn them. Others again cut the trees and branches down. and destroy them by fire letting the stumps stand a season or two. They then raise a mound of turf around them with a small vent which being set fire to in the inside burns like an oven. This mode completely burns the root as well as most of the branch roots the fire spreading under the surface of the earth. [49] An objection I have heard to that mode is that it vitrifies the earth and destroys vegetation. I do not know however whether that is proved by experience. At all events the labour is immense in clearing land as they neither turn the tree ashes nor the bark to any account. A great proportion of the trees have very slender roots. It is not uncommon to cut round at a small distance the root of a tree and let the wind blow it down. That however is a practice dangerous to the cattle. The wood is of a heavy kind frequently large. It is almost all straight timber. Planks might be cut of it to supply the wants of an immense navy. Crooked timber is scarce. A great proportion of the trees are also either heart-shook or decayed. Still a great proportion of the trees would make excellent planks. It may be cut in any quantity and any length. The roads and labour at present with the want of proper timber carriages will prevent the wood from being made use of for a length of time; and whether the plank is worth the labour of cutting and conveyance to Great Britain is at present uncertain. [50] The natural grasses of this country are capable of maintaining large herds of cattle as well as immense flocks of sheep. With artificial grasses and good cultivation any quantity could be produced and fed. Wool will be the only export for some time to Great Britain unless the plank would answer the British Navy. At present the inhabitants get their living too easily to expect that they will turn their attention to the advantages of the Colony except where an immediate profit is to be reaped. Two-thirds of the wool raised is either destroyed or wasted; and it is only this year that any attempt has been made to save it. From the census of stock Van Dieman's land is stated to have upwards of 100000 sheep a considerable number more than New South Wales. That colony ships nearly 150000 lbs. of wool yearly and is greatly increasing. In Van Dieman's land I am persuaded they might ship much more; and although perhaps not so fine would pay the growers equally well from their having a larger quantity in each fleece. I think too that if proper attention was paid to the wool it would be as fine as New South Wales. [51]   Any settler who leaves his home for these colonies if he is a poor man will get on much more easily in this settlement than in New South Wales where the high prices of cattle will materially lessen his breeding stock to commence with. Horses are however dearer in Van Dieman's land. The climate is more natural to an Englishman; and neither the heats of summer or cold in winter will prevent the operations of agriculture or impair or depress the physical powers of man. In the present state of the colony the police and safety of property is much inferior to New South Wales. That inferiority is however in these respects likely to be remedied; as it is confidently expected that a judge and judge-advocate will be appointed to preside in civil and criminal cases which cases have generally hitherto had to wait those civil officers from Sidney to the great delay and inconvenience of civil cases as well as the bad consequences resulting from the long confinement of criminals. At present the Courts in Van Dieman's land are confined to sums not exceeding £50. [52] The merchants however manage in their money matters to take notes for £50; say a debt of £500 take ten notes of £50 each which brings them within the jurisdiction of their courts. Here as in New South Wales the trial is not by jury but a bench of gentlemen of the colony who settle disputes when within the above named sum. The criminal court consists of a presiding judge-advocate with two officers of any detachment then in the colony. Van Dieman's land will more rapidly increase in value than New South Wales from its natural confined limits; and land is saleable now at from 5s. to 7s. 6d. per acre. There is generally too little attention paid to the qualifications of persons receiving grants of land. No person should receive it unless he either employs a capital to improve it or resides on it himself.  On the 5th January 1821 the Skelton having taken on board a quantity of the wool of the colony and some provisions on freight we proceeded to Sidney in Port Jackson.  The day after sailing though a fine time of the year the seasons in the southern hemisphere being opposite to ours we experienced a strong gale from the northward with a very unpleasant sea which we had rarely experienced the whole of our voyage from Europe. [53] It only continued a few hours when we got a fair wind. On the 10th of January we were off Jervis bay and congratulated ourselves on reaching Sidney the next day it being only about twelve hours sail distant. We were however disappointed. The wind came foul; and a strong current from the north also set against us; and instead of reaching Sidney as we expected we did not get off the heads of Port Jackson until the 17th January. At the latter part of a southerly gale and during the regular north-east wind which blows nearly all the summer months there is a strong current running along the coast at the rate sometimes of two miles an hour. I think it runs from north by east to south by west.  After making the entrance near which on the south head stands a conspicuous light house we got a pilot on board. The wind was down the river; we however having a flood tide beat up to Sidney Cove distant about seven miles from the entrance. [54] The only danger is a shoal called the Sow and Pigs which lies near the centre of the river; it is however easily avoided with a leading wind. This shoal is nearly dry and is just abreast of the light within the South Head. Near the entrance of the cove at Sidney we were met by the naval officer who took the ship's papers. On the next day the passengers for New South Wales disembarked; and we proceeded to land the remaining part of our outward cargo. The town of Sidney contains a great number of good houses. We were however struck with the barren appearance of the sides of the river which is mostly all rocks covered with small trees and brush wood. The river has many coves all of which are excellent harbours. Sidney Cove is perhaps as secure a harbour as any in the world. It would contain a large fleet of merchant ships moored close. It being rare to see more than 10 or 20 sail of vessels they moor with two bowers and swing.  The wharf at Sidney is tolerably commodious for landing goods. It would be however a great facility to business if cranes were erected which might easily be done as there is plenty of hard timber which would answer the purpose. [55] The price of iron is also much reduced. It is not more than £17 to £20 per ton. About eighteen months before £80 to £90 were paid. The market for merchandize is at all times uncertain and extremely fluctuating; as in a small population there is but a trifling demand for any one article. Mercantile speculation being directed that way a glut of most articles of merchandize will most likely ensue.  The principal supplies for the convicts is sent from the mother country; it is therefore to be recollected that the merchants' consumption is only among the free settlers and the families of those who have become free. Sidney is supplied with rum tea sugar &c. from China and Calcutta. Good green tea was worth by the chest 2s. 6d. per lb. and sugar by the box of 11 cwt. about 5d. to 6d. per lb. The Isle of France also sends sugar and rum; and such articles as they have a surplus of from Europe are also sent viz. French brandies wines &c. [56]   The Isle of France being made a free port all European goods will find their way either from thence or from the Cape of Good Hope independent of the direct supply from Great Britain.  To speak of the face of the country it is all covered with wood; and till you get nearly 20 miles into the country the land is in general very indifferent; more especially near Sidney it is not worth the cultivating. The soil 20 miles back improves and 40 miles inland is very good. The expenses of firing land effectually is from £5 to £6 per acre; and a strong bar fence which is the best costs about 3s. per yard. It is to be recollected that these payments are often made in property which is sometimes 100 per cent above the real value thus materially lessening the expense. A person intending to clear land either after receiving a grant or purchasing carries into the country if he has capital a chest of tea half a ton of sugar and slop clothing which he pays away to his workmen at a considerable advance. With rum tobacco and all other articles he does the same. Therefore a man who goes out with a full intention of settling should take care to provide himself with as many of these articles as it would be advisable to purchase with the means he possesses. [57] England at present is decidedly the best market for spirits clothing and sugar; the latter article from Calcutta is at present very little higher in London than at the shipping ports. The high rate of freight which the small India vessels charge to Sidney makes their goods quite as high as when exported from Great Britain. Good sugar from £40 to £45 per ton; Hyson skin tea per chest £7 to £8. Bengal rum duty paid 18s. per gallon. This is 3.3 per cent over proof which of course reduces it to 12s. 6d. London proof.  It is likely that the Bengal rum will begin to get out of use as the duties on spirits are to be levied on London proof not on quantity as heretofore. This regulation took place 1st January 1822. Permission has also been given to distil. The advantages offered to distillers are very great. They are only to pay 2s. 6d. per gallon on home made spirits whilst 10s. per gallon is charged on all imported. This permission has for its object the encouragement of agriculture; [58] but such is the apathy amongst the agriculturists that I am doubtful whether grain in sufficient quantity will be raised in a short time to answer such demand as would be created by distilleries. That apathy in agriculture is however by no means general as many gentlemen of liberal ideas have certainly done great good to the country by shewing the capabilities of the soil and the advantages to be derived from good management. It is however to be remembered that these gentlemen have expended a large capital in these improvements which will not perhaps make a return equal to their expectations; yet the prospect of gain from these improvements rests on a good basis; and as time rolls on will ultimately enable them to realize a handsome return for the capital expended.  News from Moreton Bay  SYDNEY December 18 1823  We are happy to announce the arrival of H.M. cutter Mermaid from the Northward with John Oxley Esquire Surveyor-General of the Territory; and are much gratified to observe that in Moreton Bay a fresh water river has been discovered which for extent and depth of water far surpasses any thing hitherto known in New South Wales; and indeed inferior to very few rivers in the old world.  The party ascended it about 50 miles the river preserving its uniform breadth from a quarter to half a mile and of sufficient depth to float ships of considerable burthen; and from an adjacent eminence a view of the interior of the country was obtained which rendered it probable that it was navigable to a much greater distance particularly as the tide rose about 4.5 feet and there was no apparent diminution of width or depth in the river.  The country on the banks appeared capable of raising all the different descriptions of produce usually cultivated under the same latitude. The timber was abundant and good; and among various trees of not generally known kinds a lofty and elegant one of the pine species predominated.  The Mermaid has been the means of restoring two unfortunate men to civilised life. Their names are Thomas PAMPHLET and John FINNEGAN.  NARRATIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THOMAS PAMPHLET AND JOHN FINNEGAN  These poor men sailed from Sydney on the 21st. of March last in an open boat about 30 feet long and 10 feet beam intending to bring cedar from Five Islands; and they were accompanied by Richard Parsons (part owner of the boat) and John Thompson. They had a considerable quantity of provision flour pork etc. for the purpose of buying cedar and four gallons of water and five of rum. When almost at their destination they were driven off the land by a violent gale of wind from the West which continued with unabated violence for five days.  Supposing they had been carried by the current to the Southward when the gale moderated they pursued a northerly course for it was not until the eleventh day after the storm that the boat could carry sail and by then they supposed they were off Van Diemen's Land. They had no compass but steered by the sun as near as they could guess a N.W. course expecting very soon to make the land in the neighbourhood of the Five Islands their original destination. Their sufferings were dreadful for their water was expended and they had nothing to drink but rum.  John Thompson a Scotchman the best hand in the boat (having been an old man of war's man) had become quite delirious and totally useless from drinking salt water. On the fifteenth day a heavy shower of rain fell and three days later more rain. On the nineteenth day they thought they saw land but it was not until the twenty first day (12th. April) that some islands were sighted.  Thompson on hearing this joyful news apparently revived a little; they had been obliged to bind him hand and foot three days before to prevent him jumping overboard. His feet were untied and he entreated for God's sake to give him fresh water having imagined the boat had already landed and secured some. When he found that there was none on board he raved in the most incoherent manner and in the course of an hour expired from disappointment.  They continued to steer Northwards being afraid to land because of the natives whom they could see; and Parsons being a part owner of the boat would no endanger it by anchoring close inshore.  Thompson's body had continued on board all this time as they constantly expected to land and so bury it; but it began to grow offensive and on the twenty-fourth day it was thrown overboard. He had been kept so long that he swam as light as a cork on the water.  On the 16th April they saw a stream of fresh water and the boat was anchored in a bight about half a quarter of a mile from the shore and the cable payed out for forty fathoms to let her drift further in. Pamphlet then stripped and swam ashore with a keg; but he was so exhausted that it took him an hour and a half to land. He then drank so much water that he could not fill the keg. In the meantime it began to blow very fresh from the Eastward and those on board called loudly to Pamphlet to swim back and help them to pull her off shore. The surf ran so high that Pamphlet dared not venture into the water because of his weakness and he called out to them to cut the cable and let the boat run ashore. After some time they did; but the boat grounded on the sandy bottom still some distance from the beach and in five minutes her bottom was stove in. Parsons and Finnegan both got safe on shore and eagerly drank from the stream; Parsons emptied a pint pot which had been attached to the keg thirteen times.  They were all naked and could not get to the boat because of the surf. [93] They had not the means of kindling a fire and to make matters still more miserable it began to rain heavily. They suffered much throughout the night from cold and hunger. Next morning when day break they found the boat had gone to pieces and a few things had floated ashore including a little flour still unspoilt by salt water. They still imagined they were to the southward of Port. Jackson and accordingly (after a wretched meal of flour and water) they set out along the beach in a northerly direction. They were in fact on Moreton Island abreast Moreton Bay.  They soon found signs of native habitation and from one hut secured a fire and began to roast some flour cakes. Natives shortly afterwards made their appearance and treated the shipwrecked men with the utmost kindness and consideration which indicated but little of the savage. Such kind treatment was accorded them from other tribes as they proceeded along the beach. On the fifth day after their shipwreck they found their progress stopped by a channel about three miles wide through which the tide run very rapidly. They were now certain that they were on an island which they had almost walked around; but they could observe fires on the opposite shore.  Next day they it a large fire on the beach to attract attention which being seen by the natives one of them passed over in a large canoe. But no sooner did he observe their colour than he ran back to his boat and jumping in pushed rapidly off shouting and roaring with all his might. Subsequently more natives crossed over; they were naked and unarmed and Parsons who happened to have a pair of scissors entertained them by cutting off their long beards. But the natives would not take the three men back with them in their canoes.  Fortunately the following day they found a canoe deserted near the channel but it would only carry two. After consultation Pamphlet agreed to wait allowing Parsons and Finnegan to cross over when one was to return to fetch him. However the canoe was met by natives on the opposite shore and it was not until two days later that Finnegan had the opportunity to rescue Pamphlet and then it was accomplished only with great exertion and danger because the tide carried the frail canoe out to sea.  The natives treated them most kindly and they stayed with their hospitable hosts for about ten days. The natives would not suffer them to approach the huts in which the Women were for the first five or six days; but afterwards they became less vigilant and the white men were allowed to pass through the huts among the women as they pleased.  Having now recovered their strength to some degree and being much refreshed Parsons and Pamphlet resolved to continue their endeavours to reach Sydney; but Finnegan was desirous of staying with the friendly blacks Sooner than encounter the difficulty and danger of attempting to reach the Settlements. At length however they all set off in a westerly direction in order to get round the large bay which they imagined to be Jervis's Bay.  The natives had pointed out an inlet at a distance of twelve or fourteen miles where they said they would find a canoe. With great difficulty and trouble in carrying their fire they at last reached the inlet; but to their mortification and sorrow they found the canoe old and cracked and it would not carry even one. They retraced their steps back to the natives and resolved to construct a large canoe which took them nearly three weeks working from sunrise to sunset.  With this canoe they were able to cross the inlet and reached an island which they traversed carrying the canoe. From here they saw another point far to the Northward but the distance appeared so great and the shore appeared to recede so far they were afraid to venture by canoe so they set out to walk around the bay.  On the third day they arrived at the bank of a very large river but it was too wide for them to attempt to swim and they could find no canoe. Accordingly they travelled with great difficulty for a whole month along the southern bank of the river and its many salt - water creeks until they could find the means to cross it. They existed on a poor diet of fern roots being half-starved all the time. At last they found two canoes; but the opposite bank proved to be such rough country that they were glad to retrace their steps (more easily however with the aid of the canoes) to the mouth of the river and there crossed over. With the kindly assistance of the friendly natives they slowly made their way Northwards along the shore of the bay.  Here they were befriended by the old chief of the natives in the vicinity of Pumice Stone Strait and it was he who persuaded Pamphlet and Finnegan to stay but Parsons pressed on. At last one evening Pamphlet's attention was drawn by the natives to a cutter under full sail standing up the bay. Imagine his astonishment and delight and the surprise of those on board the Mermaid when they were hailed in English by a naked light-coloured individual from the shore. Mr Oxley and his officers hurried ashore to be received by the poor man with breathless joy which almost deprived him of utterance.  He was taken on board cleaned and decently clothed and learned to his surprise that they were at least 500 miles to the Northward of Port Jackson instead of being as they always imagined to the Southward of Jervis's Bay. He had lost all idea of the passing of time and when told the day 29th. November he found that upwards of eight months had elapsed since the boat left Sydney and consequently five had been spent with the hospitable natives of Moreton Bay.  Next day Finnegan was rescued. Parsons who was an obstinate hot-tempered man in spite of the remonstrances of his companions had some weeks before pursued his course to the Northward along the shore being still infatuated with the belief that he was to the Southwards of these Settlements. No doubt he will perish but should he be driven to return to the friendly natives Mr. Oxley left a message for him in a bottle with the sable chief of that kindly - hearted tribe of savages.  Mr. Oxley with a party set out next morning taking Finnegan with them in order to examine the large river which had so long retarded their progress. On their return five or six days later the Mermaid raised anchor and set all sail for Sydney.  1st. That the stated Ground of the late Governor's objection to granting Land to unmarried Females is of itself no way valid such Lands not being more subject to be neglected than those of other Individuals where the circumstances of the Parties are similar and   2ndly. That Grants of Land to both married and single women as well as Children have been and are by no means infrequent; that therefore Memorialist as precedent directs and analogies in her favour and   3rd. Waving [sic] all consideration of the abstract principles on which was founded the stated objection of the late Governor to such Grants that no such Grounds of objection could be discovered in Memorialist's particular case Memoralist is willing to give every required Security for the due fulfillment of the Stipulations that might be attached to any Land that might be granted to her.  Your Lordship's Memorialist here rests her case and adverting to the difficulties and the exergencies [sic] connected with those more particularly of providing for an increasing Herd of Horned Cattle amounting to upwards of One Thousand and eighty Head with no ground on which to depasture them with the exception of the small allotment before mentioned purchased by herself and which now from the common that was contiguous to it having been lately divided in Grants to various Individuals is unequal to their support trusts that she will not appear obtrusive in thus addressing Your Lordship and under the hope that the mere circumstance of Sex will not be allowed to operate to her prejudice ventures to solicit that Your Lordship will be pleased to allow to her a Grant of Land of such extent as to Your Lordship may see fit. And Your Lordship's Memorialist as in duty bound will ever pray.  AUSTRALASIA  A POEM WRITTEN FOR THE CHANCELLOR'S MEDAL AT THE Cambridge Commencement JULY 1823.  By W.C. WENTWORTH AN AUSTRALASIAN; FELLOW-COMMONER OF SAINT PETER'S COLLEGE  En unquam patrios longo post tempore fines  Pauperis et tuguri congestum cespite culmen  Post aliquot mea regna videns mirabor aristas?  LONDON PRINTED for G. And W.B. WHITTAKER   AVE-MARIA LANE  1823   PREFACE. [iii]   In consenting to the publication of this poem the Author has been guided rather by the wishes of his friends than by his own; and he begs it to be distinctly understood that by this act he does not seek in anywise to impugn the decision of those learned and respectable judges who have awarded to Mr. Praed's poem the Chancellor's Gold medal. On the contrary he is free to admit that in smoothness and melody of versification Mr. Praed's Poem has undoubtedly the superiority over his:- and altho he can never be brought to consider mere music the first requisite of poetry:- altho' he can never fall into the ranks of those who    --- -by numbers judge a poet's song  And smooth or rough with them is right or wrong: [iv] -Yet-inasmuch as it is the province of a University not to create but to refine -not to inspire genius but to prune its luxuriances and to subject it to those rules which the great critics of ancient times and of modern have extracted from the pure models of Greece and Rome -he bows to their award if not with satisfaction at least with all due deference and humility. In the distribution of University-honours he admits that the judges should decide between competitors in poetry as if these were mere sculptors. They are not to inquire to whose lot a block of the richest marble has fallen but to ascertain from whom the crude substance without reference to its intrinsic qualities has received the highest polish. They are in fine to have regard to the artist and not to the material.   The Author however does not mean to imply that if his poem and Mr. Praed's had been analysed by other tests -by the fancy the vigour the accuracy or the art of their respective delineations the result of the adjudication would have been different. An implication thus arrogant would but ill become him; and he feels moreover that it would be the less decorous inasmuch as he knows that however well qualified he might be to decide between others in his own case he cannot be otherwise than a partial and incompetent judge. And here it is but justice to the umpires to notice that his poem as now published is not precisely in that form in which it was submitted to their consideration. Some trivial corrections alterations and omissions have been made in it by which. it is conceived that the texture of some few of its parts has been softened and improved. [v]  The author feels that his poem would have been much more perfect if some allusion had been made in it to the religious improvement which has been effected in Australasia and particularly to the great missionary efforts which are now in progress in the Polynesian Archipelago. An allusion of this nature as a friend has justly observed to him naturally belongs to the subject; and its omission too was the less excusable as it may be considered a species of ascription glebaeto the ancient and religious manor from which the subject sprung. He can only plead in apology the hurry in which his poem was written ; little more than three weeks having elapsed between its commencement and completion. Had he joined the University a month sooner both the argument and execution of the poem would have been very different.     [vii] DEDICATION MAJOR GENERAL MACQUARIE LATE Governor and Commander-in-Chief OF THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND ITS DEPENDENCIES.   MY DEAR SIR  ALTHOUGH I feel that I am scarcely warranted without your permission in thus bringing your name before the public; yet as you are now travelling on the Continent and as I could not therefore obtain that permission without some considerable delay -I have even ventured to inscribe to you this the first fruits of Australasian poesy without your sanction or privity. I have selected you for the patron of this crude effort not because I could not have found another foster father for this my poetic banding but because I cannot discover amidst the circle of my friends (and I am sure it would be useless to seek elsewhere) any one to whom its introduction to the public could be confided with equal propriety. [viii] In you Sir who for so many years have presided over the colonies which are included under the designation which is the subject of this poem ; who have watched over and promoted their growth rather with the warm solicitude of a parent than the frigid superintendence of a governor; who have conducted them through the helplessness of infancy to the first dawn of youth and independence; and who in resigning the task of their future guidance to other hands have still left behind you the warmest wishes for their future welfare and prosperity;- I know that every thing Australasian or connected with the honour and interests of Australasia will ever find a steady friend and zealous advocate. I feel therefore that in this conjuncture I could not apply to any one who would view this hasty production with equal partiality and be likely to give it that warm countenance and support which I fear will form its chief recommendation. [ix] But I will confess that a mere personal consideration of this nature is not the object this dedication. An Australasian myself I am anxious at a period when a few dastardly [?] and privileged calumniators have dared not openly but by insidious implication to impugn the leading measures which characterized your administration of the government of my country to testify my gratitude for the services which you have rendered to that country. and to assure you that however those services may for the instant be underrated here they will long live in the heartfelt recollection or those who were the objects of them and who have had practical proof of their wisdom and humanity. Nor do I utter any doubtful prophecy when I predict that his Majesty's ministers will soon form a more correct estimate of the zeal ability and integrity with which you have discharged the trust which your Sovereign reposed in you. Calumny is but the foul vapour of a day. As the envious mists that hide the sun quickly disappearand the glorious luminary breaks forth with renewed force and splendour: thus is it with the benefactors of mankind. Their intentions and acts may be obscured for a season; but the light of their deeds remains behind and warms and cheers through generations. [x] The treatment you have met with affords I admit but poor encouragement for your successors to tread in your footsteps; but for yourself Sir if you need any other consolation than that inward satisfaction which must result from the retrospect of a life passed like Bayard's sans peur et sans rèproche you should recollect that exalted worth and station have ever been obnoxious to envy and malevolence; and that these are the stings which Heaven has kindly attached to human celebrity that its possessor may not become too much enamoured of the glories of this world and forget that the pure unalloyed recompense of his toils is reserved for the next.   I feel that the poem to which I have thus annexed your name would have been more complete if it had contained some allusion not to those astonishing monuments which you designed and executed in so short a period in the vast Austral Wilderness -the forests you levelled the roads you formed the bridges you built the palaces you erected and the towns you founded (for however wonderful these are perishable memorials of which all traces will one day or other be obliterated;) -but to that high tone of feeling that great moral reformation of which both by your precept your example and your institutions you sowed the seeds among all classes of the colonists -seeds the fruits of which will descend to their remotest posterity. Hereafter when I shall revisit my country when the beneficial results of your liberal principles and philanthropic labours shall be present to my senses and when the sublimities of my native woods and forests shall lend their breathing inspiration to my verse I shall be better qualified to do justice to such a theme; and am resolved (if Heaven should spare my life a few years longer) to give this poem that extension of which the subject is susceptible and of which I consider it to be deserving. This is a debt Sir which Australasia owes you and which I the humblest of her sons if no other of them should in the meanwhile anticipate me will do my utmost to discharge.   That you may at length find in the bosom of your family that repose which a long life of honourable exertion deserves and which your declining years require is the fervent prayer not of myself alone but of all those of my compatriots who have Australasian hearts; and I am proud to say that there are few very few of them who do not fall under this denomination. [xii]  I remain.  MY DEAR SIR  Your faithful and obedient Servant.  W. C. WENTWORTH.     [1] AUSTRALASIA.   Land of my birth! tho' now alas! no more   Musing I wander on thy sea-girt shore   Or climb with eager haste thy barrier cliff   To catch a glimmer of the distant skiff   That ever and anon breaks into light   And then again eludes the aching sight   Till nearer seen she bends her foaming way  Majestic onward to yon placid bay   Where Sydney's infant turrets proudly rise   The new-born glory of the southern skies;-  [2] Dear Australasia can I e'er forget  Thee Mother Earth ? Ah no my heart e'en yet  With filial fondness loves to call to view  Scenes which though oft remember'd still are new;  Scenes where my playful childhood's thoughtless years   Flew swift away despite of childhood's tears;   Where later too in manhoods op'ning bloom   The tangled brake th' eternal forest's gloom   The wonted brook where with some truant mate   I lov'd to plunge or ply the treach'rous bait;   The spacious harbour with its hundred coves  And fairy islets-seats of savage loves.   Again beheld-restampt with deeper die   The fading visions of my infancy:   And shall I now by Cam's old classic stream   Forbear to sing and thou propos'd the theme ?   Thy native bard tho' on a foreign strand   Shall I be mute and see a stranger's hand   Attune the lyre and prescient of thy fame   Foretell the glories that shall grace thy name?  Forbid it all ye Nine! 'twere shame to thee   My Austral parent ; greater shame to me.  [3] Proud Queen of isles! Thou sittest vast alone   A host of vassals bending round thy throne:   Like some fair swan that skims the silver tide  Her silken cygnets strew'd on every side   So floatest thou thy Polynesian brood   Dispers'd around thee on the Ocean flood   While ev'ry surge that doth thy bosom lave   Salutes thee "Empress of the southern wave."  Say Muse when first of Europe's roving train   Burst on De Quiros' sight this island-main   What golden visions rose to fancy's view   The towns he plunde'd and the hosts he slew;   How on all sides the argent tripods shone   And temples richer than Peruvia's sun;   Till av'rice glow'd while busy thought unfurl'd   The imag'd treasures of the new-found world:   'Twas then triumphant hope thy power confess'd   Hush'd the rude tongue and calm'd the murm'ring breast;  Then still'd sedition's buzz each contrite soul   [4] With awe and gladness hail'd a chief's controul   And ev'ry peril ev'ry hardship past   Seem'd to have found full recompence at last.   Say too what terror fix'd the natives' eye   When first they saw emerging from the sky   That stranger bark in sullen silence sweep   A wrathful spirit o'er the troubled deep   Treading with giant stride the subject wave   The wind his herald and the tide his slave;  While onward stalking in terrific state   He loom'd portentful of impending fate.   Yet vain the dream of those the dread of these   For lo ! at length arriv'd with fav'ring breeze   De Quiros 'self directs the straining oar.   And leaps the foremost on the untrod shore-  Follow his band; but dark on ev'ry side   Repulsive forests frown with path untried   While from the hidden foe the frequent spear   Sings through their ranks and wakes unwonted fear;   Till struck with awe they cease the hopeless chase   And to the ship their sullen course retrace.  [5] Ye primal tribes lords of this old domain   Swift-footed hunters of the pathless plain  Unshackled wanderers enthusiasts free   Pure native sons of savage liberty   Who hold all things in common earth sea air   Or only occupy the nightly lair  Whereon each sleeps; who own no chieftain's pow'r   Save his that's mightiest of the passing hour;   Say - whence your ancient lineage what your name   And from what shores your rough forefathers came?  Untutor'd children fresh from Nature's mould   No songs have ye to trace the time of old:-  No hidden themes like these employ your care   For you enough the knowledge that ye are:-  Let Learning's sons who would this secret scan   Unlock its mystic casket if they can-  To your unletter'd tastes are sweeter far   The dance of battle and the song of war   'Mid hostile ranks the deadly spear to throw  Or see the foeman stagg'ring 'neath your blow: -  To you ye sable hunters sweeter too   To spy the track of bounding kangaroo  [6] Or long neck'd Emu:-quick with eagle gaze   Her path you follow thro' the tangled maze   O'er boundless wilds your panting game pursue   And come like trusty hounds at last in view;   Then creeping round her soon the forest's pride   Is hemm'd with bristly spears that pierce her side.   And now the labours of the chase being o'er   And Nature's keen suggestions heard no more   In uncouth numbers seated in a ring   Your ancient fathers' warlike feats ye sing   Or striking each his shield with clatt'ring lance   The early night exhaust in Pyrrhic dance.  Such mountain sons of freedom your delight  Such your rude sport by day your mirth by night;  Nor would you these few savage joys forego  For all the comforts all the arts bestow.  What if at times the barren chase deny  The scanty fare your niggard wilds supply!  What if to-day ye miss your sylvan feast!  To-morrow's meal shall thence derive a zest  Unknown to those who live in slothful ease  [7] Child of the heath the mountain and the breeze.   What if the wintry blast and pelting rain   Howl thro' the woods and inundate the plain!  To some near cave ye fly which jutting o'er  Wards from your naked limbs the drenching show'r;  While kindled faggots soon with crackling sound  Dispel the gloom and scatter warmth around   And nestling close each to his sable love  Ye sleep regardless of the storm above.  Hadst thou old Cynic seen this unclad crew   Stretch their bare bodies in the nightly dew  Like hairy Satyrs midst their Sylvan seats   Endure both winter's frosts and summer's heats;   Thy cloak and tub away thou wouldst have cast   And tried like them to brave the piercing blast.  Illustrious Cook ! Columbus off our shore  To whom was left this unknown world t' explore;   Its untrac'd bounds on faithful chart to mark.  And leave a light where all before was dark :-  And thou the foremost in fair learning's ranks  [8] Patron of ey'ry art departed Banks!   Who wealth disdaining and inglorious ease   The rocks and quicksands dar'd of unknown seas;-  Immortal Pair! when in yon spacious bay  Ye mooed awhile its wonders to survey   How little thought ye that the name from you   Its graceful shrubs and beauteous wildflowers drew   Would serve in after times with lasting brand   To stamp the soil and designate the land   And to ungenial climes reluctant scare   Full many a hive that else had settled there!  Ah why Britannia's pride Britannia's boast  Searcher of ev'ry sea and evry coast   Lamented Cook! thou bravest gentlest heart   Why didst thou fall beneath a savage dart?   Why were thy mangled reliques doom'd to grace   The midnight orgies of a barb'rous race?   Why couldst thou not thy weary wand'rings past   At home in honor'd ease recline at last   And like the happier partner of thy way   In cloudless glory close life's setting day ?  [9] And thou fam'd Gallic Captain la Perouse!  When from this Bay thou led'st thy fated crews  Did thy twin vessels sink beneath the shock  Of furious hurricane or hidden rock?  Fell ye o'erpower'd on some barbarian strand  As fell before Le Langles' butcher'd band?  Linger'd the remnants of thy shipwreck'd host  On some parch'd coral isle some torrid coast-  Where no green tree no cooling brook is seen  Nought living is or e'er before had been   Save some lone mew blown from her rocky nest   Had lit perchance her homeward wing to rest;-  Till gnaw'd by want with joy a comrade dead   They saw and rav'nous on his body fed   And soon his bones pick'd bare with famished eye   Each glar'd around then drew who first should die;  Till of thy ghastly band the most unblest   Surviv'd -sad sepulchre of all the rest ;   And now his last meal gorg'd with phrenzy fir'd   And raging thirst the last lorn wretch expir'd ?  Whate'er thy fate thou saw'st the floating arks  [10] That peopled this new world the teeming barks   That ardent Phillip led to this far shore   And seeing them alas! wert seen no more.   Ah! couldst thou now behold what man has done   Tho' sev'n revolving lustres scarce have run   How wouldst thou joy to see the savage earth   The smiling parent of so fair a birth !   Lo! thickly planted o'er the glassy bay   Where Sydney loves her beauties to survey   And ev'ry morn delighted sees the gleam   Of some fresh pennant dancing in her stream   A masty forest stranger vessels moor   Charg'd with the fruits of ev'ry foreign shore;   While landward-the throng'd quay the creaking crane   The noisy workman and the loaded wain   The lengthen'd street wide square and column'd front   Of stately mansion and the gushing font   The solemn church the busy market throng   And idle loungers saunt'ring slow among-  The lofty windmills that with outspread sail   Thick line the hills and court the rising gale  [11] Shew that the mournful genius of the plain  Driv'n from his primal solitary reign  Has backward fled and fix'd his drowsy throne  In untrod wilds to muse and brood alone.  And thou fair Port! whose triad sister coves   Peninsulate these walls; whose ancient groves   High tow'ring southward rear their giant form   And break the fury of the polar storm;-  Fairest of Ocean's daughters! who dost bend  Thy mournful steps to seek thy absent friend  Whence she-coy wild rose on her virgin couch   Fled loath from Paramatta's am'rous touch;   Skirting thy watry path lo ! frequent stand   The cheerful villas midst their well-cropp'd land;   Here lowing kine there bounding coursers graze  Here waves the corn and there the woody maize  And there the tall peach puts forth its pinky bloom  And there the orange scatters its perfume  While as the merry boatmen row along  The woods are quicken'd with their lusty song.-  [12] Nor here alone hath labor's victor band   Subdued the glebe and fertiliz'd the land;   For lo! from where at rocky Portland's head   Reluctant Hawkesbury quits his sluggard bed   Merging in ocean-to young Windsor's tow'rs   And Richmond's high green hills and native bow'rs  Thence far along Nepean's pebbled way   To those rich pastures where the wild herds stray  The crowded farm house lines the winding stream   On either side and many a plodding team   With shining ploughshare turns the neighb'ring soil   Which crowns with double crop the lab'rer's toil.  Hail mighty ridge! that from thy azure brow  Survey'st these fertile plains that stretch below  And look'st with careless unobservant eye  As round thy waist the forked lightnings ply  And the loud thunders spring with hoarse rebound  From peak to peak and fill the welkin round  With deaf'ning voice till with their boist'rous play  Fatigued in mutt'ring peals they stalk away  Parent of this deep stream this awful flood  [13] That at thy feet its tributary mud  Like the fam'd Indian or Egyptian tide  Doth pay but direful scatters woe beside;-  Vast Austral Giant of these rugged steeps  Within whose secret cells rich glitt'ring heaps  Thick pil'd are doom'd to sleep till some one spy  The hidden key that opes thy treasury;  How mute how desolate thy stunted woods  How dread the chasms where many an eagle broods  How dark thy caves how lone thy torrents' roar   As down thy cliffs precipitous they pour   Broke on our hearts when first with vent'rous tread   We dared to rouse thee from thy mountain bed!   Till gain'd with toilsome step thy topmost heath   We spied the cheering smokes ascend beneath   And as a meteor shoots athwart the night   The boundless champaign burst upon our sight   Till nearer seen the beauteous landscape grew.   Op'ning like Canaan on rapt Israel's view.   Ye tranquil scenes! too long to man unknown;  Your hills remain'd uncropp'd your dales unsown:  [14] Yet lo! at last upon yon distant stream  Increasing Bathurst's straggling honors beam  While thick o'erspreading the fresh-cultur'd glade  The ripen'd harvest bends its heavy blade   And flocks and herds in thousands strew'd around   Awake the woodlands with their joyous sound.  Soon Australasia may thy inmost plains   A new Arcadia teem with simple swains;   Soon a Lycoris' scorn again inspire   A Gallus' song to moan his hopeless tire   And while he murmurs forth his plaintive tale   The list'ning breezes waft it down the vale.  What though no am'rous shepherd midst thy dells   E'er charm'd responsive Echo from her cells;   What though nor liquid flute nor shriller reed   E'er shot their wild notes o'er thy silent mead ;   Thy blue ey'd daughters with the flaxen hair   And taper ankle do they bloom less fair   Than those of Europe ? do thy primal groves   Ne'er warble forth their feather'd inmates' loves ?  [15] Or say doth Ceres' or Pomona's reign   With scantier gifts repay thy lab'ring train ?   Ah ! no 'tis slav'ry's badge the felon's shame   That stills thy voice and clouds thy op'ning fame ;  'Tis this that makes thy sorrowing Judah weep  Restrain's her song and hangs her harp to sleep.  Land of my hope ! soon may this early blot  Amid thy growing honors be forgot:-  Soon may a freeman's soul a freeman's blade  Nerve ev'ry arm and glearn thro' ev'ry glade  Nor more the outcast convicts' clanking chains  Deform thy wilds and stigmatize thy plains:-  And tho' the fathers-these -of thy new race  From whom each glorious feat each deathless grace  Must yet proceed by whom each radiant gem  Be won -to deck thy future diadem;-  Did not of old th' Imperial Eagle rise  Unfurl his pinions and astound the skies?  Hatch'd in an aery fouler far than thine  Did he not dart from Tiber to the Rhine?  From Dacia's forests to fam'd Calpe's height  [16] Fear'd not each cow'ring brood his circling flight  From Libya's sands to quiver'd Parthia's shore  Mark'd not the scatter'd fowl his victor soar ?  From swift Euphrates to bleak Thule's rock  Did not opposing Myriads feel the shock  Of his dread talons and glad tribute pay  To 'scape the havoc of his murd'rous way ?  Yet ne'er my country roll thy battle-car   With deadly axle through the ranks of war;   Of foreign rule ne'er may the ceaseless thirst   Pollute thy sons and render thee accurst   Amid the nations; ne'er may crouch before   Invading legions sallying from thy shore   A distant people that shall not on thee   Have first disgorg'd its hostile chivalry.   In other climes Bellona's temples shine   Ceres' Pomona's Bacchus' Pan's be thine   And chaste Minerva's; from thy peaceful plains   May glory's star ne'er charm thy restless swains;   Ne'er may the hope of plunder lure to roam   One Australasian from his happy home;  [17] But rustic arts their tranquil hours employ   Arts crown'd with plenty and replete with joy:   Be theirs the task to lay with lusty blow   The ancient giants of the forest low   With frequent fires the cumber'd plain to clear   To tame the steed and yoke the stubborn steer   With cautious plough to rip the virgin earth   And watch her first born harvest from its birth   Till ting'd with summer suns the golden glade   Delight the hind and claim the reaper's blade:-  Theirs too the task with skilful hand to rear   The varied fruits that gild the ripen'd year;   Whether the melting peach or juicy pear   Or golden orange most engage their care:-  Theirs too round stakes or trellis'd bow'rs to twine   The pliant tendrils of the shooting vine;   And when beneath their blushing burdens bow   The yielding stems the gen'rous juice to stow   In copious jar which drain'd on festive day   May warm each heart and chase its glooms away:-  Theirs too on flow'ry mead or thimy steep   To tend with watchful dog the timid sheep;   [18] And as their fleecy charge are lying round  To wake the woodlands with their pipe's soft sound  While the charm'd Fauns and Dryads skulking near  Leave their lone haunts and list with raptur'd ear.-  Such be the labours of thy peaceful swains  Thus may they till and thus enrich thy plains  Thus the full flow of population's tide  Its swelling waters pour on ev'ry side : -  As on the topmost boughs of some old wood  When outcast rooks first hatch their infant brood  The tufted nests as buds each vernal year  In growing groups and thicker ranks appear  Till soon the spacious grove with clam'rous strife  Resounds throughout and teems with callow life; -  So Australasia may thy exil'd band  Spread their young myriads o'er thy lonely land  Till village spires and crowded cities rise  In thick succession to the trav'ller's eyes  And the grim wolf chas'd from his secret hold  No more with hungry howl alarm the fold.  [19] Nor be the rustic arts alone thy pride   The ambient ocean half thy care divide;   Whether thy roving sons on Tropic seas   Spread ev'ry sail to woo the sportive breeze;-  Or with bare poles and dauntless bosoms brave  The icy horrors of th' Antarctic wave ;   Till fruitful commerce in thy lap shall pour   The gifts of ev'ry sea and ev'ry shore.  And thou fair Science! pure ethereal light  Beam on her hills. and chase her mental night;  Direct her sons to seek the perfect day  Where Bacon trac'd and Newton led the way;  Till bright Philosophy's full orb arise  To gild her noon and cheer her ev'ning skies.  But mid the future treasures of their lore  Still foremost rank the Greek and Latian ore;  Still in the classic search the midnight oil  Be spent nor deem'd that pleasing labour-toil  Till to their sight reveal'd all glorious shine  The hidden riches of this ancient mine;  Whether they follow with admiring view  [20] The fam'd retreat of Xenophon's bold few;   Or in Calypso's isle or Ida's grove   And by Scamander's boiling eddies rove;  Or see the pilf'rer of th' empyrean fire   Chain'd to his rock endure the Thund'rer's ire;  Or hear the caverns of the Lemnian shore   Ring with the raving hero's anguish'd roar;  Or on Troezene's sands see Phaedra's hate   Draw on Hippolytus a guiltless fate;  Or with the glory of th'Augustan reign   Enraptur'd drink the sweets of Maro's strain;   Or borne along by Tully's whelming flood   Feel all his anger kindling in their blood   When to wide infamy and deathless shame   He dooms the plund'rer's or the traitor's name.  Celestial poesy! whose genial sway  Earth's furthest habitable shores obey;  Whose inspirations shed their sacred light  Far as the regions of the Arctic night  And to the Laplander his Boreal gleam  Endear not less than Phoebus' brighter beam-  [21] Descend thou also on my native land   And on some mountain-summit take thy stand;   Thence issuing soon a purer fount be seen   Than charm'd Castalia or fam'd Hippocrene;   And there a richer nobler fane arise   Than on Parnassus met th' adoring eyes.   And tho' bright Goddess on those far blue hills   That pour their thousand swift pellucid rills  Where Warragumba's rage has rent in twain   Opposing mountains-thund'ring to the plain   No child of song has yet invok'd thy aid   'Neath their primeval solitary shade-  Still gracious pow'r some kindling soul inspire   To wake to life my country's unknown lyre   That from creation's date has slumb'ring lain.   Or only breath'd some savage uncouth strain;-  And grant that yet an Austral Milton's song   Pactolus-like flow deep and rich along;-  An Austral Shakspeare rise whose living page   To Nature true may charm in ev'ry age ;-  And that an Austral Pindar daring soar   Where not the Theban Eagle reach'd before.  [22] And oh Britannia! shouldst thou cease to ride   Despotic Empress of old Ocean's tide;-  Should thy tam'd Lion spent his former might-  No longer roar the terror of the fight;-   Should e'er arrive that dark disastrous hour   When bow'd by luxury thou yield'st to pow'r;-  When thou no longer freest of the free   To some proud victor bend'st the vanquish'd knee;-  May all thy glories in another sphere   Relume and shine more brightly still than here;   May this thy last-born infant-then arise   To glad thy heart and greet thy parent eyes;   And Australasia float with flag unfurl'd   A new Britannia in another world.  A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE NOTORIOUS MUSQUITO  Now About To Suffer The Extreme Penalty For His Many Misdeeds.  Hobart Town 24th February 1825  Perhaps taken collectively the sable natives of this Colony are the most peaceable creatures in the universe. Certainly so taken they have never committed any act of cruelty or even resisted the whites unless when unsufferably goaded by provocation. The only tribe who have done any mischief were corrupted by the ruffian now about to suffer - Musquito a Sydney Black who with much and perverted cunning taught them a portion of his own villainy and incited them after a time to join his delinquencies.  With Musquito will be executed tomorrow morning the Van Diemen's Land native Black Jack his companion in crime. Black Tom another villain was brought up in this town by the late Mr. Birch from whose service Musquito enticed him but not before he had become addicted to rum and tobacco.  It may not be known that Musquito was once a civilised black that is he had lived among the Europeans of this Colony for a long period when he was employed by the police as a tracker more especially in the pursuit of the last and worst of the bushrangers Michael Howe. With the downfall of that desperate outlaw which put an end to free-booting in Van Diemen's Land Musquito's services were no longer required by the police; and to the shame of the Government this native who had jeopardised his safety over and over again in his dangerous calling of tracker was dismissed without any reward. As well (now being only a dismissed police-servant without protection) he suffered much abuse from the low police-hating element of Hobart Town. This odium was more than he could bear and exasperated at the indignities he was doomed to undergo he joined his fortunes with the Oyster Bay tribe of which in a short time he became leader and instructor in mischief.  The immediate crime for which Musquito was tried and found guilty was the murder of two men named respectively William Hollyoak and Mammoa. Black Jack is to be executed for the killing of a person named Patrick M'Carthy; but both ruffians are equally guilty of both misdeeds and many other murders of poor unfortunate stock-keepers in isolated parts of the Eastern coast.  At the trial of Musquito for the murder of William Hollyoak and Mammoa at Grindstone Bay on the 15th of November 1823 John Radford gave evidence as follows: - "I am and for six years have been a stock-keeper on the run of Mr. Cylus Gatehouse at Grindstone Bay I had a fellow servant named Mammoa who was a native of Otaheite. I knew the deceased William Hollyoak; he was a servant to Mr. George Meredith at Swan Port and came to our hut last November twelve-months. He said he was returning home from the Colonial Hospital where he had been an invalid and begged permission to remain a day or two as he was not very able to go further.  The morning after he came a party of the natives arrived with the prisoners at the Bar Musquito and Black Jack. Their number was about 65. Some of them had spears which were wooden ones might be six and others twelve feet long. I asked Musquito whither he was going and he said to Oyster Bay. He then begged for some provisions and I told him to follow me into the hut where he should have some bread and meat. After he had eaten he promised me he would not kill any sheep and he then retired for the night.  Next morning which was Friday he again came to the hut and brought two or three women. Some of the blacks were on the opposite side of the creek. He asked for and had some breakfast with me and in the afternoon went away with the others to hunt. In the evening he returned and I gave him some supper.  In the hut hung a small fowling piece and a musket the one by the bed and the other over it. Musquito handled the musket. On Saturday morning early the blacks were in the sheepyard sitting round a fire at their breakfast; this was about half past o'clock. At 6 they came to the hut with Musquito and Black Jack over the creek on the other side of which they had been at their diversions. Some of them however still remained in the sheep-yard which is about 10 yards from the hut. The natives who were playing might be 150 yards from the hut. [100]   I walked out after Mammoa to look at them leaving William Hollyoak in the hut but he came out after me. I had desired him to bring the guns should he leave the hut but he did not do so. At this time Musquito was on the opposite side of the creek with a number of blacks who were armed but he himself had no spear. The weapons he had were a waddy and a stick shaped like the axe of a tomahawk. Musquito then called Mammoa to the other side of the creek but first Mammoa asked if the blacks would spear him and Mosquito said No! He went over. They talked to Mammoa for a few minutes then took up their spears and walked towards the hut; but I got there first and found the guns had been taken away. I asked William if he had put away the guns but he said No! I then called Out the same enquiry to Mammoa and received the same reply.  At this moment Mammoa and Musquito were at the other side of the creek coming towards the hut; when they came opposite they got over. The other natives were by the hut door so that now the whole body were assembled. I had three kangaroo dogs and a sheep dog tied to a stump; and I saw Musquito untie them and take them into the sheep-yard. The natives stood with their spears raised and their points directed at William Hollyoak and me. I told him the best thing we could do was run away and that otherwise we should be killed. We accordingly did run.  One of the blacks threw a spear which pierced my side. I at first ran 2 or 300 yards but William could not keep up with me and he called out to me to return and pull a spear out of his back. I did so. The wound was 3 or 4 inches deep. As some of the natives armed with spears were still pursuing us - there might be from 30 to 40 - I again ran away and William after me. I received another spear in the back of my thigh. At this moment the blacks were within 30 yards of me.  William exclaimed 'Jack don't leave me.'  I made no answer but continued running till I heard him cry:  'Oh my God! the black-fellows have got me!' He was then about 200 yards behind me. I looked back.  The natives were close to him and I saw about six spears sticking in him (some in his side others in different parts of his body). He was throwing some rotten sticks at the blacks who appeared to be standing quiet. After looking at them a few minutes I recommenced my flight and some of them pursued me; eventually however I was lucky to escape."  Mr. George Wise accompanied by Mr Gatehouse some days later went out to Grindstone Bay. On the 23rd November they found the body of Mammoa in a pool of water dreadfully battered with no less than 37 wounds in the body. William Hollyoak's body was found in the place pointed out by Radford and it was half-consumed as if by vermin. It too was very battered.  In the August preceeding the above atrocity two stock-keepers to Mr. James Hobbs came to town from their master's extensive run at Eastern Marshes bringing intelligence that a tribe of no less than two hundred natives had made their appearance there and had killed by spear-wounds one of their fellow-servants named James Doyle. When the natives suddenly appeared near their hut the three stockmen had fired their muskets in the hope of frightening away the blacks. But owing to the fire - arms being improperly discharged all at once and not having time to charge them again the natives trained by Musquito suddenly advanced thereby compelling the stockmen to retreat hastily leaving on the ground their fallen companion Doyle who had received a spear; as well as leaving the cattle and premises at the mercy of the tribe.  Shortly after another poor fellow was speared by Musquito at Pitt Water. It seems that the man was enticed from his hut by Musquito cooying till he brought him within his reach when he was speared.  In the preceeding June occurred another tragedy in which Black Tom another notorious companion of Musquito was the principal offender. Mr Matthew Osborne a stock-owner residing in the district of Bath about 4 miles beyond Jericho returned home late in the evening of the 9th of June 1823. About an hour after his return an assigned servant to a settler named Beagent at the Tea-tree Brush called to offer Mrs. Osborne a kangaroo which she agreed to pay for in tobacce. After some conversation it transpired that he had some blacks with him.  "What could you mean by bringing them about the place" cried Mrs. Osborne "did you mean them to murder me?"  The man replied that they were tame and harmless but at that instant one of them appeared and Mr. Osborne recognised him as Black Tom. Mr. Osborne then said to the man;  "You must be a very bad fellow to consort with such a murderer especially as he knew how many acts of barbarity had lately been ascribed to the rascal."  "I don't care" replied the fellow. "I would not betray him for three pardons and £50 besides." [101]   Both Mr. and Mrs. Osborne were much alarmed but nothing transpired until next morning; when as Mrs. Osborne was churning in the dairy her husband rushed in and cried" Oh! Mary Mary the hill is covered with savages!"  She of course was agonised with dreadful fears of being murdered and was proceeding to run away when her husband exclaimed "Don't be frightened my dear but go into the house and I'll stand centry before it."  In a few minutes the blacks had arrived within 50 yards of the door Black Tom being their apparent leader; when Mr. Osborne addressed them by saying" What do you want? - Are you hungry?"  "Yes white man yes" was the reply.  "Lay down your spears" said Mr. Osborne "and light a fire and I'll give you some potatoes and butter."  "We will" answered Black Tom "If you white man put down your musket."  After a short discourse the gun and the spears were placed on the ground the blacks (each of whom carried a fire-stick) came close to the house were presented with some potatoes which they began to roast and seemed quite satisfied. Having eaten them they asked for more and Mr. Osborne went to get some. When he returned his musket was missing. Apprehensions of treachery were now awakened and he cried out "I'm a dead man !"  Black Tom then entered the house and commenced asking for everything he saw. He took Mr. Osborne's hat off his head and put it on his own. Two other blacks then grasped Mr. Osborne's hands as if to shake them in friendliness; when a third who stood at a little distance forcibly drove a spear into his back that convulsed him to such a degree that with a scream he bounded several yards and fell.  Mrs. Osborne rushed wildly out crying "Murder! murder !" was pursued and at length overtaken after receiving three desperate wounds in the side and neck. She was then beaten down with a waddy robbed of her silk neck-kerchief and nearly deprived of motion. After which although her loss of blood was considerable she crawled to the hut of Mr. John Jones which was at least three miles off; and where the most humane attention was shown her.  With laudable promptitude several persons went to the Osborne's house and in pursuit of the assassins but we regret to say at that time without success.  The grim chieftain Musquito was finally captured in August last year by the exertions of a young Van Diemen's Land black named Tegg the servant of Mr. Andrew Bent the proprietor and conductor of the Hobart Town Gazette and Genera! Advertiser and with the promise by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor of a boat should his mission be successful.  The young black accompanied by two Europeans named Godfrey and Marshall all well armed left Hobart Town for the usual retreat of the Oyster Bay tribe and by a stroke of good fortune found Musquito encamped with his two women by himself the rest of his tribe being in another glen. He had luckily no dogs and not expecting a hostile visit from anyone he was not on the watch as usual with him.  His women were at a little distance from the wretched bark weather screen they had put up for him to break the force of the cutting wind which was cold enough now. Tegg directed his companions to take post between the chief and his females which they did by stealthily advancing in the direction indicated by the young black but who himself made a cat-like movement towards the hovel in which Musquito lay half-roasting himself by the fire that blazed up merrily in front of it.  Musquito started from the ground at the first indication of approaching footsteps at sound of which Tegg darted forward to confront him before he seized his arms which Tegg divined but as it happened wrongly that the other had at hand: but so assured was the doomed man of security that he had not a spear in his camp. Tegg then fired at him sending a ball through his body from one barrel and two into his thighs from the other. But badly wounded as he was Musquito ran off but pain and loss of blood soon brought him to a stand.  In the meantime Godfrey and Marshall had taken both of Musquito's wives; and whilst the latter stood centry over the two prisoners Godfrey ran off to assist Tegg. On joining his youthful and sable leader he found Musquito wounded and at bay; - still making a poor effort to defend himself with sticks and stones. Seeing however the futility of resisting two armed men he at length surrendered. With great difficulty the wounded man was brought back to Hobart Town where the party arrived on the 12th. of August last.  Thus ended the infamous career of this notorious and wily savage for which he is now to pay the price in full tomorrow morn.  Ten Days Stepping it out on the TREAD MILL.  One of the larky boys John Wilson prisoner of the crown was charged last Monday with having furiously driven a chaise in the streets of Sydney to the great danger of the passengers and moreover with wantonly and cruelly beating the horse he was driving in the said chaise and himself in a great state of intoxication.  This stepper-out was sentenced by His Honour to like-wise step it out for ten days at the tread-mills newly erected at Carter's Barracks.  We are pleased to observe that these discipline mills which are productive of obvious utility in grinding corn will be the means of curbing such thoughtless behaviour as that mentioned above. The punishment consists of perpetual climbing without being able to idle away a single moment. It is a kind of hard labour to which everyone would have a natural dislike and yet such as everyone can perform without previous instruction.  The tread-mill much resembles a water-wheel. It consists of long horizontal steps and it is moved round by the prisoners treading on the steps successively; a rail is extended at the top of the wheel from end to end by which the treaders support themselves.  The tread-mill was invented by Mr William Cubitt Civil Engineer of Ipswich and the first constructed was at Brixton gaol for the employment of thirty men. They have now been adopted in a considerable number of gaols in England but those built last year in Sydney by Mike Mennis at Carter's Barracks are for ten and fifteen men respectively; Mr E. G. Stack has been appointed Superintendent of Tread-mills in Sydney.  The ditty printed overleaf is in great demand at present in England where the tread-mill - that terror to evil doers - has excited much attention.  Sydney July 21 1825  BOTAMY BAY Or the Wife of Four Husbands!!!!  Police Office Chester Sept. 24 1825.  The one he was an Irishman Another was a Scott  The next he was a Dutchman But the Scott was best I wot.  The Overseer of St John's Parish conducted before the Magistrates an elderly-looking woman in order to prove her settlement previous to receiving parochial relief. - Town Clerk: "What's your name?" With a very significant look the applicant said  'Well my name your honour's a very ugly name - its Kitty Gravy (dropping a curtsey) I come from the Vale of Clwyd."  "Are you a married woman?"  "Married! O Yes; I are be married very often; I have had four husbands and the last he is in Liverpool Infirmary with a broken leg and his name's John Joachim Gravy; a very ugly name isn't it your Worship?"  "Where were you married at?"  "Married at? Why I was married at Botamy Bay!"  "At Botany Bay? Do you mean Botany Bay opposite Queen-street adjoining the Canal?"  "Pooh no; I mean Botamy Bay - the real Botamy Bay 30000 miles off your honour!"  "And what took you there ?"  "'Pon my word they transported me for seven years for doing nothing - nothing at all; God knows what for I can't tell. I never stole nothing in my life."  Mrs. Kitty Gravy here inserted her hand into her sinister pocket and produced several documents including a number of receipts for Poor Books and a certificate from Sir Charles Brisbane Governor General of New South Wales October 25 1804. On the back of it was endorsed her personal description and on the Town Clerk reading the passage "fair complexion" Mrs. Kitty looking very knowing and with a shrug of her shoulders exclaimed "Aye but its withered now."  She then stated that Gravy was a native of Hamburgh and was a free settler at New South Wales residing at Wollomoolo. She was asked why she did not go to her fourth and last spouse at Liverpool and she excused herself by stating that she did not like to go there on account of crossing the water and besides he was better off than she was although he had a broken leg and hobbled crutches.  Mrs. Kitty appeared to be in high glee during the whole of her examination which called forth rebuke from Alderman Bowers for her levity "Thank your Honour (Curtseying) I'm much obliged; I paid £100 for my passage home and every one loves poor Kitty. I'm all fair yea and nay your Honour's."  It was insinuated that Mrs. Kitty (who was years old) lived with a Frenchman in Brighton but she repelled the charge indignantly.  Mrs. Kitty now proceeded to recapitulate the period of her nuptials in chronological order but we shall be content with the following: - "My first husband was James Miller and he was a Scotchman; Thomas Wilson was my next and he was a Hollander in the Navy; my third husband John Grace an Irishman from the County of Wicklow; and my fourth was John Gravy a German; so you see (said Mrs. Kitty with all the naivety of an accomplished punster) that for my last two husbands I had Grease and Greavy! Gravy was a sailor in the Press Gang and I like a fool married him. But my first husband the Scotchman was worth them all."  "When were you first married?"  "Eh! The Lord knows it's a long while ago but I've got a daughter at Little Neston 46 years old with six children. When I landed in England two years ago I was robbed of £170 in London."  Mrs Gravy's fingers were decorated with a variety of rings some of them silver.  The Full Particulars of the Sudden and Awful MURDER of HUNT!  THE ASSOCIATE OF THURTELL & PROBERT  With a Narrative of the Mutiny on Board the MARQUIS of HUNTLY  ON WHICH OCCASION 17 CONVICTS WERE SHOT AND HUNG.  In giving an account of the Murder of Hunt we cannot avoid casting a retrospective view at the circumstances which led to his transportation. We are far from being superstitious yet we must acknowledge that it appears to us that the hand of heaven interferes. - One of his associates in Crime Hung - Another! saved for the mere purpose of becoming King's evidence and again transgressed and at this very moment waiting the punishment of his crime and himself Murdered before he reached the destination of his banishment - thereby terminating the existence of those who planned and put into execution one of the most cold blooded Murders perhaps the annals of crime ever related.  When the Marquis of Huntly Convict Ship sailed from England she had upwards of 200 prisoners on board among which perhaps there were never a more desperate set of villians in one vessel before. Not a day or scarcely an hour was passed without some fresh tokens of villainy being practised; there were amongst the rest a number which seemed to bid all law at defiance and even dared the sailors to acts of hostility.  The most severe and strict discipline was obliged to be observed towards them; in short their overbearing and turbulent actions called forth the greatest energy and courage of the captain and crew to keep them in the least subjection. In many instances the conduct of a few were such that the Captain would have been fully justified in causing them to be hung at the yard-arm. But he being naturally of a mild and peaceable disposition shuddered at the idea of taking away the life of a fellow creature when it was possible to avoid it; therefore he only put into action every coercice [sic] measure that he thought might be the means of bringing them to a sense of their duty.  He talked to them persuaded and did actually everything in his power to make them change their conduct. It was oftentimes very dangerous for one of the ships crew to go into the hold where they were confined. A single person would stand a risk of loosing his life amidst a set of such desperadoes as were there together. - Their conduct at length grew so desperate as to oblige a threat from the Captain that if they did not desist from such ungovernable behaviour he would order the centinals to fire on them.  It does not appear that Hunt took any active part or was a ringleader in their tumultuous proceedings; he was always looked upon by the crew as a well behaved and gentlemanly man yet it was not deemed prudent to observe any particular degree of leniency towards him lest the others should take offence at it and being the cause of giving them some shallow plausability for their behaviour; everything in short was done for them that was possible and every precaution taken to prevent giving them offence. It was the real opinion of the Captain that they would mutinize whenever an opportunity should offer therefore he was on the alert and the crew who had every instruction necessary was always ready for a surprise.  Some time after a lad of the name of Melluish (a convict) was taken very ill in fact so ill that it was necessary to take to what the sailors called the dyeing pit. During his illness and a short time before the poor fellow's death which took place about three weeks after he discovered to the Surgeon that it was the intention of the prisoners whenever a squal should spring up and when all the sailors was engaged about the ship to burst open the hatchway murder the Captain and some of the crew take possession of the ship and commence piracy at once that there being several old sailors among the prisoners it would be very easy to manage the vessel; the greater difficulty would be in getting her in their possession. [106]   They had been a long time preparing instruments to open the hatchway which would be easily effected in the midst of the confusion of the sailors every thing might soon be done. - Blood and Murder was to be the order of the day. Not a single individual was to be saved who dared to oppose their enterprise; it was even agreed that if any of their own companions hesitated or was inactive at the mutiny that those who observed it was at full liberty to murder them.  They obliged each other to take the following oath - at being made acquainted with the intention of the principal mutineers - that they hoped should they betray their companions in misery never to experience one moment of happiness! that they called down the vengeance of God to strike them dumb blind and deaf and afflict them with some loathful disease and that they should be punished eternally in Hell fire! with several more wishes of the most diabolical and shocking description. There was not a single prisoner confined who had not this oath administered him at the same time standing on a Bible with a Testament in one hand a Prayer Book in the other and one of each placed upon their head in order as they said to be surrounded with the words of their God.  These particulars being made known to the Captain he was satisfied at once his suggestion was right and that the conduct he had pursued was proper. And he determined not to relax in his severity towards them and always to keep himself and crew prepared for any surprise. - Every sailor in the vessel was made known the intention of the prisoners therefore they was always well armed and ready for an encounter of the worst description.  A few days had only passed before a gale sprung up blowing hard North West. - It continued for several days until at length it had become a compleate hurricain. - This was an opportunity not to be missed by the prisoners - and there is no doubt they would have commenced their diabolic proceeding before the before time but the vigelence of the crew kept them kept I in awe [sic] but it appears that there determination was made either to loose [sic] their lives or obtain their liberty on the fourth night of the gale at about eleven o'clock.  A Gun was fired by one of the centinels which alarm occasioned every man to leap from their hammocks and be up on deck instanteously so sudden indeed was their approach that it put it out of the power of the prisoners even to open a single barrier. However exertions to force the main hatchway was such that the guards placed above was necessitated to fire on them which caused them to fall back and cry for quarter.   In the approach of morning the sight below was horrible five or six was observed to be laying dead immediately under the hatchway and several crying that they were wounded. - No person however deared to enter the hole untill the morning of the second day when the prisoners gave the most solemn promise that they would desist from any hostility. - The guard on this enterd [sic] - handcuffed and pinioned most of the prisoners and began to remove the wounded men and the dead bodies among which Hunt was one a musket ball had entered the top of his head and pieced directly through the brain which caused his immediate death.  A pardon was then offered to all except the men actually engaged as ringleaders in the mutiny on a provision that they would give up their names. A hundred voices was raised at the moment declaring themselves ready to acquiesce in any thing the Captain pleased. On silence being observed an investigation took place when it appeared that the whole disturbance was caused by twelve of the most disperate two of which had already meet [sic] the fate they deseved [sic] the others was immediately taken and hung at the yard-arm. It does not appear that Hunt made himself conspicuous in the affray - but being unfortunate under the hatchway when the guards fired - received his death by that circumstance as soon as possible we will give further particulars.  FINIS.  CHUBB Printer 63 Long Lane.  The day on which the brig Wellington was to have made Norfolk Island was the time fixed by the prisoners she was carrying for putting into effect the plan for mutiny contrived by their ringleader Walton. At noon the Captain (Harwood) was employed in taking "sights". Two soldiers were parading the deck; Walton was sitting either on or contiguous to the bowsprit; the troops were in the forescuttle; six prisoners were on deck; the sergeant went below. No sooner did Walton observe all things were so far favourable than the signal was given - the sentinels on deck were secured and deprived of their arms; the Captain was made prisoner; the hatch of the fore-scuttle in which the military were all pent up was closed in the act of doing which one of the prisoners was wounded in the shoulder as the soldiers immediately commenced firing; the sailors were in a like manner secured by being forced into the prison hold at the same time that Walton and his party liberated their fellow-prisoners from confinement. The vessel was immediately in a state of confusion and in less than a minute the pirates had complete possession of the vessel.  Walton took upon himself the command - another of the name of Douglas was appointed chief mate - Edwards alias Flash Jack became second mate and Clay contented himself with mere stewardship. No violence was offered to any one on board after the capture. We had nearly forgotten to mention that the soldiers kept firing away through the bulk-head into the hold until they understood that the crew were in danger of being shot. The military were divested of their accoutrements and red coats in which the pirates became dressed and in less than a quarter of an hour the sergeant had the mortification to behold all his stripes decorating one of the pirates who lorded it away at a great rate.  Being short of water and in want of a nautical almanack and a chart they resolved on making for New Zealand with the view of obtaining by fair or foul means those requisites from any whaler that might be in the way as their ultimate destination was South America.  It is worthy to remark that so divided was this motley group there were at one time no less than three different parties - among the prisoners there was the neutral party there was a Roman Catholic party there was a Protestant party who had command; and the Catholic brethren had formed the plan among themselves of taking the vessel from their Protestant brethren and forcing them to walk the plank. But the call at New Zealand upset all this policy.  At 9 A.M. of Friday 3rd of January the brig Wellington entered the Bay of Islands where she found at anchor the Sisters Captain Duke and the Harriet Captain Clark and these captains boarded her. Captain Duke enquired of Walton whence he came? Walton replied from New South Wales bound to the River Thames with troops and provisions. The two captains had no suspicion whatever that the Wellington was in the hands of the pirates although they thought the manner in which they managed the vessel very strange.  In the course of the day Mr. Fairburn of the Mission Station having some business with Captain Duke boarded the Sisters and enquired the name of the new arrival. Captain Duke replied he could not tell but supposed her to be the brig Wellington from Port Jackson. Mr. Fairburn and Captain Duke then went on board to see if there were any letters for the Missionaries; when Mr. Fairburn recognised a person who had formerly been a painter at Sydney named Clay and Captain Duke also recognised another who had formerly been condemned in England and was to have been sent to Norfolk Island. This excited their suspicions that the vessel had been run away with from Port Jackson; for the people on deck in soldiers' jackets had no appearance whatever of regular troops.  After leaving the brig they consulted together on what they had observed and Captain Duke sent a polite note to the Commander to come on board to dine as they wanted to learn who he was and what he was about. Walton however declined the invitation but said he would come for an hour in the afternoon. He did not come according to promise and Captain Duke and the others went on board the Wellington.  They found everything in great confusion what with watering the vessel and trading with the natives. They thought it very strange that as she was only proceeding to the Thames the brig should be taking in such a quantity of water to supply them on so short a passage. During the time Captains Duke and Clark were in the cabin they observed a number of counter-signs passing amongst the company which consisted of about 10 persons and a guard. Mr. Williams came on board whilst they were there and put a few questions to the Commander which he answered in a very unsatisfactory manner.  As the visitors were leaving a gentleman who proved to be Captain Harwood found an opportunity of whispering to Captain Clark and also to the Surgeon of the Harriet telling them who he was and that the vessel had been taken from him. Mr. Fairburn also had a note slipped into his hand acquainting him that the brig was from Port Jackson bound to Norfolk Island with prisoners and provisions; that on the 21st of December they rose upon the guard.  Walton was invited to visit the Sisters and when he came on board Mr. Williams put some close questions concerning the brig and also their intentions. He prevaricated a good deal and when Mr. Fairburn produced the note which he had been privately given him by Captain Harwood he was struck with astonishment but did not attempt to deny the truth of the statement. He confessed the whole of the transaction as to the taking of the vessel. A few he said were wounded but none were murdered. He observed also that he little thought of being so trepanned [sic] but that he should be resigned to his fate. [116] He was told to consider himself a prisoner but he was allowed to depart between 10 and 11 o'clock as the brig could not proceed to sea that night.  On Saturday the 6th at daylight the people on board the Sisters got the guns on deck and made all ready in case the pirates should make any attack. At 8 A.M. the brig bore down close alongside the Harriet and let go the stern anchor. The pirates wanted several articles and offered provisions and tools but the Captain resolved to have no transactions whatever with them. "Who is to recompense me" said Captain Clark "for the probable loss of my ship?" "And who will repair our fractured limbs or reward us" replied the Harriet's men "if we trouble ourselves with such affairs?"  These remarks had a great influence on the cautious mind of Captain Duke who was willing to extricate his fellow-subjects from their awful conditions but who at the same time trembled for the consequences. The chief mate of the Sisters Mr. Tapsell and the crew reprobated the idea of allowing their country-men to be carried away by pirates from under their very noses. The British feelings that pervaded all the hearts of the Sisters' gallant tars were not to be repressed and they made preparations to carry them into effect as soon as Captain Duke left the ship. The Harriet however was inflexible - her captain and crew were willing to yield the honours to the Sisters.  When Captains Duke and Clark went on board the Wellington Mr. Tapsell got a spring upon the Sisters' cable this action soon being discovered by the pirates who drew Captain Duke's attention to it. The native girls told the pirates that the chief mate meant to fire the guns into them. However they allowed Captain Duke to depart on giving his word that it was not his intention to fire. When he returned on board the Sisters some rather strong language passed between the magnanimous Mr. Tapsell and Captain Duke who said his life had been placed in jeopardy by the chief mate's action and he reported his promise against interference with the pirates. But the chief mate and the crew not having plighted their faith to so lawless a banditti avowed their readiness to sacrifice their lives rather than surrender their character as Englishmen in allowing such a host of incorrigible fellows to escape. Captain Duke was grieved with the conduct of his mate and crew - but they were inexorable and were prepared to leave the ship rather than abandon the hope of recapturing the brig and extricating innocent men from destruction: Captain Duke thereupon laudable gave the command to "Fire!" when all was ready.  On Sunday the 7th at 4 A.M. the Wellington hove short and loosed the jib. At the Sisters hoisted her colours and fired the first shot. The pirates hoisted no colours and at the second shot from the Sisters the chief part of the pirates ran below and some jumped overboard. The Sisters continued firing until the Wellington's deck was cleared but when she ceased a number of pirates again mustered on deck when the Sisters fired one more shot. The pirates never fired any and they received a considerable deal of injury both in the hull masts and rigging. The Harriet joined in the firing towards the end.  Correspondence then ensued between Captains Duke and Clark on the one side and Walton the Walton pirate leader on the other regarding the terms of surrender. It was finally agreed that the pirates would be allowed to land at the Bay of Islands on condition that the brig be given up. At 3 P.M. the pirates began to disembark the guards were released and at 4 Captains Duke and Clark had possession of the brig.  As soon as the pirates landed the natives commenced stripping them it being impossible to prevent them from doing so. Forty-one pirates landed -but twenty-five prisoners were still in irons.  On Tuesday the 9th the natives brought a pirate on board the brig - Douglas who acted as the chief mate - and the natives received 50 lbs of powder for his apprehension. Each succeeding day the natives brought on board the remaining pirates in groups of three and four and in every case they were rewarded by powder or muskets. On Monday the 15th the natives brought on board John Walton and Charles. Clay late pirate Captain and Purser and as they understood that these two were superiors on board they would not deliver them up without receiving 100 lbs of powder and two muskets. By Sunday the 20th thirty-one pirates had been captured.  Monday the 22nd at daylight the Harriet got under weigh and departed. A strong guard was kept over the prisoners who found two days later that eleven had cut their irons. They were tied up and received each of them two dozen lashes with the exception of a man named Henry Drummond who after receiving three lashes begged to be let down and that he would confess all he knew. He then told of the prisoners' plan to again take the brig and then to seize the Sisters. Drummond was kept on deck as the other prisoners swore they would massacre him.  On Sunday the 28th the Sisters got under weigh in company with the Wellington. Four prisoners were allowed on deck at a time when their irons were inspected but none were found cut. On February 3rd the cooper's mate gave information that the prisoners had been consulting the previous night how they could best take the ship as two or three more days would bring them to Sydney. The cooper's mate they thought was the only person they could trust to render them any assistance. If he would do so they promised he should live in the cabin and have all the money found in the ship. As a result the prisoners were all handcuffed behind and double ironed. Walton and Clay were bolted to the deck as the best means for securing these desperate ruffians.  The Sisters and Wellington arrived in Sydney Cove 9th of February 1827 without further incident. Thus the pirates but for these exertions on the part of the Sisters' crew might have been successful in eluding the condign punishment which justly awaits them for mercy to most of them on this side of the grave is beyond all hope.  An ACCOUNT of a WELL Matched FIGHT between A young terrier bitch belonging to Mr Ferguson and an opossum brought from New South Wales by Mr Jenkins.  News has been received from London of this extraordinary match which excited exceeding interest amongst the sporting fraternity in the Old Dart.  Local boys need no introduction to the fighting attributes of the Vulpine Opossum our bushy-tail whose remarkably strong claws have left many a mark on incautious Europeans both man and dog.  Mr Ferguson's young terrier bitch was about sixteen months old liver and white weight about 25.5 lbs. Mr Jenkin's opossum from New South Wales was supposed to be about three years old and weighed 27 lbs.  The bitch and opossum fought on the 6th January 1829 and the day being very rough the fight was obliged to take place in a barn instead of Hempton Green Norfolk as had been contemplated to the vexation of numbers who could not get admission at any price; so much stir did the affair make in the neighbourhood.  A great deal of betting took place previous to the match at guineas to pounds Possey the favourite. Some of our Norfolk knowing and learned country swells who were acquainted with the nature of the beast (after seeing the excellent trim he was got into by his trainer Jemmy my Neal) even went as high as three to two and it was said that even two to one was offered on the New South Wales favourite.  ROUND 1ST. Possey looked very fit shook his bushy tail and darted at the bitch as quick as lightning caught her by the shoulder and tore a piece out of it; he then drew back made another spring at the fore leg but missed it. Meantime the bitch was not idle - she made several attempts at a hold but the gentleman's furry coat deceived the poor bitch who brought away a mouthful of his outer garment every time she sprung at him; at length she caught him where the Irishmen put their lundy and punished him severely while he returned by making use of his claws with which he scratched dreadfully. At length he got away and was taken to his house; and after two minutes rest began  ROUND 2ND. Both darted at one another their heads met and both were knocked over. Returning Possey seized the bitch by the throat and threw her quite over him flung out his hind feet and almost knocked all the wind out of the bitch (four to one on Possey freely offered - no takers). The bitch fought shy till she got a little wind then made for him seized his proboscis and pulled him about in good style in spite of his claws which made dreadful havoc with the bitch; Possey got away and was taken to his house. This lasted nine minutes and a half.  ROUND 3RD. The bitch made first play and began by taking Mr Possey by the nose where she held him and pulled him about for two minutes and a half he keeping his claws in exercise all the while when she lost her hold and sprung at his neck (which in the previous round she had cleared of the fur) which she lacerated in a shocking manner when he got away and was led to his house. Possey became rather weak from the loss of blood but was restored by something being applied to his nostrils.  ROUND 4TH AND LAST. The bitch again made for the foreigner's neck where she left the marks of her toothy work; she then seized him by the shoulder got an excellent hold and for the first time Possey uttered a dismal yell and on getting away made for his house from whence he could no more be brought to the scratch. The bitch was consequently declared the winner.  The fight lasted thirty-seven minutes. 