 january 7th 1826  The festivities of the season commenced at Denham Court on the second inst. (the first being on Sunday) and were kept up with great spirit by a party of sixteen from Sydney who were met here by all our country neighbours - On Monday we set down at dinner forty in number - sixteen of whom were accommodated with beds in the house besides fifteen servants in the kitchen and out houses. ...  jany 10  The new Colonial Secretary has arrived and Major Goulburn has given up to him the cares and duties of an office of great responsibility during the later administration. - 'Nothing can promise more favourably than the energy with which General Darling has commenced his Government - that he is a man of business we have every reason to believe and that he will cause "everyman to do his duty' we may be allowed to anticipate from the prompt government orders for the reorganization of the several Public Departments. [83]  jany 26  I don't know how some of our great men will relish the late General Orders but I imagine many of them will be quite unprepared to comply with them...  During the Administration of Sir T B everything was left to the Heads of Department but when the murmur of discontent rose at the inefficient measures adopted these petty sovereigns would willingly have shifted the burden from their own shoulders - General D if I mistake not will be Governor in Chief and the Heads of Departments will no longer be allowed to consider themselves as so many Heads of the Colony whether they be the Accreditted Agents of the British Government "or the trusty and well beloved of George the Fourth" or our own Kings' own "Visitors" all will find themselves subjected to the power of Major General Ralph Darling etc. etc. I confess for my part I would prefer one Tyrant if needs must to half a score petty usurpers. -   Feby 20th  The Governor has begun by giving dinner parties to about 20 persons and seems inclined to be sociable with the better part of the inhabitants: It is said Mrs D is rather gay and is fond of dancing - the young folks will have reason to rejoice should anything like the old times in Governor Macquarie's day be revived.  March 5  This is the anniversary of our landing in this Colony and 12 years has made such an alteration in everything here that a comparison would be very amusing say "Sydney in the year 1816" and "Sydney in the year 1826" or we will take a less period and say 1817 - the year which the Bank of N. S. Wales was established: by the end of this year it is believed there will be three Banks three newspapers and three steam engines - Bob Howe says ADVANCE AUSTRALIA but this is advancing with rapid strides.  March  The Governor's Orders appear to be issued without respect to persons the highest in office or the meanest subordinate appear to be equally called upon equally required to do their duty. I for my part admire the prompt measures of General Darling he requires of every man to do his duty as it is pointed out to him: he does not need any person to tell him what is necessary but appears to be a man of business equally for arranging and carrying into execution. - [84]  March 15  The inhabitants of the country are once more restored to a state of security by the Execution of some and the capture of almost all that desperate hords of bushrangers which have for many months been the scourge of the country - the efficient and prompt measures adopted by General D on this occasion will lend much to keep alive that respect and veneration for his character which already begin to manifest themselves toward him as Governor.  March  The School of Industry patronised by Mrs D seems better adapted in its plans as a system for the Orphan Institution and could be carried with effect without any additional subscription - a plan of so much utility in a new Colony like this as "A School for the Education of Female Servants" will however not want support I feel convinced while the F' Ladies are only called upon for their one pound one and a little of their time and attention and whence their names are associated in the same list with those of the polished the feeling the benevolent and the conscientious Mrs A Mrs B Mrs C Mrs D and altho I entertain little hope that in the present generation it will be of much service while the population continues as about [NN] male to one female yet as the girls will be taught to do something useful they may transmit their knowledge to their offspring and in time become a superior race to those who lounge over the shop doors in Sydney: A half dressed or over dressed generation - who seem born for no other purpose but to gossip with their male acquaintances. -   April 6th  We are beginning to have the Australian newspaper now regularly twice a week and it is expected the newspaper called the Monitor will shortly make its appearance. I hope it will be a weekly paper - while we had but one "Howes Weekly Gazette" we looked for it with great avidity when two of each weekly papers appeared we read them with great interest but now we have four each week they frequently lay on the table for days without being perused. I indeed have lost all feeling of interests in the Australian since W has withdrawn his name as Editor.  April 20  We have had almost incessant rain for ten days past and the roads are nearly impassable this is a great disappointment to us country folk who have invitations to Government House on 26th inst. and had the weather been favourable it would without doubt have been one of the most crowded partys ever witnessed in this Country - every person of respectability is asked and all would be anxious to show their loyalty by taking their bow at Government House not only in honour of His Majesty's Birthday but to make Courtesys to His Excellency who is known to be a great stickler for all the forms of Etiquette of which he is a perfect pattern in his own conduct never sparing himself where any duty demands his time his ear or his eye. [85]   May 12  The Aborigines Natives having assembled in unusual numbers in the County of Argyle in the neighbourhood of Lake George and having evinced some hostility to the stock keepers of particular stations the Govr. in his usual prompt manner has despatched a Detachment of the 40th and 57th Regts with instructions to the Officers in Command to put themselves in communication with the Magistrates of that district. This hostility on the part of the Natives will I have no doubt be found as it ever has been to originate in outrages committed on them by the stock keepers an ignorant and brutal race who by their interference with the females of the aborigines provoke them to revenge - The Governor's Order upon this occasion is humane and liberal promising equal justice to all. I doubt not the sight of soldiers will strike a panic in these poor simple creatures and the Officer in Command is a man of experience who will fully investigate the cause of their present hostility and should he find that the stockmen and shepherds have committed any violence or ill treated any of these inoffensive creatures he will I earnestly hope bring them forward that they may receive the punishment due to their cruelty.  May 19th  There are ARCH FIENDS in this place who seek to ruin all in which they are not themselves concerned - the Bank of N. S. Wales has been placed in rather a tottering state by the machinations of those enemys to mankind but the Champion of Australia has been a match for them and the impartiality of Government in rendering the Bank prompt assistance has averted for the present the evil apprehended. The Directors will or ought to learn prudence. They MUST limit their discounts or we shall not have a Dollar left in the Country.  May 24  The new Journal the MONITOR made its appearance on the 19th it appears moderate in its policies but from my own knowledge of the Editor I know which side he is likely to enlist upon and it is worthy of remark that the Aristocratic party have no advocates in our journalists - a symptom that this party is not very popular - There was a rumour some months ago of a newspaper to be Edited by a certain great man and supported by his partisans nor do I believe the idea is altogether abandoned. [86]   May 30th  The Council it would seem by a General Order in this weeks Gazette are quite tired of the applications for female servants being addressed to them and it is now simply specified that families who are in want of female servants may be supplied from the prisoners lately arrived in the Ship Lady Rowena describing what sort of servants are wanted and which application is to be addressed in writing to the Principal Superintendant of Convicts.  june 9th  The first Amateur Concert on the 7th was as well attended as could reasonably be expected considering it was not set on foot by the quality of Sydney; but as this is an amusement in which taste and science are combined there is every hope it will be patronised by those who give the tone to fashion. The Subscription list has been augmented by one or two names of great respectability whose families it is said intend honouring the next Concert which is fixed for the 21st.  june 21  I had promised to visit the Infant School to see the Gas Light introduced into the Colony by a man named Wilson and which altho on a small scale at present is capable of being extended if he meets with encouragement. I also wished to see the inside of the Scotch Church which I am told is a very neat and commodious place of Worship and is to be opened for Public Service very soon it is a pretty plain but substantial building and has a most beautiful and commanding situation.  july 29  Much as our present Governor is to be admired for his energy and decision of character yet there has arisen some discontent lately among the newly arrived emigrants for hitherto General D has not given a single Grant of Land and consequently those settlers who arrived in the beginning of the year are seeing their finances daily diminish without an immediate prospect of getting on a Farm of their own - It is an old saying "While the grass grows the stead starves". Thus while Commissioners are preparing to start in order to locate and value the lands - while the members of the Land Board are suggesting the best method to apportion grants etc. etc. a poor man with a family or a young man with little property is hanging on in expectations of what when he gets it he will have no means left to stock or cultivate. (a farm)  This very serious grievance should be represented to the Governor for he is possibly ignorant how much this delay costs those who suffer by it. [87]  The Chamber of Commerce (a new institution) will be likely to benefit the Colony very materially the members being respectable wealthy and effective and for the most part free of that party spirit which rages and has always raged in this community.  Sept. 10th  I do not quite agree with the Monitor this week in thinking a person with a capital of 750£ can do better for his family by "Renting a farm in England or Scotland" than by getting the Grant of one here because tho' in the present time the poor settler may have some difficulty to contend with it is next to impossible they can endure besides with all the disabilities the industrious cultivator has many advantages in emigrating here he would look in vain for in almost every other part of the world - The climate and the soil are good - fuel and provisions are cheap and plentiful: and a habitation however simple in construction is sufficient to shelter him from the effects of heat and cold and above all his family will learn from their neighbours to do without any of those things which are at home reckoned necessarys but which in fact are not essential to his happiness.  I know some families who are now and have been for the last 18 months living on their grant of land in tents: They are indeed poor but they are healthy contented and cheerful: they have HOPE for their prospects and INDEPENDENCE for their COMFORT and when they die what they have lived upon themselves will descend to their children and the same HOPES and the same INDEPENDENCE will be a legacy that pays no DUTY.  Sept. 18th  The Aborigines Natives both at Hunters River and in the New Country (Argyle) are still very hostile: several murders have been of late committed by them in the former District and altho the Mounted Police have been actively engaged in pursuit of them and have in those affrays shot two or three yet they seem so far from being intimidated that they become daily more and more daring. . . things indeed now have gone so far that something decisive must be done to stop the progress of this evil or the Stockmen and shepherds will not readily be persuaded to remain at the distant settlements while exposed to the animosity of a set of untutored savages. As these Natives have never before been known to proceed to such extremeties there is reason to think some MOTIVE must exist for their present warfare which if possible should be ascertained and if six or eight of them could be brought in as prisoners it is likely we should become acquainted with the cause of their animosity and probably find it easy of remedy: perhaps our people have been the first aggressors or possibly want of food may drive them to desperate measures for it is a fact well known that wherever our stockmen abide the Kangaroos and Opossums disappear our dogs destroying them; and thus being driven from the coast and this usual sustenance destroyed it is no small evil to these poor simple creatures to be deprived by the invasion of strangers of both food and rainment [sic]. [88]  Sept. 29th  'Bushranging in all its atrocity seems still to prevail instead of being subdued by the numerous executions that have taken place during the last six or eight months and Housebreaking and Street Robbery was never so frequent in Sydney as during the winter - many reasons are assigned for this but none of them satisfactorily account for it as upon all hands it is agreed our Police was never better.  General Darling with all the energy of a powerful mind constantly engaged for the welfare and good government of this people has not on all occasions shown himself infallible - One error which he has committed which is likely to be an abiding evil: Whoever could persuade His Excellency to bring two hundred of such abandoned bad characters from Port Macquarie might be a friend to humanity but could have thought little about the effect likely to be produced: These men for the most part are notoriously of the worst description and therefore if indeed the Prison population were not sufficient to supply the demand for labour the best that could have been done for the security of the Colonists would have been to work them in Ironed Gangs till they had given some warranty of their good behaviour.  Nov.20  The delightful rain of yesterday has made everything in the country look refreshed and beautiful: hope may now be entertained that the Epidemic Catarrh which has prevailed in the Colony for the last three weeks or a month will abate - this disorder which is indeed an influenza prevailed to a similar degree about six years ago it then as it has now carried off some of the old inhabitants of the Colony the population being now much larger a greater number of Deaths have taken place. I think I have observed that it has been felt most severely by the native born youth of both sex but there has been few if any deaths from this cause among them - those who have died (about 30) have been old persons with worn out constitutions. [89]  Dec. 26  For my own part I have never had but one opinion which is that the Govr. will be able to justify his motives to the satisfaction of the British Government just as I do not believe G_D acted upon his own ideas only in a matter in which the military men were competent judges: secondly I believe he wished to strike terror into the soldiers comprising the Regiment in Garrison and that the irons put on the Prisoner were intended only to be used until he was fairly out of sight of his brother soldiers. If indeed G_D had refused to attend to the representations made by the surgeon or surgeons "that Sudds was not in a state of health to bear the irons or undergo the whole punishment" then indeed he would merit the stigma thrown on his character but we do not hear that any such representations was made neither do we hear that the Judges or Attorney General made any remonstrance as to the illegality of the sentence it is said Sudds was in a dropsy before any part of his sentence was carried into execution. What were the Surgeons about that they did not interfere - I do not deny however that the man died of a broken heart but whether such death can be attributed to the harshness of the sentence or to the man's own acute feelings I leave the hair splitting Dr W to convince the public.  That G_D is unpopular as a Governor is very true but it is equally true that all the Governors who have gone before were as unpopular and with less reason for altho' G_D has neither the [faith?] of Governor Mc or of Sir T B he is as obstinate as the former and not so easy and mild as the latter and moreover he makes every man do his duty and I should not hestitate to take a wager that G_D will remain as Governor for the next Eleven Years.  Dec. 27  A most daring robbery was committed almost at our very gate on Saturday evening a Gentleman going on a visit to a near neighbour of ours was stopped by two bushrangers who seized the bridle of his horse but having extricated himself from their grasp was fired at the bullet of a Musquit entered the back of his neck behind one of the ears and came out above the cheek below the eye - believing him to be dead they dragged him into a ditch and relieved him of his watch and money - he was found in the morning quite insensible and is now lying dangerously ill at the house of his friend the great loss of blood he has suffered and the coolness of the weather are however favourable. [90] Two suspicious persons have been brought into Liverpool this morning and it is greatly to be hoped if these are not actually the men who committed the atrocious deed that their detention may lead to that of the gang to which they belong. The Governor with great promptitude came in person to Liverpool to enquire into all the circumstances and has ordered an additional party of Mounted Patrols on duty in this neighbourhood.  There is a good deal said about the Bushrangers but I feel no fear about them. Hayes [the overseer] makes a man keep watch and with your father's blunderbuss ready loaded if he is absent any night. By the absence of Hayes and family the house is more commodious but I think it advisable to build another room corresponding to the nursery. It is a very nice house indeed now far better than I expected the verandah is all round and a very nice width . . . Hayes I insisted to do a great deal more. I have applied for a Carpenter and some more men there is a great difficulty in getting them but Hannibal thinks they will not refuse me. One of my vexations was the prospect of Nannys leaving me her brother persuaded her to come to Sydney and to marry a young man there. However I have talked her out of it as she told me she did not feel any particular wish for the man only her brother told her he was respectable and it was a good match for her. I am going to give her higher wages and she is not to be so exclusively with the children - indeed it is one persons work to attend the stores from 5 in the morning till Bedtime there is no rest and while I am nursing I cannot always go so I thought I had better offer Nanny anything to remain here. My expenses here will be very trifling. I have been very busy unpacking ever since I came here; but I continue to teach Essington & Robert their lessons everyday I also try to keep them in proper subjection but it is no easy task to manage so many Boys for Charles & Frederick now come in for their share of correction. [70]  [27 August 1827] Oh could I but know where you are and how you are it is a long time since we met; but I must banish gloomy thoughts when addressing you but at times I feel our separation very painful. This will inform you of our being all well your dear Boys are in excellent health and a great comfort to me; I have so much to attend to with them and the farm concerns during the day I have little leisure for reflection . . . In another fortnight I hope to despatch my cartload of butter and poultry to market Mrs Flanagan is very attentive to the latter and I have a woman who understands the making of butter very nicely.  [22 October 1827] I cannot do without 3 women at present on account of the washing. We wash everything at home and what with the Dairy poultry Baking making candles & so on we find plenty to do. I have very little meat from the Butchers as we reserve fresh meat whenever a Bullock is killed. I have upwards of 40 young Turkey 50 young chickens. My Ducks & Geese we had bad luck with. The crows carried off many of the former and a large Dog killed 18 of the latter just as they [were] coming out of the shell. However we shall do better next time. I believe I have eleven Goslings coming on strong. Mrs Flanagan is very attentive .  jany First 1827  The first daily newspaper has made its appearance this day.  jan 28th  On the 39th anniversary of the foundation of the Colony (Jany. 26th) a Public Meeting of all the free inhabitants of N.S. Wales was convened by the Sheriff for the purpose of petitioning the King and both Houses of Parliament that Trial by Jury and a House of Assembly be allowed in this Colony; the meeting was numerously and respectably attended "The Hero of Australia" (one of her sons) spoke at great length and as a test that this speech was the voice of the popular feeling "The loud cheers and great applause" which it excited bears ample testimony as well as that those who are opposed to an application for these indulgences were inexcusably absentees: fully aware I imagine that all they could advance would not gain one proselyte in that Assembly - I believe that nothing is more likely to promote Emigration to this Colony than being in possession of all the rights of British subjects. "Trial by Jury" first and foremost for which we are every year becoming more competent and secondly "Taxation by Representation" which we may now with some face hope for when it is known that our Colonial Revenue amounts to £65000 annually which by a late calculation appears to be a Tax of £3 per head for every free adult in the Colony.  March 3  This place [Sydney] which 10 or 12 years ago was a quiet country looking thoroughly English looking Town is now a crowded Bustling Business like City - the shops are well supplied generally speaking and the price of Leghorn Bonnets are very high nothing wearable at less than six guineas! The price of Tea is very low - good black Tea being only about one shilling per pound by the chest.  April 12  It might be thought that Governor Darling is trying how unpopular he can make himself - his late measure is a rash one to say nothing more of it and he has placed a man of narrow mind repulsive manners and a selfish disposition in the situation lately filled by a Gentleman every way the reverse of this character a situation too where conciliatory manners and an obliging disposition is so necessary - everybody will feel the reverse and the change is terrible loss to the Colony. [91]  April 18  Married this day at Campbell Town by the Revd. Mr Hassall Edward Cox Esq. of Mulgoa son of Mr Cox Esq. of Claredon to Jane Maria third daughter of Richd. Brooks Esq. of Denham Court.  May 4  An Act in Council passed on 3rd inst. entitled "an act for imposing a Duty upon all Newspaper and Papers of a like nature" has caused a great sensation in Sydney - this will indeed act as "a restriction on the Press". I wish I could say such a restriction was uncalled for and unnecessary but we are too young a Country to be allowed all the privileges of a British people - Sir Thomas Brisbane allowed to this Colony the full liberty of the Press. General Darling has passed more than one act for the restriction of this liberty and has thus rendered himself if possible more unpopular than heretofore. It is a pity his measures and his manners are not more conciliatory for I believe him to be a well intentioned Governor and I have no doubt the experience of seven years will render him far more agreeable to the inhabitants of N.S.W. during the last years of his Administration: for "be it Recorded" I think the administration will extend to twelve years.  You ask me in one of your letters if you have any more cousins. I believe I have not written to you since the birth of our little girl which event took place on the 30th of June 1826. She is now eighteen months old; such a very fine child and beginning to be very interesting. Her name is Christiana Eliza Passmore after my mother's maiden name. What will you say when I tell you perhaps ere you receive this letter you may have another little cousin. If a girl she shall be named Louisa Matilda; if a boy Barrington. I think your Aunt Matilda will say we stock our house too fast now but in this colony we are only considered very moderate folks. [100] Most people add one to their family every year and as there are so few disorders fatal to children in this colony there will in a few years be larger grown-up families in this part of the world than any other...  Our three boys are all well and growing up fast but they are as wild as young kangaroos and as mischievous as monkeys but not unlike other children at their age. Thomas is still small of his age but very sensible manly and quick at his lessons; very passionate but very affectionate so that I do not despair of making him anything I please. Richard is a stout fellow in my opinion a fine handsome boy an excellent temper but more mischievous than any of them. Johnny is a little innocent child very fond of being made a pet of rather odd looking with very light blue eyes and light curly hair. He is quick like Thomas. It is a sad thing not having a school to send them to. I regret it more on account of keeping them away from our farm servants than from what they would learn. I take them myself to school for two hours every day and Thomas is beginning to read very nicely. He can say the church and their other catechisms besides several of Watt's hymns very nicely. Richard is rather dull but I dare say he will improve by and by. I hope in another year to be able to send Thomas to the clergyman of our district to school as he proposes taking a few pupils above eight years old. We will endeavour to bring Thomas forward as fast as we can and persuade Mr Wilkinson to take him before he is eight years old. He is a very nice man and we should know he was taken care of in every sense and improved in moral as well as learning.  P.F. Campbell. Deputy Inspector of Roads and Bridges. Newcastle 27 July 1827.  My dear Patrick  I delayed replying to your letter in hopes that I should be able to say something as to your wishes of exchanging your Grant of Land to the Coal River but I am still unable to say anything decisive as Oxley is unwell and the Govt. seem undetermined as to the proper mode of proceeding. It occurs to me however that the best way will be for you to memorial for a Grant putting the land received from Sir Thomas Brisbane down as for Charles and Dalmahoy and if you can get it it will be an advantage if not you will still have your share of what is up here but I shall be able soon I hope to say something more decisive and shall write you as soon as possible in the mean time you may be on the look out for a track that would answer and perhaps we might as well relinguish what we have up here and take all down at the Coal River but of this hereafter.  I have got your pay and taken up the Bill to MacVittie. I did not ask him to renew it but if you have particular occasion for money send up a Bill the same as the last we signed and I will try to get it discounted for such sum as you require but if you can do without it you had better as you will save the interest.  I had a letter from John. He is well but William has been ill and he says we may expect him down here. John has got a good situation if he has his health he will do well. He is in the Nizams Civil Service and has 1200 Rupees a month beside his pay as a Lieut. and Rank going on. He says he is now within two of the top of the Lieuts. William has not been so lucky poor fellow. He has got no appointment yet.  This day I got a letter from your Aunt Barbara but it is of an old date and directed to your Sister Colin. She says she had written to me but I have not got it if she did. She says all our friends in the Highlands are well.  I shall write again when I come here next week. Margaret takes up school at Parramatta in eight or ten days. In haste.  I am my dear Patrick Your affectionate Father John Campbell  2nd Decbr 1829  To begin with the weather as an Englishman generally does it is so mild and pleasant and the days so long that I have some difficulty in persuading myself that it is Xmas! More particularly as there are with me no internal and domestic indications to remind me of it.  I have seen many strange places but I never knew one where there was so utter an absence of hospitality as here. I hear of no friendly parties no national merry makings - no social intercourse in any class of the society.  Indeed it may be said that there are but two classes here the "elite" and the "canaille". Among the former it is all pomp stiffness and formality; with the latter riot revelry and drunkenness hold undisputed sway.  I admire Sydney as a town but I should be very sorry to live in it. In the country I believe the people are really kind and hospitable.  I have been this evening to visit the Botanical Gardens. It is very prettily laid out and contains a great variety of rare and beautiful flowers and shrubs. There are walks of perhaps 300 feet in length by 15 wide enclosed entirely by vines trained over a Trellis. The effect is delightful the shade most grateful and refreshing.  I shall be truly glad to get into the Bush. When I once take possession of my tent I do not think I will live in Sydney again. The scenes of riot and debauchery one witnesses here are dreadful; and to see the miserable wretches of natives reeling about the streets some stupid some frantic from the effects of intoxication is a most revolting spectacle. It is a melancholy fact and speaks volumes of the depravity of human nature that these poor savages are apt beyond belief at imitating everything bad: drunkenness swearing and every kind of vice they copy with the utmost facility - while the most laborious exertions have been found insufficient to impress them with a sense of right and wrong or to engraft on their brutal natures one single good quality. The faculty of speech alone seems to distinguish them from the beasts that perish.  Such they are here among civilized men - I shall see them 'ere long in their primitive state among their native wilds. There I shall find them at least uncontaminated by the vices of the white man.  A short distance to the left of the Parramatta Road and about a mile from the Town is the Burying Ground. It is almost filled with monuments but is in a very neglected state. A great number of the Tombs are completely covered with Geraniums which quite scent the air with their fragrance and has a very pleasing effect. Many of the graves are marked by no other Memorial than a plain wooden cross while some have a piece of board only nailed to a post and rudely painted with the words "Here lie the remains of" some poor wanderer from the Fatherland whose dust lies unwept below.  A cemetery in a distant land is the saddest truthteller and to one who feels deeply the "amor pro patriae" there is no scene so full of melancholy so natural is the desire: "bury me with my Fathers".  I walked some distance along The South Head Road and then struck off into the bush to a rising ground which afforded me a completely Panoramic view of the whole country round with [a] great part of Sydney The Cove Botany Bay and the Blue Mountains in the distance. But how [to] depict the scene [NN] Imagine a succession of undulating sandy hills entirely covered with brushwood; no house or road to be seen. At a distance the fine expanse of water called Botany Bay with here and there intervening swamps looking green as meadows or partially filled with water reflecting the deep blue of the sky. Beyond these ranges on ranges of hills rising one above the other until they "melt in the distance". Such is the country and with a blazing sun fast setting in the west forms a magnificent landscape.  The hills themselves afford very little variety being composed entirely of sand fine and white but the profusion of shrubs many very beautiful and all curious is very striking. I may describe one in particular as most abundant and very picturesque and remarkable it is a sort of rush the long sharp leaves spring in a tuft from a short stem or trunk exactly resembling a pine apple in size and shape from the centre rises the flower stalk very like a bulrush and reaching a height of 10 or 12 feet. These cane-like stems are used by the Natives as spears having a point fixed at one end of some hard wood or a piece of shell or bone. The Aloe tho not indigenous is very common here and grows to a great size. I see them in many cottage gardens upwards of 30 feet high and the flower stem resembling a large fir tree. The blossoms are a pale delicate yellow. The leaves are enormously thick and large often reaching 10 feet in height.  The variety and beauty of the insect tribe would delight an entomologist. More especially if he could claim on the score of friendly acquaintanceship an immunity from the attacks of the Mosquitoes and the Blowflies. The latter are most loathsome and disgusting. They will taint the meat on your plate and pollute everything that has heat and moisture. Blankets and woollen clothing must be carefully examined and even infants in the cradles must be carefully shaded with muslin to defend them from their disgusting propensities. As to the Mosquitoes they are terrible pests. The eternal buz buz buz and irritating stings are destructive of all enjoyment in these lovely evenings.  The immense number and beauty of the grasshopper tribe is astonishing. They vary in size from a quarter of an inch to four inches in length and some of the larger species have beautifully coloured wings some bright yellow with shades of dusky black. These fold closely to the body like a fan and are concealed by a sort of sheath but expand in their flight and appear as large as a butterfly's wings and the noise resembles the furling and unfurling of a fan. Others I observed with two pair of silvery gossamer wings more like those of the dragon fly. Their flight is irregular and more like a long and extended leap than actual flying. They rise expand their gauze-like wings and are borne by the air as it lifts falling again it would seem without any aim or object.  I am surprised to see such a variety of tints in the foliage for I had been induced to expect a dull monotonous everbrown tint pervading the landscape. But it is not so at least in this part of the country especially about Wooloomooloo; there seems to be a great variety of tint and green of as lively a hue as any we see in England  It is impossible to conceive anything more delightful than the climate so far as I have yet experienced. Fine clear and just agreeably warm. Yet I am told that the winter is the most agreeable season (this is the height of Summer in this hemisphere).   Christmas day - alone! at the Antipodes!  I attended St James' Church where the whole service was very satisfactorily performed by the Archdeacon (Dr Broughton). The Church was profusely decorated with a variety of evergreen and flowering shrubs which in England would be esteemed rare and curious exotics but which here are common as thistles. Beautiful as they are they do not equal in my eyes the rich luxuriance of the Holly the Laurel and the broad-leafed Ivy with its clusters of dark berries all so much more lovely because so dear to the heart of the Exile.  The scene in the harbour is lively and pretty. We have the "Crocodile" Frigate the "Zebra" Sloop of War and upwards of 40 sail of other vessels many of them fine large Ships all at anchor in the Cove. The harbour is confessedly the finest in the world. Fort Macquarie a picturesque but not very formidable fortification which projects into the Cove and forms as it were one arm of that part of the Harbour has a very pretty effect at all times and particularly now from the "Crocodile's" men being encamped there; and the Flag is hoisted every day on the Tower with the usual ceremonies.  Nature appears in this country to have indulged in most extraordinary fancies (if I may say so). Here are salt water Lakes 300 feet above the level of the Sea; rivers which rise near the coast and flow inland; fine cod are found in fresh water and the Pike inhabits the ocean. Everything appears to be reversed and calculated to set all speculation at defiance. The Botany the Geology the Ornithology the ichtheology etc. of the country are all different from any others and form a separate study in themselves. General principles seem not to hold good and all one's preconceived notions are continually at fault. It is certainly a wonderful country and affords a fine field for any ambition.  Yesterday one of the Chiefs of these poor creatures the Natives brought me a spear for which I gave him a sixpence; at least a piece of silver about that value called a dump. The Spear is about 10 feet long the shaft of some very light wood but the point is of a different nature and very hard and sharp. It is firmly fastened to the shaft by a sort of resinous gum which exudes in great quantities from the grass trees and is fully two feet long.  Many of the Chiefs have a sort of badge or ornament of brass hung round the neck. It is in the form of a crescent with the name of the tribe inscribed on it. I was reading this aloud: "Chief of the Câttáyâh" when the whole party set up a shout repeating the word "Cattayáh" with a long emphasis on the last syllable apparently delighted with my mispronunciation.  Many of their words are soft and pretty but to me the language is at present an unintelligible gabble. The few seen about Sydney are terribly debased and degraded by their association with the refuse of mankind planted on their shores and have imbibed all the vices of civilisation without any of its virtues.  My friend Cattayáh has promised to bring me some more of their weapons which are curious. The womerah or throwing stick the ëlamán or shield and the sort of javelin or dart thrown from a sort of sling.  My favorite walk is what is called the "Domain". This consists merely of a considerable tract of land beyond Government House and attached to it as a Park but left in its natural state with the exception of the Botanical Garden near the centre and the numerous walks and drives the principal of which terminate at the extreme point of a ledge of rock the extremity of this neck of land jutting into the Cove. A large seat or alcove has been cut out of the solid rock with an inscription above it intimating that for the design and execution of all these improvements the public are indebted to Mrs Macquarie. She is the wife of the late Governor and they are both much beloved and regretted. These walks and drives are disposed with so much taste and every peep of the Cove and its beautiful shores is so rich and so varied that I find fresh beauties every time I visit it. My favorite "Stance" is a projecting ledge of rock which overhangs the shore about 30 feet high just over the Stone Seat I have described which is called "Mrs Macquarie's Chair". There with the most lovely part of the Cove and the romantic "Garden Island" before me I sit or stand. The gentle splash of the tiny waves beneath me inspiring a soothing melancholy my thoughts insensibly turning to dear England. Here I have now been watching the full moon rising in cloudless majesty over the North Head. The scene is surpassingly lovely - no pen or pencil can do justice to it. So calm so tranquil so motionless except for the dancing of the rippling waves in the broad stream of moon-light and occasionally a white sail skimming as if by magic athwart the Cove. To the right is Garden Island and the deep bay called Farm Cove in front. Several other points project into the Cove all wooded to the water's edge and these the bold bluff rocky headlands called the North and South Heads with the LightHouse form the background. Beyond is the dark unfathomable ocean too distant to be distinguished. This magnificent harbour is not one large Bay only but a continued succession of bays or coves the shores of all beautifully wooded and affording perfect shelter for shipping from the Heads up to the town and even beyond for the Parramatta River nearly 15 miles up is more like a deeply indented estuary than a river and has deep anchorage some miles beyond the port.  The country round is romantic and picturesque though in point of fact sterile in the extreme. Hundreds of thousands of acres composed of nothing but fine white sea sand in which you would suppose it impossible for anything to vegetate but which produces endless varieties of plants and shrubs (all evergreen) which in England would be accounted the most valuable rarities. I collected a most beautiful bouquet to adorn my little cottage. There are no trees of any height to be seen excepting here and there the scathed and blasted trunk of a gum tree. The hills are lofty and the whole surface of this part of the country beautifully undulating. At a distance of six or seven miles the waters of the far-famed Botany Bay stretch away to the westward like an inland sea and the Range of Blue Mountains in the background form altogether a very lovely landscape.  The foliage of the trees and underwood is by no means so "everbrown" as I had expected. The generally sombre tints are relieved and enlivened by many large masses of green bright and vivid enough to do honour to old England. The climate so far as I may yet form an opinion is most lovely.  It is glorious to see the sun rise day after day and travel through an almost cloudless sky. And there is continually a refreshing sea-breeze which prevents the heat from becoming oppressive. I walk in the very heat of the day without feeling any inconvenience. Not even the lassitude and weariness which is produced by exertion in very hot weather in England. I attribute this to the clearness of the atmosphere and the peculiar lightness of the air. And then the mornings and evenings are so delicious the air blows cool and refreshing without the slightest damp or chilliness; even the twilight tho' shorter than in England is most luxurious for after the sun has set in one blaze of splendour it is long ere the sky loses the bright influence of his beams. Then it becomes gradually "fretted with golden fire" "thick inlaid with patinas of bright gold" - compared with which our northern skies are cold and splendourless (if I may coin such a word).  Of the town itself little can be said there a some pretty cottages the residence of Government Officers and the so called "streets" resemble the suburbs of London small houses with little strips of garden in front some in rows some detached.  The public buildings in Sydney are very paltry and insignificant. The Barracks are very extensive and occupy a large portion of the best part of the town but they do not possess any architectural beauty. The Military Hospital is in a similar style and well situated. The Churches (there are two: St. Philip's and St James) are both plain unpretending structures. The latter the most modern where all is new; it is built of brick and is rather a handsome structure with a lofty spire surmounted by a ball and cross of stone the interior is very neat the fittings being of native Cedar a dark wood resembling mahogany; but it is disfigured by two galleries one appropriated to the convicts the other to the Soldiers. There is a very fine Organ and the manner in which the Service is performed gave one great satisfaction. St. Philip's is beautifully situated at the other extremity of the town on a lofty promontory overlooking the harbour and has really some pretentions (in appearance) to antiquity for it was the first place for public worship built in the Colony and is a curious specimen of Church architecture it consists of a round tower built of unhewn stone and a low nave or chancel partly of stone and wood; the interior is also devoid of any attempt at ornament and is dark and inconvenient. But what a delightful reflection it is that even here in a penal settlement a place appropriated to the reception of the very refuse of mankind of wretches who have merited the gallows by a hundred acts of villainy a settlement now which has only been established 40 years our noble and glorious country thus extends her wise and holy institutions to the remotest quarters of the globe; and our holy Church holds forth her arms to recover the most hardened offenders and offers to the most depraved of mankind the means of reconciliation with God and man. The Roman Catholic Chapel and the Government Stables are here considered the finest buildings in the Colony but they seem to me very poor specimens of Architecture. The former is quite in an unfinished state and likely to remain so; but Popish Priests in the present day like the monks of old are very judicious in selecting their scites. The view from the back of the Chapel is the most beautiful I have seen.  There is nothing I have yet seen which so strongly excites my disgust and pity as these miserable natives. They are the most wretched and degraded class of human beings it is possible to conceive in form and face more resembling the Baboon than anything human. They are attenuated with famine for they care not for food but spirits are their delight. Their limbs are mere skin and bone their faces hideous beyond description; the forehead flat and prominent the eyes small the nose flat and wide the cheeks sunken and chin projecting immoderately their colour a sooty dingy black. The Government provides them with blankets and obliges them to appear in Sydney clothed but they have no idea of the use of clothing and it is generally put on in such a manner that they might almost as well be without it. The men all carry "waddies" or large clubs and with these will give and receive such blows on their heads as would certainly fracture the skull of an European. They have an immense quantity of coarse black hair which hangs in thick pelts or tresses over their faces like the threads of a mop. All that I have seen (both male and female) have lost the two front teeth of the upper jaw which operation is performed by punching them out. I have witnessed some disgusting scenes of intoxication and consequent fighting among these poor creatures who are so weak that the washing of a Rum cask or even a sugar bag steeped in water produces that effect. I saw a woman belabouring a man with an immense stick over the head in a way which would have caused concussion of the brain in an ordinary skull he sitting all the time with his arms folded taking it as coolly as possible.  There were about 30 of them in the Street this afternoon dancing singing and screaming and howling in the most extraordinary manner. Their violent and uncouth gestures and strange wild monotonous song interested me much; the perfect time they keep jumping and raising the arms in different attitudes sometimes slowly then with gradually increasing vehemence and rapidity the song becoming a dismal howl in which the most obvious sound is something like "murra murra jaa "murra murra fee" the last notes prolonged amazingly is very curious. But it is a pitiable exhibition as they are always more or less in a state of intoxication. They are very rapidly diminishing in numbers and it is anticipated that a very few years more will see their entire destruction. This their inevitable fate is the less to be regretted as every effort for their instruction and improvement has utterly failed. They have in this country been generally well treated but I hear that in Van Dieman's Land there is terrible work. They are a more formidable race there than these poor creatures and the settlers have found them so determinedly hostile that they actually go out in parties and shoot the Natives like mad dogs. A gentleman who has just come up from Hobart Town told me that he saw one man bringing the heads of twelve whom he had shot himself and whose heads he produced in Hobart Town lest he should not be credited. I know not which is the worst destroying these poor creatures in this way or murdering them more slowly and more painfully by the sure contamination of our vices. It is a painful reflection.  11th August [1829]. - On the River Derwent in sight of Mount Wellington and Hobarton.  Though there is but one thought absorbing my mind I must not anticipate but tell you that after seven weeks of most awful weather we got sight of land. You may judge my thankfulness as three weeks we had been under water on deck nor had the daylight entered my cabin. 'Tis vain now to waste time dwelling on all the suffering of such a period with a baby at my breast but I may express how much valuable aid I had from my humble friend Mrs. Hughes and kind attention from Mr. Betts who nightly stopped to speak and cheer me sometimes if it was tempestuous nursing Flora or assisting to bathe her and beguile our mutual discomfort. [...]  I had taken this miserable voyage in vain and was alone in Van Diemen's Land while Fenton was retracing the perilous sea I had just crossed.  Surely I am doomed in everything and for me there is no haven of peace on this side of time. [...]  14th August Macquarie Hotel Hobarton  Then we took our way up Macquarie Street. About half-way I could not resist the temptation of stopping to lean upon a fence almost breathless this being the longest walk I had taken for some years; and further being equipped in black satin shoes they were penetrated by wet and fringed with mud. Mrs Frankland's recollections of the habits of India soon explained my distress and the party kindly accommodated themselves to my feebleness and unequal strength until we reached the hotel when after inspecting the rooms ordered Mr Frankland with equal kindness and tact proposed they should all leave me to rest for an hour when he would return and take me to his house which proposal I readily agreed to. [123] [...]  On my return to the Macquarie Hotel I felt so nervous to sleep was impossible and I stepped out on a little balcony to look on the waters with which my future destinies and that of my babe were mixed up and on the strange stars above me. [...]  I have in the midst of other disjointed thoughts to-night half inclined to the idea of returning to India if Fenton's return is hopeless. I must in this case have seven solitary months to spend here how I know not [...]  [15th August]  This is the third day since the departure of the whale-boat one or two more must decide my measures.  [August 17th]  I do not think any comparison can be fairly made between the love of a father and a mother for an infant. But he was evidently delighted with Flora. She could not be passed unnoticed by a stranger and the dullest parent must have regarded with delight the lovely creature just able to sit up and know it to be a stranger who embraced her. Visitors came in rapid succession. At length with Flora enveloped under the nurse's cloak we proceeded to Mrs F.'s drawing room and spent a delightful evening; Fenton and Frankland were in such high spirits and even the children seemed delighted to see him.  3rd October - The perpetual encroachment of the servants on my time is indescribable. After our breakfast at eight o'clock I order dinner and go with the cook to the store room for anything requisite for I need hardly remind you of the direful necessity of having to lock every-thing up yourself. Here my daily admonition is "Take all you want now for I will not come here again." Then perhaps the cook departs to the market for any small articles wanted; in an hour after when perhaps I am nursing the baby or writing a letter or arranging my clothes a knock comes to the door: "Please mam will you give me some rice or some sugar or spice or something else out of the storeroom?" [124] It is in vain to remind the offender that I said I would not go there again. His or her "Very well mam" will not supply the deficient article when dinner comes and the only redress left me of "sending him in" will only give me another to pursue the self-same plan of annoyance which is repeated in every family in the Colony.  I may tell you here what my establishment consists of: a nurse a cook a laundress a housemaid a man who cuts wood and is groom; the boy I brought from India I have kept with the idea of training him for an inside servant; I cannot yet reconcile myself to the attendance of a convict though I see them at every house in town and admirable servants too. All these ideas I am told I shall lay aside and do as others do after a little experience. So this is my household at present. I asked the housemaid yesterday while I was giving her some work what she had been sent out to this Colony for: "Please mam for housebreaking"; a very pretty neat dark-eyed girl.  According to promise but not as to time I write to you but I have so little to say that is so much that I cannot find words to express it so it will amount to the same thing in the end and you will have a short letter about nothing. In the first place I was to tell you how I like the place I do not like it at all the country I must say is beautiful no person can find fault with it but then it is a new colony and there is a great deal for a settler to encounter particularly a female next the people they are either very high or very low the upper class are all military or naval men such as Cols Majors and Capns. that you have no chance with them and the lower class are convicts. There is such a party spirit amongst them that if you are at all noticed you must be either one side or other so that it makes you quite uncomfortable as for us we know very few. We know the gentleman who transacts business for Sam his Son and Daughter and a Mr & Mrs Aidey he is a banker and she is a very clever woman - but these are all that I am on visiting terms with so you see our circle is not very extensive and now that we have left Hobart Town for the bush I dont expect to see them often either oh! how often do I wish for some of my friends to be nigh me but it is all in vain. I suppose you have heard of Georges marriage poor fellow he has done for himself forever I have only seen him at a distance since our arrival if she had been any kind of woman that I could have been on terms with how comfortable it wd have been for me but it seems as if I was to be disappointed in everything - it seems she was well known on the Commercial Road as Betty Duff god knows how true it is but this I know that she is one of the greatest drinkers and one of the worst tempered women I have ever met with. [156] What think you of Sams turning farmer and me making Butter and Cheese but alas! I am sorry to say that we have not a cow or hen yet on our farm - so much for my beginning we are about five miles from town across the river the greatest want of these farms is the want of water we have to draw every drop we use from what they call a Lagoon a mile off and every thing we want we have to send to town for Eggs are 2/3 per dozn and fowls 5/ and all these kind of things in proportion as for milk we seldom see it now - firing is the only thing we have cheap and that we have for the cutting. I wish you would take a trip over here and see us.. . T[here] are a great many respectable families here from Ireland. . . and now dear Robert how is my own boy I trust you have an eye as you promised and that you make him go over his lessons often. I hope he will be all could wish Jane and Martha often talk of you they are all quite well but not gone to school yet. They send you a kiss I hope my dear Father is in good health I am sure this is a country he would like if he saw it your father I know would - Dear Robert may I depend on your writing to me soon you know that letters are the only comfort I have now and I trust you will add to it if you should happen to be in London when the ship arrives that this goes by I wish you would see the Captain he will be able to tell you all about us as he is the Capn we came out with and he could give you all the information about George as they wd be anxious at home to know of him his name is Elder of the ship Pyramus - Sam joins with me in affectionate remembrances and believe me to remain dr Robert your ever affectionate Cousin and Friend.  Launceston Van Diemans Land August 10th 1829  Dear Cousin  Your much esteemed favor of the 8th November last is now before me in which you refer me to yours pr. William Young of the 6th Ult./ this letter I duly received and as there was a vessel just weighing Anchor for Sydney at the Moment I received it I enclosed it to my Mother with a request it might be returned to me/ My Mother shortly after arrived here (is here now) and forgot to bring your letter with her or I certainly should have answered it by the last ship but you must recollect we live in a very out of the way place in the far extreme of the Island to where Hobart Town is situate and therefore seldom know exactly when a ship sails/ your charge against me for discontinuing writing you is quite just and I take great shame to myself and in fact you must be very good to look over my neglect the only apology I can offer is that I never understood to the Contrary but that my Mother was in constant corespondence with you untill she arrived here about two Months ago/and for these last Six Months I have been very ill for some time my life was completely despaired of / I had a severe attack of Inflammation in the bowels and three Doctors who attended me gave me up/ I certainly recovered by a Miracle this must plead my excuse for some months but had I known my Mother had not written you for some time I certainly would have written you a few lines occasionally to inform you how we were getting on / another cause of my not writing you before was in consequence of the harrassed state of my mind for the very blameable and foolish conduct of Thomson the event has justified my forebodings entrusted as he was at the head of Customs & Treasury of this part of the Island with immence Sums of Money with a Salary of only £300 per Annum to be careless so as hardly to keep any accounts and to live at the rate of £800 or 900 pr. Year/ all my advice and knowledge only served to irritate and make him shun my society / the Consequence is that Govt. at last took notice of it every thing he had was Seized (all the property Mrs T. had from my Mother included) and sold and he thrown into Prison the deficiency was about £3000. My Brother Thomas and Myself had at last come forward to save him from a worse fate (as was threatened) and became security for the Amount to Government which released him/ [100] his property has paid off about one half and there may still be some errors which it is supposed will be but I am afraid we shall have to pay about £1000 independent of this/ My Mother has assisted and paid in Cash for them about £2000 some of his Bills which My Mother endorsed have lately come back on her they were drawn on his Uncle Young's of Burnt island this has much injured my Mother in taking up as they came suddenly upon her/ this I believe has prevented her as much as anything remitting some money she owes you she is continually talking about it & you and saying she is ashamed to write you / I was trying very much the other day to get her a Bill on England for £100 to remit you but could not succeed for her / Mr & Mrs Thomson are living on their farm at Pattersons Plains but [?] off and he is so very lazy and useless a being that he cannot turn his hand to anything/ I have no patience with him so extravagant and so careless and to add to their misfortune Mrs T. has just been confined of her fifth child/ his Uncle John seem inclined not to do anything for him / they ought after My Mother has embarrassed her affairs for some time in I may say foolishly paying Money for him. My Mother some time back sent me a bale of Carpetting one that came by your recommendation from some part of Scotland/ this Carpetting I sold here on Credit to a shopkeeper of the name of Ash he shortly after failed and having a good opinion of the Young Man and willing to assist him I advanced him large sums of money and became security for other sums including my former debt Carpetting included of about £1500/ he repaid me some part of the Cash advances I had made him when unfortunately he was killed from a fall off a horse leaving me Minus Carpetting included of £870. I seized on all his property I could get hold of on this side and a Lawyer of the name of Butler at Hobart Town seized on all he could get hold off/ and as the accident happened then he had the start of me this Butler was his Guardian and has advanced a claim on him for some English outlays as he states before their arrival in this Colony/ we are at law [?] now who will obtain Letters of Administration from the Supreme Court but the little property left is hardly worth while contending for and if I succeed the whole probably will be swallowed up in law expences. I am extremely sorry to have to send you such an account of the Carpetting. I would have communicated to you before respecting it but was in hope of something better turning up.  My Mother as I stated before is here / Mrs Atkinson is also who accompanied my Mother down / they go up in a few days in a vessel of mine the Hetty to Sydney again. You will probably hear before this My Sister Elizabeth's Marriage about three Months ago at Sydney to a Lieutenant Innes of the 39th Regiment who is also adjutant. [101] I have not seen him but I understand he is a very fine Young Man and highly respected he was brought up at the Military College/ it was as it appears quite a Love Match but my Mother has settled £200 per Year on her and her heirs as well as a farm at present let for 70£ more and an improving property - I have just received a letter from her by a vessel arrived this Evening from Sydney / she seems very happy and gay but I would sooner have seen her married to a steady sober farmer or Citizen/ Atkinson is not doing very well he has had some expected claims from England on him lately but he has industry and perseverence/ you know long ere this that Eliza Foster was married to a Mr Pitman an American Gentleman from China extremely well off and a most exellent man but I do not expect she will live long as she is in a deep consumption -/ Mrs Foster her Mother lives with them and she has a good farm and some other property of her own you know old Foster was found dead supposed to be murdered as he was on the way from the interior of New South Wales to give evidence against some Cattle stealers - the eldest daughter Jane was some years ago married to a man of the name of Patten (formerly Master of a vessel)/ they keep a Public House in this Town and he has turned out a drunken beast / she is very steady and they are well off/ it was an unhappy circumstance for our family they ever came here/ we have never been so united since/ she is a perfect D---l  I send you accompanying this a letter some time back written to Messrs Young the owners of the North Britain & Wm. Young respecting a difference that has occurred between myself and their drunken Agent a Mr Morrisson of Sydney. When Read please send it to them sealed if you think I am right in so doing I pledge myself to the truth of every sentence -  Your Communication with Sir Thomas Brisbane respecting the Eclipse I am exceedingly obliged for and I am sure Atkinson will be the same when he Knows of it I am astonished at Sir Thomas Neglect he promised me most faithfully personally in Sydney he would get us Remuneration for the Loss. I gave him all the Certificates and documents relating thereto at his own Request previous to his departure from New South Wales I also wrote him a long letter eighteen months ago reminding him of his promise and recapitulating the whole of the story again on purpose to assist his memory/ I have not heard from him since/ he is a good man but very forgetful his loss is much felt in these Colonies I see he has acknowledged the receipt of the additional documents sent home by Mr Atkinson and I hope you will not let him rest untill he has done something for us to redeem his pledge / his last words to me were   "I feel for the loss you & Mr Atkinson has sustained severely had there been a precedent in the Colony I would order you immediate remuneration but if you will extract me with the documents as I am about leaving N.S.W. for England I pledge myself I will use all my endeavours to get you some recompence"[102]  at that time I could not find a precedent but it was after-wards found in the Case of the Boy Harrington Captain Campbell and which was the substance of the additional documents sent home by Mr Atkinson/ our loss was also more glaring as the Vessel was taken away from the Port in the open day moored close to the Wharf and within Pistol Shot of the Centinel on duty by the very Men in Government Employ employed to load her which Cargo was purchased by us from the Government paying them 10/- per ton for them and for which they were to put them on board/ and these men so employed by them (the Govt) were the Pirates overpowering the Crew and taking her out of the harbour having the wind and Tide in their favor as [?] [?] any in the Port and the Govt not a boat to send after her - I know your disposition so well you will leave no stone unturned to gain Atkinson and Myself a recompense/ our value of the vessel was £1600 after she was taken away/ Sir Thomas ordered the Master attendant to Value her but he not knowing the stores &c she had on board valued her very low at £1000 or £1100 I forget which but this Certificate of Valuation was given with the other documents to Sir Thomas/ if they will not give us Cash in remuneration Land would do at a fair valuation in part if not for the whole  My Brother Thomas & family are quite well he has still but three Children he is very industrious and is one of the first farmers and Graziers in this Island/ he has nearly twelve thousand acres of land - Mother & Mrs Atkinson are at present at Mr Thomsons four miles from Town / I Remain yours most truly and faithfully obliged Cousin  Mr D. Hope Glasgow  Sydney October 20th 1829 to Mr David Hope Glasgow  My dear Cousin  I have lately received a letter from Mssrs Gregory Thomson & Co Kilmarnock Concerning the goods sent me appointing Mr How to settle them / be assured I am extreamly glad - has it as been a source of vexation and trouble to me and no doubt they will think I have not acted right with them but I hope as soon as Mr H can sit down with me he will be able to convince them and you I have done my best / the state the Colony has been in these last three years has rendered impossible for any one to make good their acccounts you complain loudly of my not writeing - there may be some Cause but not quite so bad as you of course must think as I understand you have not received any letters since Jany 1827 No 21 /So Mr How said you told him and which I immediately referred to my Book and showed him dates 19 June 1828 No 22 by the Megonet [?] bound for Glasgow / 28 Oct 1828 by Mrs Wemyss our late Commissarys Lady with a parcell for Mrs Irvin Containg [sic] Two India Crepe Gown pieces one for Williams Wife and which I am Certain will deliver safe / if She arrives well the next the 3d of Jan 1829 by the Hellen through Mr Morrison 29 Jany 29/20th March Capt Doughty ship Eliza by which I sent twenty one 21 Bales of Wool to Acct of those bills I drew on your House for £602.18.10 / I have also remitted the first and second of Treasury bills for £250 as also the first of one hundred pounds / the second I now transmit altho a lapse of time has transpired since remitting the first but their being no opportunity before I had included it when I was at the southward to send by the Alice but was not in time for the post but I hope & Trust you have long ere this recvd the first the Wool I bought on speculation namely for a remittance at 1/ one shilling a pound sterling the nett Amount was £255.5.10 / knowing it was a good sample I hope it will pay me but I know you will do your best for me.  I now enter into family affairs which to you O [owe?] I had liked to have forgot for I must tell you all my Busness affairs /I wrote Mr Hargreaves about Two years & half ago to send out a little medicin to set up a person as Chymist & Druggist who had been in that line in England and who was about takeing one of my Houses / of course the man had everything to arrange in his House and the fitting up cost him a deal of money / he also detained Two young men in his service to dispence them till it nearly ruined him expecting they whould come in due course /[105] but Ship after Ship arrived and no investment the Young men where obliged to seek other employment and he Mr Colhist had to let part of his House to assist in paying his rent having given up all thoughts of them comeing out indeed we both had written him not to send them as it had been such a lengthy time / in the meantime out comes a person from London of the name of Foss and set up and has amassed quite a fortune - now the Country is quite full of them had Mr Hargreaves sent them out within 15 or 18 months Mr Colhist whould have had no oponent and might equally done as well as Foss but after the lapse of nearly Two years and half out comes an Invoice over of £908.0 / Mr. Colhist will not take them having made Arrangt otherwise Consequently they are thrown all on my hands they are now lying in Mr Pitmans stores / I have had the first legal advice in the Colony and they say they are of the Opinion that I can refuse to receive them after such a length of time but unfortunately I was down at Launceston when they arrived and they where lodged in Mr Pitmans Stores as my Agent. I really do not know what to do with them their is no money in the Colony no one will buy under 12 or 18 months credit here and their is a question wether the bills are good / they also say the goods are laid in at much too high prices their are similar Invoices in the Country which are from 50 to 75 per cent Cheaper/ I think of reshipping them again but I should like if I could Sell it all at a small loss to do the best I can for him but at present I see no likelihood / I had desired him to buy me a small Carriage that he did not send nor do I wish he whould as every Article here now is much below prime cost or mostly so owing to the scarcity of Money / I wrote Mr H. about 7 or 8 months ago not to send it nor the medicin I suppose he must have shipped them before he received my letter / I have got all this Trouble through my own good nature to some others.  I suppose you will be tired of this complaint so I must just give you the last occurances of my family I believe I wrote you about Mr. Thomson since I have been down to the southward and did all in my power to settle his busness / their appeared in his Accts when I was down their an error of £9 or £1100 which was sent over to Hobart Town for the Commissioners to examine / the result I have not heard yet as I left before they came over but if that is the case will lesson the debt or near pay it of with what they have already taken from him / indeed every head of cattle and my Grains of Wheat he had / I am afraid he is as Idle as ever my poor Eliza has now got five 5 children it is for such a young Creature a miserable prospect / to be sure he is very kind and affectionate to her but that is not all as I tell him it wants his exertions and activity to support such a family / she is quite a slave to them. [106]  it whould delight you to see her children with what order and neatness she keeps them had she a Husband equal to herself they might have been amongst the first people in the Colony but he is fit for nothing / I do no know any one thing he can do for the Farm he now lives on he quite neglects but I hope he will soon see his error I have talked to him seriously  I did not write you about Elizabeth's marriage / She was married about six months ago to a Lieutenant Innes adjutant of the 39th Regt. a very fine young man is only 6 foot 7 inches high and I think will make her a very good Husband / I have settled upon her £200 a year besides her Farm with his pay which is about the same will support them very handsome with occonomy he is a very clever young man and an exellent Correspondent / She Elizabeth wrote you some time back thanking you for the handsome present you sent her did you receive it She desired me to give her kind regards to you and accept my best wishes for your health (which I hope is quite restored) and happyness from your affectionate Cousin  M. Reibey  As please to give my love John & wife & little Penelope William and wife and ask the latter if she received the crepe gown through Mrs Irvin love to Alice and her spouse & little George  30 March 1829 [Monday]  9 am left town in a large whaleboat with six hands fair weather. 12 1/2 pm reached Rats Bay on North Brune. Had an interview with the natives. Crossed over to Birches Bay a government establishment for sawyers; hospitably entertained.  31 March  10 am got under way. Fair weather. Steered our course for Isthmus Bay. Crossed the Neck to Adventure Bay then recrossed and traversed the land on the south of Isthmus Bay. Contrary wind and heavy sea and the boat unable to pass the point.' Took up our quarters on the beach at Isthmus Bay.  1 April  6 am got under way; fair weather adverse winds. Traversed the shore. Saw remains of the natives' fires. Reached Little Cove; remained here this night. Saw footmarks of natives on the shore.  2 April  At 5 am prepared for breakfast. Strong southerly wind heavy sea. Left Little Cove and pulled along shore to Great Cove or Taylors Bay. At 3 pm proceeded for the head of the bay travelling through an extensive swamp covered with lofty shrubs. Passages about two feet wide are formed in a serpentine direction and at short distances are open clear spaces supposed to have been burnt out by the natives so that they might be the better able to pursue the kangaroo with the dogs.   3 April  The men being out of provision I sent the boat out to fish. Took two men and went in search of land. Traversed a vast extent of clear country interspersed with clumps or copses intended as a cover for kangaroo the whole range for miles forming a beautiful picturesque scenery. This has been done by the natives: when burning the underwood they have beat out the fire in order to form these clumps. Saw some native huts. Ascended a high mountain called Tasmans Head and saw Adventure Bay and the Neck and had a fine view of the country. [55] Returned by a different route. Reached the boat much fatigued about 2 pm. The men in the boat had been alarmed for our safety. Proceeded to Partridge Island took refreshment and proceeded to Birches Bay through a heavy sea arriving at 8 pm. Very unwell.  4 April  Sent for some intelligent natives. Conversed with them and with a female aged seventeen years named TRUGERNANNA.   5 April [Sunday]  Preached to the sawyers at the establishment: sixty present very attentive. Self very unwell.  6 April  Bless the Lord much improved in health. Went over to the north side of Isthmus Bay. Returned to Birches Bay and took dinner and then went over to Kinghorne Bay and round to Barnes Bay. Slept at Barnes Bay.  7 April  Fair weather with strong southerly winds. Proceeded to the head of Barnes Bay and round to Rats Bay. Landed TRUGERNANNA the rest of the aborigines being much delighted to see her return. Proceeded to Kelly's farm and cautioned his men as to their improper conduct towards the natives; said if I could ascertain the fact I would certainly make an example. Proceeded to W Gellibrand esq South Arm. Very hospitably entertained.  8 April  Fair weather with strong winds. Proceeded to town arriving at 1 pm. In good health. [56]    Feeling the importance of the situation to which your Excellency has been pleased to appoint me and fully persuaded that the plan which your Excellency has devised to be the only one whereby the aborigines of this territory can be ameliorated I have endeavoured to arrange what I conceive to be your Excellency's views and submit the same accordingly.  General Plan  I. The object to be obtained - the amelioration of the aborigines of Van Diemen's Land.  II. The means by which it is proposed the foregoing object should be carried into effect:  1. Civilisation;  2. Instruction in the principles of Christianity.  Civilisation - to form a general establishment or native village. . . . The site should include fertility of soil proximity to fresh water contiguous to the shore and remote from settlers. . . - The establishment to form three sides of a quadrangle opening to the beach the mission house to be situated at the upper end so as to command a view of the whole establishment the married persons to occupy one side the single persons the other side. . . . Each family to have a log hut covered with bark the aborigines to assist in the erection of the same. . . . Each allotment to be fenced. . . . A school to be erected with logs and covered with bark this building to answer (in the first instance) as a church for the performance of divine worship. . . . A garden to be laid out for the general purposes of the institution.  The means: to assist the aborigine to erect his hut; . . . to assist them in preparing a few rods of land as a potato ground; . . . to prevail on them to cook their food after the manner of Europeans to catch fish to eat with their potatoes; the children if practicable to eat at one table; as opportunity may occur to teach the children trades. To instruct them in the principles of Christianity - 1st by public worship 2nd by public schools. . . . The school to open and to conclude with prayer. Dr Bell's system to be adopted as far as practicable. The children to be taught the English language. . . .  The formation of the establishment would appear of primary importance. The aborigines would be acquiring habits of industry. The establishment would be able to produce its own potatoes. [57] The natives would be satisfied. Strangers visiting the settlement would see more to interest them and be induced to settle. [...]  I would likewise submit to your Excellency whether a little tea sugar and tobacco should not be kept in the store in the case of sickness and at certain times when the aboriginal females would require a little tea of which they are very fond; the tobacco might be given as rewards to the men. A medicine chest with directions for use would be an acquisition to the mission. Sulphur and lard would be of great use to clean the scorbutic affection of the natives. At present if they feel any inward affliction or pain they cut themselves with sharp stones or shells supposing the affliction is caused by RAGEAWRAPPER. or evil spirit and by making an incision imagine a speedy cure. [...]  A fine youth about seventeen years old named WÉANÉE whom I had seen on my first visit I was informed had died and that the natives had burnt the body. I saw the place where he was burnt. There was a heap of ashes and some grass and sticks put on top of them. An aborigine named Joe had returned from the Isthmus after performing the last sad office of burning the body of his deceased wife. She was ill when I was here before. The tribe had gone to the Isthmus and there she became worse. In such cases they put water into a piece of kelp and a few shellfish alongside the afflicted persons and leave them to their fate. This man had two wives one of whom is still living. Polygamy is not at all frequent amongst them. The circumstances of this man's having two wives was this that his first wife became dangerously ill and he expected she would die. He therefore took unto himself another wife. The invalid contrary to his expectations recovering he continued them both. Asked him what his former wife said on his leaving her he replied RAEGEAWRAPPER LOGGERNER. The natives paint their bodies with charred wood and mark their faces with red chalk.   28 April  Yesterday found two of the convicts with the natives about half a mile from the hut. Ordered them away and gave orders to the convicts not to interfere or converse with the natives. One man behaved impertinent this morning and refused to work. Sent the man up to Hobart Town in charge of the overseer. At 3 pm took two convicts and two natives and travelled through the bush to the Neck to select a suitable spot for the settlement. [58] Got benighted. Natives unwilling to proceed. Slept in the open air. Rain at times.  29 April  Continued our journey. After travelling about two hours came to the head of Isthmus Bay. Took my grant of 500 acres. Set out the village on a gentle declivity leading down to the bay the site delightfully pleasant and close to water. At 2 pm left two men to erect a hut and returned with the natives to the Woodcutters. The natives I took with me as guides had a piece of string tied tight round the calf of their legs. Informed me it was to make them walk. Have a similar one round the arm to give force in throwing the spear and waddy. They have regular beaten paths and a mutton fish shell at their watering places to drink out of.  30 April  Remained with the natives obtaining words for a vocabulary. Cooked some perch and rock cod for breakfast. With great difficulty persuaded the natives to partake of some.   1 May  Started for town with two men. Strong head wind and with considerable labour reached Hobart at 7 pm. Took with me some waddies and native baskets. The native basket is made of rushes or a species of grass called iris. In preparing them for use they place the same on a slow fire which gives them a tenacity that enables the manufacturer to twist them into threads. These are plaited together and then formed into a basket which in shape is somewhat semiglobular. The waddy is an offensive weapon used by the natives. It is about eighteen inches long and an inch and a half in diameter of a straight spiral form and made of a species of hardwood called she-oak. They are remarkably dextrous in using this missile and seldom fail to hit their object. The natives are also very expert in throwing stones.  14 May  Removed to the new establishment at Isthmus Bay. Travelled across from Barnes Bay over rocks and through thick brushwood. Found the brig unloading the bricks; also Joe an aborigine and his family. The two men that I had placed here a fortnight before had been employed in erecting a hut. Richardson left here today in the Cyprus. This morning read to the prisoners of the crown regulations for their observance. Also transmitted to the whalers Messrs Kelly and Lucas and Messrs Young and Walford at Trumpeter Bay and Bull Bay letters requesting them not to allow their men to interfere with the natives. [59]  15 May  Men employed in erecting a hut burning scrub. Hitherto my time has been occupied in superintending the prisoners and in conversation with the natives. Have obtained upwards of sixty words as a groundwork for the vocabulary. Morley the wife of the aborigine Joe much afflicted. Her lamentations arc most melancholy.  16 May  Men employed in erecting the hut. Morley no better. Gave her a blanket. Anointed the children with sulphur ointment.  17 May [Sunday]  Read the scriptures; felt much comfort in the Acts of the Apostles. Joe went in pursuit of game and in about an hour returned with two wallabies. They skin their animals with shell or a piece of glass bottle. They are very fond of the entrails which they eat half raw.  18 May  At 8 am visited the aboriginal family Joe and Morley and two children. Morley evidently much worse; appeared in a dying state and looked wishfully at me as if anxious for me to afford her relief. Alas I knew not how to relieve her. Enquired of her husband the cause of her being sick: said MERYDY BYDAY LIDINY LOOMERDAY (sick head breast and belly). On each of those parts incisions had been made with a piece of glass bottle. The forehead was much lacerated the blood streaming down her face. Her whole frame was wasted; she had a ghastly appearance appeared in dreadful agony. Her husband was much affected frequently shed tears. Indeed this man's affection both to his wife and children was very striking: in civilised society he would be termed a good husband and kind parent. Made her some tea. Could not bear the afflicting scene; retired to my quarters. The husband soon followed me his cheeks wet with tears. Said LEUBERER LOWGERNER UNNEE (his wife asleep by the fire). Stopped about half an hour. Made some tea for his children. Asked him if he would take his LEUBERER any. Said 'tea kangaroo PARMATTER LINENER NO OILLY' meaning that his wife could not take any food. In about half an hour I met him coming to my quarters with his children blankets kangaroo skins etc. At about 100 yards distant I saw a large fire and it immediately occurred to me that his wife was dead and that the fire was the funeral pile of his deceased wife. I asked him where his LEUBERER was and he said LEUBERER LOGERNER UNNEE (dead in the fire). Walked to the spot. The wind had driven the fire from the legs which were quite exposed. The stench was intolerable. On again visiting the spot the fire had burnt out but the body remained unconsumed. It had been placed in a sitting posture. Whilst ruminating on the mortality which had taken place amongst this tribe within the short space of one month - three had died two of whom were the wives of the aborigine Joe - I was interrupted in my reverie by the husband of the deceased who requested I would assist him in getting WEE (wood) for the purpose of consuming the body. My feelings were particularly excited by this mandate an office of all others I never could have conceived I should have been called upon to assist in. [60] Fearful lest my refusal should give offence and being anxious for the termination of this melancholy business ere the circumstance became known to the prisoners belonging to the establishment I afforded an unwilling assistance.  26 May   Busily engaged in carrying on improvements conversing with the natives writing letters &c. Joe very ill. How ridiculous we make ourselves appear when we are only partially acquainted with a language. An instance of this occurred today. Joe called to me to come to his assistance. I found him very weak. He said 'Mr Robinson TAGGERER WEE Joe TY'. I supposed him to mean that I was to collect WEE (wood) to consume his body when dead and I began to encourage him and said 'Joe TIME ME die' (no die). Part of his meaning was made apparent by his little girl coming with a stick to assist him to walk. In the course of the day one of the children evacuated. I immediately asked 'What name?'; said name TY. The request of this poor man occurred to me namely that I was to get him a stick to assist him to walk out for the purpose of evacuation. I certainly was glad of the information as it enabled me to know in case of sickness the state of their body. On another occasion hearing the children repeatedly crying LY or E.LY and seeing the parents give them water I concluded that ERY or E.LY meant drink; and used the word in that sense. I soon found they knew not my meaning.  27 May  One of the prisoners scalded his foot. Much perplexed with the behaviour of the convicts. Said they ought to be attended to as well as the natives and whether their company was not as good as the natives thought themselves better than the natives all I cared for was the natives &c. Joe extremely ill: these people appear very impatient of pain. This man had made several deep incisions in his body with a view to afford relief. It is universally believed amongst the aborigines that their afflictions are caused by RAEGEOWRAPPER (devil or evil spirit) and they imagine by inflicting wounds on the parts affected that a mitigation of pain will follow. Have obtained one hundred and fifteen words towards the vocabulary. Can make myself tolerably well understood in their vernacular tongue. [61]  30 May  The prisoners of the establishment allowed this day to themselves as an encouragement to labour. In a conversation with the aborigines respecting the workmanship of their baskets I observed that they were inferior to the manufacture of the up-country natives. The natives caught several opossums. They can track opossums through the bush and tell the tree it ascends the opossum in ascending leaving a small scratch on the bark. One of the aborigines performed an operation upon the sick man's throat by cutting it with a glass bottle. The aptness of these people to descry objects at a distance is astonishing: on one occasion they observed a boat and told me whose it was when my sight required the assistance of a glass. They are also remarkable for their aptitude in tracking persons or animals through the bush and are excellent guides. I observed them knock off the fungus from the gum tree which they eat. It has the appearance of wood and has a sweet flavour not unlike mushroom. The natives call it NINGHL There is another sort of fungus belonging to the same tree but which they do not eat called TUVARA. There is also another sort of fungus which belongs to the she-oak resembling sponge of which they also eat. At 5 pm Andrew Ryan with a party of constables arrived at the establishment. Said they were in pursuit of runaways.  31 May [Sunday]  At 11 am performed divine service in the natives' hut. Four of the prisoners attended. Preached to the aborigines in their own tongue. Part of the sermon - MOTTI (one) NYRAE (good) PARLERDI (God) MOTTI (one) NOVILLY (bad) RAEGEWROPPER (devil). PARLERDI (God) NYRAE (good). PARLERDI (God) MAGGERER (stop) WARRANGELLY (sky) RAEGEWROPPER (devil) MAGGERER (stop) TOOGENNER (below) UENEE (fire). NYRAE (good) PARLERWAR (native) LOGERNER (dead) TAGGERER (go) TEENNY (road) LAWWAY (up) WARRANGELLY (sky) PARLERDI (God) NYRAE (good) RAEGE (whiteman) etc etc. NOVILLY (bad) PARLERWAR (native) LOGERNER (dead) TAGGERER (go) TEENNY (road) TOOGUNNER (below) RAEGEWROPPER (devil) UENEE (fire) MAGGERER (stop) UENEE (fire).  The sick aborigine Joe requested a fire outside the hut to which he was anxious to be carried. He did not survive long. I was busy in my hut when the groans of this man ceased and with them the noise of the other natives. A solemn stillness prevailed. My apprehensions became excited. I went out. He had just expired. The natives were seated around their fire and some were employed in twisting grass. They then bent the legs back against the thighs and bound them tight round with the twisted grass. Each arm was bent together and bound round above the elbow. A funeral pile was then made by placing a quantity of dry wood at the bottom upon which they laid some dry bark. They then placed more wood raising it to about two feet six inches above the ground. A quantity of dry bark was then laid upon the top upon which they placed the corpse arching the whole over with dry wood. The men and women assisted in kindling the fire after which they left the fire and did not approach the spot any more that day. Next morning I went with them to see the remains and found one of the dogs eating a part unconsumed. The remains were then collected and burnt. I wished them to have burnt his body on the same spot where his wife's had been consumed but whether it was on account of the trouble or from superstitious motive I know not they did not seem at all willing. [62] I did not therefore urge it. After the body was burnt the ashes were scraped together and a quantity of grass and sticks laid over them. They seemed to have a presentiment of the approach of death: his wife requested to have a fire made in a fresh place and in a few hours afterwards she expired; this man made the same request two hours after which he expired.  In the death of this man the establishment has sustained a severe loss. He was kind and humane and remarkably affectionate to his children. For probity and veracity he was unequalled. I could place the fullest confidence in him and never did he betray that confidence. But alas he is no more. Death has done his office upon him. Would to God he had died in the faith of Jesus Christ. I feel very sorrowful at this dispensation. These rude and uninstructed natives leave behind them a monument far superior to the stately mausoleum of the proud and arrogant. The convicts mourn on account of him: 'Sir said one I feel very sorry; I liked him because he was affectionate; I remember giving him bread and he gave it first to his children'. He has left two interesting children a boy and a girl to deplore his loss one of whom the boy was sucking at the breast at the time of the mother's death; the girl was about four years of age. I took occasion to converse with the natives on the circumstance of this man's death and that of his wives but they told me they did not like to speak on the subject. I asked them where they went to after death. One said to England. I scarcely credited what I heard. I asked the question again when they all replied that they went to England that there was plenty of PARLEVAR in England. I lament that so many years have been suffered to glide by without any attempt having been made to ameliorate their condition and instruct them in the true faith. [...] [63]  2 June .  Separated the orphan aboriginal children from the tribe by placing them in the prisoners' hut. In conversation with the natives. Overheard a discourse amongst the prisoners respecting the object of the establishment: thought it would be a bad job to civilise the natives as it would make work very scarce. Prisoners employed cutting firewood for the government sloop Opossum.  7 June [Sunday]  Conversed with the natives on religious subjects. Learnt that they had some idea of a good spirit whom they called PÁRLLERDÉ and that he stopped in the sky (WARRANGGELLY).  9 June  Sailed the Opossum. Men putting up a hut for my store. Went out with the natives in the whaleboat to catch fish. The women dive for the mutton fish an essential part of the native diet. They have a basket made of rushes which they sling over their shoulders and a small stick sharpened at one end and hardened in the fire which they hold in their hand. Thus equipped they dive and force the fish from off the rocks by means of the stick. They are excellent divers keeping under water for a considerable time; they ascend to the surface for a second or so and then dive and continue down until they have filled their baskets.  10 June  Men employed in framing my house. Made some temporary repairs to the boat. The six days the Opossum was here the crew of the vessel caught from ninety to one hundred dozen of fish with hook and line.  11 June  Moving the stores to a temporary hut adjoining that of the prisoners. Natives out getting me oysters. The men catching young kangaroo and opossum for me to take to Hobart Town: brought me an opossum. [64]  7 July  Boat returned with the aborigines four of whom were dangerously ill and unable to walk without assistance. Issued clothing to the aborigines. Shot some birds for the sick of which they are remarkably fond. Gave them some tea and sugar.  8 July  The aborigine Jack apparently much worse. Apprehensive that he would not survive his complaint it seeming to bear a similarity to that of which others had died and being anxious to be confirmed in my opinion I manned my boat and went on board the ship which was aground off the establishment to solicit the opinion of a medical gentleman named Fattorini belonging to the vessel who was formerly page to Napoleon le Grand. On our return ashore this gentleman after viewing the dying man averred his complaint arose in an affection of the lungs and fully concurred with me as to the improbability of his recovery. He further stated that his complaint might have been checked in its early stage by bleeding and that his throat was filled with purulent matter which caused a difficulty of respiration. At 7 pm Jack breathed his last. The usual ceremony was performed and his body committed to the flames. The wife of the deceased when life was extinct sang a song of mournful lamentation which lasted about half an hour.  I must not omit to state that in the early part of the day I went on board the Prince Regent accompanied by two of the most intelligent females under my charge who were received by their own sex with a degree of politeness which their unpolished natures could not comprehend. The pleasure however seemed to be mutual. The ladies at first exclaimed at the beauty of the boys for so they considered them. But when an explanation ensued on my part and their true gender was made known their feminine sensibility could not endure the striking contrast; and as if apprehensive that pollution might follow this development of unsophisticated nature or beauty unadorned they flew to their wardrobe and equipped their visitors in a style not plain but gaudy not as a country maid but in silk and satins after the manner of a drawing-room belle at the west end of the metropolis. Of course my companions were highly pleased at this their metamorphosis but holding no sense of value I thought it best to take the first opportunity of substituting some Maria Island manufacture which is more durable and more suited to their habits to which they offered no objection. [65]  9 July  Monsieur Fattorini paid me another visit accompanied by Mr Allan who was formerly Commissary-General at Sydney and two of his sons. Mr Allan expressed his opinion that the aborigines of this colony had been much misrepresented and that as far as his observation went he considered them a tractable and intelligent race and that the system now adopted towards them would be attended with the greatest success.  The aborigines appeared greatly affected at the dire mortality which had taken place amongst their tribe and consequently showed a reluctance to remain in this abode which they had previously occupied. They therefore requested that the position of their habitation might be altered - for they were led to leave a place where sickness existed and always when there had been a death supposing it was some evil spirit had caused the malady - to which I acceded and went through the necessary labour. I have not failed upon all occasions by endeavouring to persuade the aborigines of the existence of an Almighty Power to remove all superstitious prejudices of which this appears to be one. In the course of my rounds this day I observed a sick aborigine busily engaged in folding up a small portion of the ashes of a deceased which she tied round with grass and enclosed in a piece of kangaroo skin with the fur turned inwards and then sewed it tightly together. She possessed herself of two of these relics one of which she gave to her husband who was also in a sickly condition. I am of opinion that the aborigines hold these relics as a charm and not from any respect to the deceased as I observed that the sick woman before alluded to girded them about the part which seemed most afflicted. I had observed upon a former occasion this extra appendage but never till now was I aware of the cause.  At 7 pm it being then dark I was dreadfully alarmed by a horrid yell which threw the whole of the establishment into a temporary consternation. I immediately repaired to the spot from whence the noise proceeded and was agreeably surprised to find an accession of nine aborigines consisting of three women three men and three children who had travelled overland from Port Davey to join their friends here. The joy exhibited on both sides was unbounded and fully indicative of the affection they felt towards each other. One of them was son to the afflicted persons abovementioned. Provided them with clothing and provision. Was informed that four aborigines consisting of three women and a boy had stopped at Port Esperance and that there was a numerous tribe of aborigines now dwelling at Port Davey.  10 July  Thick hazy weather with rain and squally throughout the whole of the day with occasional falls of snow. Men busily employed during the week in the erection of my cottage. The late aboriginal corners seem to be perfectly contented with their fresh abode. The raiment provided by government for the use of the females seems well adapted for the purpose: such as want lengthening the wearers are provided with needles and thread to accomplish. [66] Doctor one of the sick aborigines heretofore alluded to I am happy to find is now convalescent.  11 July  The fresh aborigines started back for Port Davey. The craft of these people exceeds all belief. From the satisfied tone of their demeanour I had great reason to hope that they intended sojourning here some time particularly as some of them came to meet their relatives. I must own I was somewhat disappointed at this occurrence as I had anticipated a strong enforcement to conduct me to Port Davey as my premeditated object would be thereby greatly facilitated. Having however taken care to provide them both with food and raiment whilst they remained I am led to hope that their report will pave the way to a favourable reception amongst their tribe. In this however I trust entirely to a just and omniscient providence.   THE expedition of which we have just detailed the proceedings was so far satisfactory in its results that it not only set at rest the hypothesis of the existence of an internal shoal sea in southern Australia and ascertained the actual termination of the rivers it had been directed to trace but also added very largely to our knowledge of the country considerably to the westward of former discoveries. [91] And although no land had been traversed of a fertile description of sufficient extent to invite the settler the fact of a large river such as the Darling lying at the back of our almost intertropical settlements gave a fresh importance to the distant interior. It was evident that this river was the chief drain for carrying off the waters falling westerly from the eastern coast and as its course indicated a decline of country diametrically opposite to that which had been calculated upon it became an object of great importance to ascertain its further direction. Had not the saline quality of its waters been accounted for by the known existence of brine springs in its bed it would have been natural to have supposed that it communicated with some mediterranean sea; but under existing circumstances it remained to be proved whether this river held on a due south course or whether it ultimately turned westerly and ran into the heart of the interior. In order fully to determine this point it would be necessary to regain its banks so far below the parallel to which it had been traced as to leave no doubt of its identity; but it was difficult to fix upon a plan for approaching that central stream without suffering from the want of water since it could hardly be expected that the Lachlan would afford such means as it was reasonable to presume that its termination was very similar to that of the Macquarie. The attention of the government was consequently fixed upon the Morumbidgee a river stated to be of considerable size and of impetuous current. Receiving its supplies from the lofty ranges behind Mount Dromedary it promised to hold a longer course than those rivers which depending on periodical rains alone for existence had been found so soon to exhaust themselves. [...]   A wish to contribute to the public good led me to undertake those journeys which have cost me so much. The same feeling actuates me in recording their results; and I have the satisfaction to know that my path among a large and savage population was a bloodless one; and that my intercourse with them was such as to lessen the danger to future adventurers upon such hazardous enterprizes and to give them hope where I had so often despaired. [92] Something more powerful than human foresight or human prudence appeared to avert the calamities and dangers with which I and my companions were so frequently threatened; and had it not been for the guidance and protection we received from the Providence of that good and all-wise Being to whose care we committed ourselves we should ere this have ceased to rank among the number of His earthly creatures.  [Nov. 10 1829] The morning on which I left Sydney a second time under such doubtful circumstances was perfectly serene and clear. I found myself at 5 a.m. of that delightful morning leading my horses through the gates of those barracks whose precincts I might never again enter and whose inmates I might never again behold assembled in military array. Yet although the chance of misfortune flashed across my mind I was never lighter at heart or more joyous in spirit. It appeared to me that the stillness and harmony of nature influenced my feelings on the occasion and my mind forgot the storms of life as nature at that moment seemed to have forgotten the tempests that sometimes agitate her.   At a quarter before 7 the party filed through the turnpike-gate and thus commenced its journey with the greatest regularity. I have the scene even at this distance of time vividly impressed upon my mind and I have no doubt the kind friend who was near me on the occasion bears it as strongly on his recollection. My servant Harris who had shared my wanderings and had continued in my service for eighteen years led the advance with his companion Hopkinson. Nearly abreast of them the eccentric Fraser stalked along wholly lost in thought. The two former had laid aside their military habits and had substituted the broad brimmed hat and the bushman's dress in their place but it was impossible to guess how Fraser intended to protect himself from the heat or the damp so little were his habiliments suited for the occasion. [93] He had his gun over his shoulder and his double shot belt as full as it could be of shot although there was not a chance of his expending a grain during the day. Some dogs Mr. Maxwell had kindly sent me followed close at his heels as if they knew his interest in them and they really seemed as if they were aware that they were about to exchange their late confinement for the freedom of the woods. The whole of these formed a kind of advanced guard. At some distance in the rear the drays moved slowly along on one of which rode the black boy mentioned in my former volume and behind them followed the pack animals. Robert Harris whom I had appointed to superintend the animals generally kept his place near the horses and the heavy Clayton my carpenter brought up the rear. [...]  I had been more anxious to gain the banks of the Morumbidgee on this occasion than I had been on a former one to gain those of the Macquarie for although I could not hope to see the Morumbidgee all that it had been described to me yet I felt that on its first appearance I should in some measure ground my anticipations of ultimate success. When I arrived on the banks of the Macquarie it had almost ceased to flow and its current was so gentle as to be scarcely perceptible. Instead however of a river in such a state of exhaustion I now looked down upon a stream whose current it would have been difficult to breast and whose waters foaming among rocks or circling in eddies gave early promise of a reckless course. It must have been somewhat below its ordinary level and averaged a breadth of about 8o feet. Its waters were hard and transparent and its bed was composed of mountain debris and large fragments of rock.  We were now far beyond the acknowledged limits of the located parts of the colony and Mr. Whaby's station was the last at which we could expect even the casual supply of milk or other trifling relief. Yet although the prospect of so soon leaving even the outskirts of civilization and being wholly thrown on our own resources was so near it never for a moment weighed upon the minds of the men. The novelty of the scenery and the beauty of the river on which they were journeying excited in them the liveliest anticipations of success. [94] The facility with which we had hitherto pushed forward blinded them to future difficulties nor could there be a more cheerful spectacle than that which the camp daily afforded. The animals browzing in the distance and the men talking over their pipes of the probable adventures they might encounter. The loads had by this time settled properly and our provisions proved of the very best quality so that no possible improvement could have been made for the better.  One of the blacks being anxious to get an opossum out of a dead tree every branch of which was hollow asked for a tomahawk with which he cut a hole in the trunk above where he thought the animal lay concealed. He found however that he had cut too low and that it had run higher up. This made it necessary to smoke it out; he accordingly got some dry grass and having kindled a fire stuffed it into the hole he had cut. A raging fire soon kindled in the tree where the draft was great and dense columns of smoke issued from the end of each branch as thick as that from the chimney of a steam engine. The shell of the tree was so thin that I thought it would soon be burnt through and that the tree would fall; but the black had no such fears and ascending to the highest branch he watched anxiously for the poor little wretch he had thus surrounded with dangers and devoted to destruction; and no sooner did it appear half singed and half roasted than he seized upon it and threw it down to us with an air of triumph. The effect of the scene in so lonely a forest was very fine. The roaring of the fire in the tree the fearless attitude of the savage and the associations which his colour and appearance enveloped as he was in smoke called up were singular and still dwell on my recollection. We had not long left the tree when it fell with a tremendous crash and was when we next passed that way a mere heap of ashes. [...]  [Dec. 10 1829] The Morumbidgee appeared on examination to have increased in breadth and continued to rise gradually. It is certainly a noble stream very different from those I had already traced to their termination. The old black informed me that there was another large river flowing to the southward of west to which the Morumbidgee was as a creek and that we could gain it in four days. [95] He stated that its waters were good but that its banks were not peopled. That such a feature existed where he laid it down. I thought extremely probable because it was only natural to expect that other streams descended from the mountains in the S.E. of the island as well as that on which we were travelling. The question was whether either of them held on an uninterrupted course to some reservoir or whether they fell short of the coast and exhausted themselves in marshes. Considering the concave direction of the mountains to the S.E. I even at this time hoped that the rivers falling into the interior would unite sooner or later and contribute to the formation of an important and navigable stream. Of the fate of the Morumbidgee the old black could give no account. It seemed probable therefore that we were far from its termination [...]  [Dec. 16 1829] We journeyed due west over plains of great extent. The soil upon them was soft and yielding in some places being a kind of light earth covered with rhagodiae in others a red tenacious clay overrun by the misembrianthemum and salsolae. Nothing could exceed the apparent barrenness of these plains or the cheerlessness of the landscape. We had left all high lands behind us and were now on an extensive plain bounded in the distance by low trees or by dark lines of cypresses. The lofty gum-trees on the river followed its windings and as we opened the points they appeared from the peculiar effect of a mirage as bold promontories jutting into the ocean having literally the blue tint of distance. This mirage floated in a light tremulous vapour on the ground and not only deceived us with regard to the extent of the plains and the appearance of objects but hid the trees in fact from our view altogether; so that in moving as we imagined upon the very point or angle of the river we found as we neared it that the trees stretched much further into the plain and were obliged to alter our course to round them. The heated state of the atmosphere and the sandy nature of the country could alone have caused a mirage so striking in its effects as this - exceeding considerably similar appearances noticed during the first expedition. [96] The travelling was so heavy that I was obliged to make a short day's journey and when we struck the river for the purpose of halting it had fallen off very much in appearance and was evidently much contracted with low banks and a sandy bed. It was difficult to account for this sudden change but when I gazed on the extent of level country before me I began to dread that this hitherto beautiful stream would ultimately disappoint us. [...]  [17 Dec. 1829] Our route during the day was over as melancholy a tract as ever was travelled. The plains to the N. and N.W. bounded the horizon; not a tree of any kind was visible upon them. It was equally open to the S and it appeared as if the river was decoying us into a desert there to leave us in difficulty and in distress. The very mirage had the effect of boundlessness in it by blending objects in one general hue; or playing on the ground it cheated us with an appearance of water and on arriving at the spot we found a continuation of the same scorching plain over which we were moving instead of the stream we had hoped for.  The cattle about this time began to suffer and anxious as I was to push on I was obliged to shorten my journeys according to circumstances. Amidst the desolation around us the river kept alive our hopes. If it traversed deserts it might reach fertile lands and it was to the issue of the journey that we had to look for success. It here however evidently overflowed its banks more extensively than heretofore and broad belts of reeds were visible on either side of it on which the animals exclusively subsisted.  [18 Dec. 1829] It is impossible for me to describe the kind of country we were now traversing or the dreariness of the view it presented. The plains were still open to the horizon but here and there a stunted gum-tree or a gloomy cypress seemed placed by nature as mourners over the surrounding desolation. Neither beast nor bird inhabited these lonely and inhospitable regions over which the silence of the grave seemed to reign. We had not for days past seen a blade of grass so that the animals could not have been in very good condition. We pushed on however sixteen miles in consequence of the coolness of the weather. [97]  We observed little change in the river in that distance excepting that it had taken up a muddy bottom and lost all the sand that used to fill it. The soil and productions on the plains continued unchanged in every respect. From this time to the 22nd the country presented the same aspect Occasional groups of cypress shewed themselves on narrow sandy ridges or partial brushes extended from the river consisting chiefly of the acacia pendula the stenochylus and the nut I have already noticed. The soil on which they grew was if possible worse than that of the barren plain which we were traversing; and their colour and drooping state rendered the desolate landscape still more dreary.  [26th Dec. 1829] We started on the 26th on a course somewhat to the N.W and traversed plains of the same wearisome description as those I have already described. The wheels of the drays sank up to their axle-trees and the horses above their fetlocks at every step. The fields of polygonum spread on every side of us like a dark sea and the only green object within range of our vision was the river line of trees. In several instances the force of both teams was put to one dray to extricate it from the bed into which it had sunk and the labour was considerably increased from the nature of the weather. The wind was blowing as if through a furnace from the N.N.E abd the dust was flying in clouds so as to render it almost suffocating to remain exposed to it. This was the only occasion upon which we felt the hot winds in the interior. We were about noon endeavouring to gain a point of a wood at which I expected to come upon the river again but it was impossible for the teams to reach it without assistance. I therefore sent M'Leay forward with orders to unload the pack animals as soon as he should make the river and send them back to help the teams. He had scarcely been separated from me 20 minutes when one of the men came galloping back to inform me that no river was to be found - that the country beyond the wood was covered with reeds as far as the eye could reach and that Mr. M'Leay had sent him back for instructions. This intelligence stunned me for a moment or two and I am sure its effect upon the men was very great. They had unexpectedly arrived at a part of the interior similar to one they had held in dread and conjured up a thousand difficulties and privations. [98] I desired the man to recall Mr. M'Leay; and after gaining the wood moved outside of it at right angles to my former course and reached the river after a day of severe toil and exposure at half-past five. The country indeed bore every resemblance to that around the marshes of the Macquarie but I was too weary to make any further effort: indeed it was too late for me to undertake anything until morning.  The circumstances In which we were so unexpectedly placed occupied my mind so fully that I could not sleep; and I awaited the return of light with the utmost anxiety. If we were indeed on the outskirts of marshes similar to those I had on a former occasion found so much difficulty in examining I foresaw that in endeavouring to move round them I should recede from water and place the expedition in jeopardy probably without gaining any determinate point as it would be necessary for me to advance slowly and with caution. Our provisions however being calculated to last only to a certain period I was equally reluctant to delay our operations. My course was therefore to be regulated by the appearance of the country and of the river which I purposed examining with the earliest dawn. If the latter should be found to run into a region of reeds a boat would be necessary to enable me to ascertain its direction; but if ultimately it should be discovered to exhaust itself we should have to strike into the interior on a N.W. course in search of the Darling.  [28 Dec. 1829] M'Leay and I started at an early hour on an excursion of deeper interest than any we had as yet undertaken; to examine the reeds not only for the purpose of ascertaining their extent if possible but also to guide us in our future measures. We rode for some miles along the river side but observed in it no signs either of increase or of exhaustion. Its waters though turbid were deep and its current still rapid. Its banks too were lofty and showed no. evidence of decreasing in height so as to occasion an overflow of them as had been the case with the Macquarie. We got among vast bodies of reeds but the plains of the interior were visible beyond them. We were evidently in a hollow and the decline of country was plainly to the southward of west. [99] Everything tended to strengthen my conviction that we were still far from the termination of the river. The character it had borne throughout and its appearance now so far to the westward gave me the most lively hopes that it would make good its way through the vast level into which it fell and that its termination would accord with its promise. Besides I daily anticipated its junction with some stream of equal if not of greater magnitude from the S.E. I was aware that my resolves must be instant decisive and immediately acted upon as on firmness and promptitude at this crisis the success of the expedition depended. About noon I checked my horse and rather to the surprise of my companion intimated to him my intention of returning to the camp. He naturally asked what I purposed doing. I told him it appeared to me more than probable that the Morumbidgee would hold good its course to some fixed point now that it had reached a meridian beyond the known rivers of the interior. It was certain from the denseness of the reeds and the breadth of the belts that the teams could not be brought any farther and that taking every thing into consideration I had resolved on a bold and desperate measure that of building the whale-boat and sending home the drays. Our appearance in camp so suddenly surprised the men not more than the orders I gave. They all thought I had struck on some remarkable change of country and were anxious to know my ultimate views. It was not my intention however immediately to satisfy their curiosity. I had to study their characters as long as I could in order to select those best qualified to accompany me on the desperate adventure for which I was preparing.  The attention both of M'Leay and myself was turned to the hasty building of the whale-boat. A shed was erected and every necessary preparation made and although Clayton had the keel of the small boat already laid down and some planks prepared she was abandoned for the present and after four days more of arduous labour the whale-boat was painted and in the water. From her dimensions it appeared to me impossible that she would hold all our provisions and stores for her after-part had been fitted up as an armoury which took away considerably from her capacity of stowage. [100] The small boat would still therefore be necessary and she was accordingly re-laid for half the dimensions of the large boat and in three days was alongside her consort in the river. Thus in seven days we had put together a boat twenty-seven feet in length had felled a tree from the forest with which we had built a second of half the size had painted both and had them at a temporary wharf ready for loading. Such would not have been the case had not our hearts been in the work as the weather was close and sultry and we found it a task of extreme labour. In the intervals between the hours of work I prepared my despatches for the Governor and when they were closed it only remained for me to select six hands the number I intended should accompany me down the river and to load the boats ere we should once more proceed in the further obedience of our instructions [...]  16 Oct. 1830  Last night Peter Hawkins came to me for protection he having been severely beat by Jeffries and Ashley his head cut open apparently by some sharp instrument. Kept him here for the night and this morn I took all parties to the Police Office it appears Ashley and Peter had gone to town without leave as usual quarrelled and Jeffries assisted in ill using Peter. The whole mob of them having made a set against that man from an idea of his telling me tales which he does not Brown laid in his bed and instead of assisting Peter encouraged the others to beat him he was ordered 25 lashes Ashley 30 Jeffries 50 and all promised if again brought for a repetition of the offence they should be sent to Maquarie Harbour.  18 Oct.  My three men were brought to me by the flagelator this morn having been punished at sunrise. I gave him a receipt for them enclosing 2 dollars as a fee he said they had been very severely flogged. about noon I observed Jeffries who had recd. 50 and whose back the flagelator told me was like a mass of bullocks liver returning from the distillery very drunk. I followed him home found him raving against Hawkins [...] . fearing the consequences if Hawkins came in sight whilst the ruffian was under the double excitement of pain and liquor I intercepted him and sent him to the kitchen for his dinner he of course joins them tonight [...] . it will not do for me to seem even to fear the consequences.  Jany 1st to 5th  During this past month since my arrival in Sydney in consequence of the absence of the Surveyor General in the interior I have been doing little more than getting myself settled &c and was engaged at the office for the first time Tracing a sketch of part of the line of Road to the Hunter's River. Purchased a horse for which I am to pay £27 - -  6th  Correcting the same sketch and tracing one of the Roads to Bathurst.  7th  Finished and delivered to Major Mitchell the sketch of the Roads to Bathurst:-  8th  Continued sketch of the Hunter's River Roads.  9th  At the office untill 1/2 past One continuing the above sketch:- afterwards engaged in making preparations for my journey - -  10th  Sunday  11th  Engaged all day in making preparations for my journey - received my written instructions &c.  12th  Engaged in the same way to-day.  13th  Today drew 3 week's rations and slops for my men and in the evening pitched my tent  14th  Drew my arms and ammunition - engaged the whole day in preparing for my journey.  15th  Completed my preparations & sent my men & equipage forward to Long Bottom  16th  At 1/4 past 6 P.M. left Sydney in company with Mr Macleod and got to Paramatta to Breakfast - after breakfast assisted him in measuring some allotments adjoining the New Catholic Chapel - Our men passed through & about one O' clock encamped at Broken Back Bridge where I joined them in the afternoon - slept in my tent  Sunday 17th  Went to Paramatta church afterwards rode round the Government Domain -  Monday 18th Jany 1830  At 1/2 past 6 AM left our station at Broken Back Bridge and about 2 PM encamped at the back of Best's 15 miles from Paramatta -  Tuesday 19th  Left Bests at 8 O'clock and at 1 PM encamped at the "finger Post" distant 15 miles and 9 from Wisemans. The Road from Bests hitherto is in many places rough & bad and unlike that we travelled yesterday there are no signs of cultivation .. no small farms nor indeed a single habitation of any description nothing but interminable Forest - tho' here and there at the rise of a Hill the country opens before you and presents a magnificent prospect -  Wednesday 20th  Left the "Finger post" and arrived at Wiseman's on the Hawkesbury. The leading features of the country are the same as in yesterday's march - ranges upon ranges of barren & unprofitable rock without an acre of land available for agricultural purposes. Approaching "Wiseman's" there are some pretty & romantic peeps of the Hawkesbury winding through the valley; and there is the first good land I have seen in the Colony. It consists of prime but not extensive tracts of alluvial land; but it bears a miserably small proportion to the ranges of useless rock which here rise perpendicularly to an immense height clothed with timber & brush from base to summit & giving an irregularly wild & romantic affect to the Scenery. The pencil of Gaspard Poussin alone could do justice to some of the scenes I have beheld today with delight & admiration.  Thursday 21st  Measuring Dogherty's Farm in company of Mr Macleod. Wrote to Major Mitchell (by dray) returning to Sydney informing him of our arrival here.  Friday 22nd  Measuring Rose's farm - weather for several days has been dull & heavy and tonight the rain is falling plentifully.  Saturday 23  Heavy rain at intervals throughout the day which has prevented our working in the field. Accompanied by McLeod & Larmer crossed the River to Wiseman's to procure some corn &c - - Shot (at one shot) two birds of the Cockatoo Species - one of them ash-colour tinged with yellow about the head - throat canary colour - breast a dusky brown back & wings raven - tail consisting of twelve feathers two upper ones raven - 10 others the same colour banded about the middle with broad bands of bright crimson-edged yellow The other of the same description excepting that it had no yellow about the throat and had only one broad band of crimson on the 10 tail feathers. The heads irregularly formed with immensely powerful ............... [NN] as jaws the under part of the beak quite square - & the upper part curved like all birds of the parrot kind - They were both of the same size & measured from tip to tip of the wings 3 feet 3 ins. and from beak to tail 19 ins -  Sunday 24th Jany  Took a ride round the different little vallies to the Eastward of our camp: the scenery is everywhere of the same magnificent description range upon range of rocky hills 4 or 500 feet in height rising high over vallies partly swamp but still of the richest and most luxuriant alluvial soil - and wanting only English Capital and English industry to render them productive in the highest degree. The slopes of the hills too at the lower part where they are free from rock are well covered with very good herbage. Indeed land in the neighbourhood of Bath and of other places I know of a description inferior to this lets as high as 40/ to 50s/ an acre. - Two of our men this morning killed a black snake measuring about four feet six inches. It had just cast its skin when taken. On being opened it was found to contain as many as eighteen (18) small ones ............ [NN] 10 ins. long each enclosed in a separate wrap or bag sufficient proof that the black snake at least is not oviparous as some have maintained to be the case with all snakes.  Monday 25th  Went up Webb's Creek for the purpose of measuring Smith's - Rose's & Grono's Farms but being misinformed as to the distance was obliged to return at night for the purpose of procuring provisions &c. These Farms are situated about 15 miles from the mouth of the Creek which is passable in a boat only about 10 miles. About a mile beyond the Creek ............... [NN] altogether & becomes only a succession of fresh water Lagoons..  Tuesday 26th Jany 1830  Tuesday 26th Jany 1830  Started in a boat with five men & provisions for 3 days began measuring Smith's (or Hearn's) Farm: the land is very difficult of access from the quantity of water which covers it in many places - & from the swampy nature of a great part of it.  Jany 27th-28th  27th-28th  Finished Smith's and began measuring Rose's Farm Finished Rose's Farm - and returned to the Camp - from the difficulties I met with in measuring these two Farms I was deterred from commencing Grono's which is of the same description and much more extensive:- fearing that if I remained to finish it I should not reach the camp by the time the bullocks returned from Sydney and should thereby occasion a delay which is contrary to the spirit of my instructions. Such would certainly have been the case - for the bullocks returned this night to our camp   Friday 29  Drawing sketches and preparing Reports of the Farms measured by me in this neighbourhood. The weather has been oppressively hot and since dark there have been heavy storms of thunder lightning & rain - wrote to major Mitchell a letter to accompany my reports  Saturday 30th  Wrote fair Copies of my letter & reports to send by Wiseman's man to Paramatta tomorrow morng Drew 14 days' rations from Wiseman's and sent the men forward to 12 mile hollow Twelve (now Ten) Mile Hollow - The Great North Road continues northward to the left Simpson's Track (after Percy Simpson engineer for the road's construction) branches off eastwards to the right. Stone footings of a building are amongst the trees in the centre.  Sunday 31st  Dined at Mr Simpson's  Monday 1st February  Thick & heavy rain during the day. In the afternoon left Wiseman's accompanied by Mr Larmer & two guides for the Iron Gang Party No 9 distant 12 miles where we arrived about 10 O' clock. I have suffered during the whole of this afternoon from a severe attack of Cholera Morbus which rendered me almost incapable of walking  Tuesday 2nd  Detained at the huts all day by illness & by heavy & incessant rain  Wednesday 3rd  Left the huts and reached the camp at Hungry Flat. Rain all day.  Thursday 4th  Heavy rain the greater part of the day but being very anxious to push on we travelled as far as Dennis's Dog Kennel.  Friday 5th  Weather fine proceeded as far as Finch's  Saturday 6th Feby  In consequence of Mr Macleod not having joined us I determined to await him here:- in the event he returned - & brought me a fresh man in lieu of O'Regan who for drunkenness & insolence was sent to an iron gang.  Sunday 7th  Walked to the summit of one of the loftiest ranges - the view was extensive - but both the mind & the eye become wearied of gazing on such interminable tracts of forest: I want the fine open varied & expansive prospects which is presented from the hills in dear England. -  Monday 8th  Early in the morng moved from Finch's and proceeded to Blaxland's stock station on the Wollombi.- The country through which we have travelled today is different from any I have before seen - the ranges are less lofty there rises more thickly clothed with herbage & the vallies are rich & varied affording excellent pasture. indeed the kind of scenery reminded me much of walking through rock and land in Somersetshire excepting that the trees are not apple. -  Tuesday 9th  Left the Station and arrived at the Reserve of Broke on the Wollombi - country similar to that we passed through yesterday.- Shot a large brown eagle measuring upwards of seven feet across the wings.  Wednesday 10th  Assisted Mr Macleod in measuring the government Reserve of Broke on the Wollombi.. country picturesque but great part of the land very poor & (though flat) abounding in Iron Bark - & in some parts with Apple and Gum -  Thursday 11th  Measuring a line of Road from the Reserve of Broke N32º30'W towards the Reserve of Hay on the River Hunter - measured 6 miles & encamped. Visited the first camp of the natives I have seen. There were about 60 men women & children. I remained with them about an hour & saw them return for the night each party or family kindling its own separate fire apart from the others. The place they were encamped in was a romantic spot on the bank of the Wollombi and the scene altogether was to me one of peculiar interest. They were very curious [NN] in observing every article of my dress & everything about me and were particularly amused with my watch & a pocket compass especially the latter the use of which they appeared in some measure to comprehend. A whistle too which I wore suspended from my neck they were much pleased with & were very anxious to make it sound as I did -  I prevailed on some of them to "give me a specimen of their skill in throwing the "Boomerang" a weapon which is composed of hard wood nearly in the shape of a crescent which they throw from them to a great distance causing it to describe a circle and fall again at their feet. They asked us to see their "gins" or wives & very obligingly invited us to select a good one each & invitation which I did not feel at all disposed to avail myself of. They are amazingly quick of comprehension & caught my name in a moment pronouncing it well & distinctly - they were much amused at our awkward attempts at pronouncing some of the native names - They are certainly a less disgusting set than those in the neighbourhood of Sydney indeed one of them named "Wednesday" was really a very fine man - but many of them are ugly & loathsome from dirt & starvation & I observed several who appeared to have defective eyes.  Friday 12th  This morning our black acquaintances surrounded our tents & two of the women & several children were delighted with some bread & tea which I gave them - Measuring the line on to the Reserve of Haye - nine miles & then walked to the Camp which was pitched on Howes Farm adjoining the Reserve & on the West bank of the Hunter. This is one of the great Rivers of Australia & to my astonishment I found it now nothing but a wide bed of sand & gravel - with here & there a dirty pool of stagnant water. The heat for several days has been excessive & I have suffered much measuring over burning sand from thirst & fatigue  Saturday Feby 13th  Finished on line of Road & measuring two section lines to meet it -  14th Sunday -  Monday 15th  Measuring the Reserve of Haye  Tuesday 16th  Do - Do -  Wednesday 17th  Do - much rain throughout the day.  Thursday 18th  Finished measuring the reserve of Haye - The extreme difficulty we had in finding the boundaries from having no person to point them out and from the incorrectness in many places of the section line has caused to be longer in making this survey than we otherwise should have been - In the afternoon left the camp with Mr Macleod and encamped at night on the village Reserve on the banks of the Wollombi -  Friday 19th  Measuring the village reserve - proceeded & reached Mr Mudie's on Patrick's plains - this is a fine open tract of land of about 5000 acres commanding a fine view; & afforded great relief to the mind & the eye after travelling so long through pathless forest.  Saturday 20th  Left Mudie's and arrived at Dalwood's Mr Geo Wyndham's - here Mr Macleod left me in order to proceed to Newcastle.  Sunday 21  at Dalwood's - walked with Mr Wyndham to "Luscintyre" Mr Macleod's - this is a very fine part of the River - the country is open & beautiful and the houses of the settlers are of a very superior description  Monday 22nd  Procured three week's rations from Mr Wyndham and left Dalwood's - encamped opposite to Mr Mudie's -  Tuesday 23  Returned to the camp on the reserve of "Haye" - encountered the most terrific thunderstorm I ever witnessed which continued nearly 2 hours -  Wednesday 24  Rain all day  Thursday 25  Measuring and tracing the hills gullies &c - on the Reserve of Haye  Friday 26  Ditto - Ditto: - heavy rain great part of the day  Saturday 27  Miserable wet day - rough plan of the reserve of Hay - -  Sunday 28  Heavy Rain all day - reading & writing  Monday March 1st  Fine day - drawing fair plan of the reserve of Haye  Tuesday 2nd  Finished my fair plan & prepared my Report which I sent to Major Mitchell by way of Wallis Plains  Wednesday 3rd  Heavy rain - awaiting the arrival of stores from Newcastle  Thursday 4  Waiting the return of Mr Macleod - walked round the boundaries of the Reserve & double marked all the corner pins -  Friday 5  Waiting the return of Mr Macleod with stores. Writing letters all day.  Saturday 6th  Do - very wet  Sunday 7th  Writing & reading - fine day  Monday 8  Mr Mcleod & Mr Larmer returned unpacking stores & c  Tuesday 9th  Unpacking & taking acct of stores &c &c - a total eclipse of the Moon which commenced a little after 9 in the eveng total darkness at 1/4 before ten which lasted two hours.  Wednesday 10th  Weighing rations &c Mr Larmer receiving stores &c &c went to Patrick Plains  Thursday 11th  Sent on the cart to Dalwood's and remained all day at Mr Mudies -  Friday 12th  Left Mr Mudies & got to Dalwood to dinner - retd the 3 weeks rations borrowed of Mr Wyndham -  Saturday 13th  Rode to Wallis's Plains; called at Mr Campbell's & left directions about a table returned to Dalwood to dinner -  Sunday 14th  Spent the day at Dalwood  Monday 15th  Left Dalwood & reached Mr Mudie's -  Tuesday 16th  Left Patrick Plains & retd to the Camp at Hay  Wednesday 17  Set my men to work in erecting a hut for the reception of the stores - -  Thursday 18  Superintending the work  Friday 19  Do - - recg stores from & weighing Rations to Mr Macleod -  Saturday 20  Do - Do -  Sunday 21  Reading & writing - rode up to the top of a lofty hill at the back of Larmer's house - commanding a most extensive view - Mt Dangar (or "Wandi") clearly visible  Monday 22  Superintending the work at the hut.  Tuesday 23  Do - Do - completed Do weighing rations to Mr Abbott  Wednesday 24  Removing the stores from the tents to the hut - weighing & taking of same  Thursday 25  Do Do weighing Rations to my own party &c -  Friday 26  Tracing pt of the River and Road from Jerry's Plains towards the Wollombi. 9 miles measures - could not reach the Camp until 9 O'clock having left it at 1/2 past 7 in the morng - -  Saturday 27  In consequence of having lost one of my men with my instrument I was detained at Camp today -  Sunday 28  Reading & writing - very wet day  Monday 29  Left the Camp at "Hay" - measured five miles of Road and encamped at Onus's on the Wollombi ..  Tuesday 30  Removed from Onus's & encamped at Rodd's - dined at Mr Jno Blaxland's -  Wednesday 31  Mr Blaxland rode out with me for the purpose of pointing out a line of road - rain great part of the day  Thursday 1st  Commenced a Survey of the Banks of the Wollombi -  Friday 2nd  Measuring all day  Saturday 3rd  Do - Do - very wet afternoon.  Sunday 4th  Reading & writing - dined at Mr Blaxland's  Monday 5th  Very wet day - drawing in my tent  Tuesday 6th  Do - Do - Do -  Wednesday 7th  Tracing part of the "Broken beg" Range  Thursday 8th  Ditto - Do - ascended "Mattawei" or the Yellow Rock for the purpose of taking bearings - encountered great difficulty & danger in descending from the Cliffs which is of great height & in many places perpendicular. It consists of a very fine hard white sandstone - very similar in appearance to freestone - intermixed with strata of limestone The side & summit abound in Myrtle brush & in great variety of beautiful evergreens. There is also in great abundance a peculiar plant very much resembling the "candle" plant in form and appearance The stems are hollow and when broken a white milky liquid exudes which has the most powerfully bitter taste of anything I ever met with.  Friday 9th April  Good Friday - a very wet day - reading writing &c in my tent  Saturday 10th  A very wet day - plotting my work &c &c  Sunday 11th  Easter Sunday - fine day - reading & writing in my tent - evening set in very wet  Monday 12th  Very heavy rain all day; drawing fair plan of Road from the Wollombi to Jerry's Plains -  Tuesday 13th  Measuring - rain during the day - sent plan of the Road to Major Mitchell -  Wednesday 14th  Weather fine measuring all day  Thursday 15th  Ditto - Ditto -  Friday 16th  Ditto - Ditto -  Saturday 17th   Rained incessantly [NN] - measuring & plotting my work  Sunday 18th  Weather variable & cold. reading & writing &c  Monday 19th  Measuring all day  Tuesday 20th  Ditto - removed my Camp to Townsend's  Wednesday 21 Thursday 22 Friday 23  Measuring  Saturday 24  At home plotting my track &c  Sunday 25  Reading & writing dined at Mr Townsend's  Monday 26 Tuesday 27  Measuring  Wednesday 28th  Travelling  29th 30th  Measuring & travelling - bullocks very troublesome - broke every thing to pieces  Saturday May 1st  Travelling up the Brook  Sunday 2nd  Reading & writing in my tent  3rd to 8th  Measuring - removed up the Brook  Tuesday 9th  Reading & writing in my tent  May 10th - 14th  Measuring - removed to Finch's - finished the Survey as far as Wiseman's.  Saturday 15th.  Plotting my work  Sunday 16th  Reading & writing to ....................... [NN]   17th to 22nd  Plotting - and drawing fair Plans of the Wollombi  Sunday 23  Reading writing &c  Monday 24  Drawing fair plan  Tuesday 25th  Do & packing baggage - dispatched 2 men to Hayes  Wednesday 26th  Rode to Hay for the purpose of taking charge of Mr Rogers's equipment examg stores &c &c  27th 28th  Weighing & examining stores &c  29  Rode to Mr Glennie's for the purpose of lodging an information against Denham storekeeper who has absented himself  Sunday 30th  Reading & writing all day  Monday 31st  Taking acct of Mr Rogers equipmt & stores & riding about endeavouring to borrow tools to set the men at work  June 1 & 2nd  Very wet all day unable to remove from Hay  3 - 4th  Travelling - slept at Rodds - arrived at Finch's  5th  Drawg rations wet day  Sunday 6th  Reading &c  7th  Removed from Finch's - measuring  8th to 12th  Measuring - finished my Survey of the Wollombi.  Sunday 13th  Reading &c rode over to Mr Finch's - was induced to join Mr Finch & Ogilvie on an expedition to Yungo for the purpose of acquiring a general knowledge of the country & making myself acquainted with some of the leading points in my own projected Survey  Monday 14  Left Finch's and bivouacked on the mountains after travelling about 10 miles  Tuesday 15  travelling encamped in a valley about 5 miles from Yungo  16  Ascended Yungo - took bearings to all the leading points in the Broken Back Range &c &c  17  Left the camp and traversed the ranges for the purpose of discovering the connection of the main Range with the mountain of Warang very wet day & being unable to regain our camp we passed the night in a cave or "Giba Gunyah" about 3 miles from Warang.  18  Returned to the Camp  19  Returned to Finch's - slept there &c  Sunday 20  I reached my own tents - reading & writing during the remainder of the day.  June Monday 21st  Plotting my work  Tuesday 22 Wednesday 23 Thursday 24  Ditto Finished my fair plan of the Wollombi-  Friday 25th  Writing report - preparing my baggage &c  Saturday 26  Packing useless baggage to send to Finch's - drawing Rations. copying sheet of fair plan [NN] &c &c  Sunday 27  Reading Writing &c  Monday 28th  Removed down the Brook - below the Conabeare Reserve - slept at Finch's and borrowed a horse of him to proceed to Hay  29  In consequence of letter from Mr Kentish started for Hay but could get no farther than Blaxland's tonight  30  Left Blaxland and arrived at hay  July 1  Ascended the Ranges with Mr Kentish in search of the clear station "Wambook" but was unsuccessfull  2  I succeeded in finding Wambook  3  Pointing out to Mr Kentish the boundaries of the Reserve of Hay's junction of the Roads the Ford &c  Sunday 4  Left Hay and slept at Rodds  5  Returned to my camp & from thence to Finch's where I slept  6  Preparing to ascend the Broken Back  7  Ascended the "Broken Back" from Conabeare Reserve & marked the leading Range a distance of about 12 miles  8  Ascended the mountains with my equipment and commenced measuring the leading Range  9 & 10th  Measuring  Sunday 11  Very wet day - reading & writing  12 to 17  Tracing the Broken Back ......................... [NN]   Sunday 18  Reading & writing in my tent  19 & 20  Measuring  21  wet foggy day ................ [NN]   22 23 24  Measuring  Sunday 25  Wet day. Reading & writing  26  Measuring  27  Marking the leading Range  28  Very wet and foggy all day  29  Do Do measuring - sent packet of letters to Sydney  30  Very wet day  31  Measuring  Sunday August 1st  Reading & writing  2 & 3  Measuring - descended from the Broken Back  4 & 5  Endeavouring to trace & marking the country [NN] between the Broken Back Range and the Myall or the .......... [NN]   6 & 7  Measuring Do  Sunday 8  Reading  9  Measuring  10  Travelling  11  Detained at Pender's [NN] by the loss of my bullocks  12  Travelling camped at .................... [NN]   Augt 13  Augt 13  Plotting my work - despatched two letters for Sarah & Mrs Lange to Mr Duncombe -  14  - Plotting my work  Sunday 15  - Reading & writing Agilose [NN] dined with me  16 to 21  - Plotting & drawing a fair plan 20th 21st heavy rain day and night  Sunday 22  Reading & writing heavy rain continued intensely all day.  23  Drawing rations - writing report packing baggage  24  Packing & Preparing baggage  25  Removed to ........ [NN] Bay but unable to cross on acct of the flow - tracing the Range  26  Tracing & marking the leading Range  27  Examining & packing stores sent from Sydney ................................. [NN] articles to Finch's  28  Crossed the brook & commenced measuring  Sunday 29  Reading &c.  30  Measuring  31  Started with 3 men and four days provisions to trace the leading range left the tents at [NN] O'clock encamped for the night in a gully at 1/2 past nine. Storms all day  1  Recommenced working [NN] at 8 O'clock about 10 got a view of Lake Macquarie & endeavoured to trace the Range running from Warrawalong - lost ourselves in a thick scrub. regained the leading range and encamped for the night at five O'clock -  2  Returned to the tents and moved the Camp to the leading Range  3  Measuring  4  Began measuring - but stopped by the rain  Sunday 5  Reading & writing  6 7  Measuring finished measuring the range at its junction with the range west of Lake Macquarie Traced & marked a portion of the leading Range & endeavoured to find the branch connecting it with Warrawalong  9  Descended from the Range & travelled from the head of Watagan Creek to Corranban  10  Finished my rough plan & -  11 12  Drawing fair plan writing report &c &c Reading & ~ sent letters to Anne Sarah & Jas Baker  13  Mr Finch being unable to accompany me to day I prepared my baggage &c &c  14  Travelling encamped by Mt Macquoid  15 16  Exploring & marking the leading Range from Mt Macquoid to Warrawalong & returned to the camp  Sept 17 & 18 -  Measuring  Sunday 19  Reading & writing  20  Measuring ascended to the summit of Warrawalong  21  started with four men and carrying four days provisions to explore the Range to Broken Bay Walked about 20 miles and encamped near the head of a Creek I afterwards ascertained to be Tuggerah Creek  22  Proceeded on our journey. About ............ [NN] began to rain heavily. Found [NN] ........ gunyah where ..... [NN] remained all night-  23  Early this morng recommenced ..................... [NN] & after walking till about 3 O'Clock found to my great mortification ............................ [NN] abruptly in a gulley the head of Tuggerah Creek .................................. [NN] which .................... [NN] to Kangiangi Mr Heeley's stock station where we Passed the night-  24  Walked to Mr Heeley's Farm on Narara Creek & From thence took a boat to Mr Anderson's at Brisbane Water who supplied me with rations & At whose house we stopped for the night-  25  ............. [NN] upon the right Range & commenced tracing [NN] ............. [NN]   26 27  Tracing the range and descending at the head of .................................... [NN] at Corrabare about five O'Clock after ................. [NN] and ............................... [NN]   28  Finished sketch of the Range from Mt Macquoid to Warrawalong  29-30  1  Very wet days - writing letters &c &c  2  Unable to cross the Brook on acct of the flood - writing &c  Sunday 3  Reading & writing & -  4  Looking up different articles left at Mr Finch's & Preparing baggage &c - brook still impassable-  5  Left Coranben and sent my camp on to the foot of the Range - being detained by packing baggage at Finch's - slept At Wiseman's  6  Joined my camp and ascended the Range from Mt Macquoid  7 to 9  Measuring the Range to Broken Bay  Sunday 10  Reading writing &c  11 to 16  Tracing the Range reached from Broken Bay Saturday night  Sunday 17  Reading &c  18 19 20  Finishing rough Plan writing Report &c &c  21  Removed up the water to Webb's-  1830  October 22nd  Wet day - crossed the water to Anderson's  23  Rode over the flat behind Webb's tracing the Creek &c  24  Sunday  Monday 25  Left Brisbane Water - walked to N. Harbour  26  Arrived in Sydney  from this time to 20th December I was in Sydney  Decr 20  Decr 20  Left Sydney - got to N. Harbour  21  Reached Anderson's  22  Returned to my camp at Erinna Creek  23  Rode over the range to Anderson's  24  Weighing rations arranging & preparing baggage &c &c  25  Xmas Day - dined with Mr Watson at Erinna -  26  Sunday - rode with Mr Watson & Mr Slade to Wamberal.  27  Preparing baggage - procuring harness from Anderson's  28  Commenced marking the Range - intending to trace it to it's [sic] junction with that from Mt Macquoid to Broken Bay -  29  Ditto - lost the Range in consequence of the thickness of the brush and descended into an extensive valley which I afterwards discovered to be Tuggerah Creek -  30  Endeavoured to ascend Tuggerah Creek but after wandering about for several hours scarcely able to proceed for the brush - found myself close to last night's camping place - ascended another Range which I traversed with great difficulty but at length got on the first one marked and which separates the waters of Tuggerah Creek from the sea -  31  Returned along the Range towards Bean's farm - Traced several branches of Erina Creek to their heads and marked several ranges but could not find that I am in search of.  God grant that his preaching may be blessed to some of these poor ignorant creatures! For four years they have never heard the word of God preached to them and they really appeared to live "without God in the world". There is always now a full congregation and I must say a most attentive one. Our school is also going on as well as we could wish and we have forty-two scholars. No little heathen could have been more ignorant; but I hope that in future God's name and word will be more known and lived than hitherto. Earnestly do we pray that this may be the case. We must expect to meet with disappointments and trials; but when we consider whose work we are doing no difficulties ought to discourage us. [45] May God give us strength to persevere! You might perhaps suppose that our greatest difficulties arise from the convicts but I must say that we have not found this to be the case. The free people are far the worst and most difficult to manage because they think they may do as they like; and while they set such a bad example we cannot wonder that the prisoners do not improve. For the latter we have set up an adult school. Some of them wished to learn to read and we are anxious to encourage them as a means of keeping them out of mischief and amusing them in the evening.  I begin the day by rising abt. five o'clock not from choice but downright compunction being dragged neck & heels out of bed if I show the slightest resistance of course I need not name the perpetrator of so tyrannical an act none but a man & husband cd. be guilty of such cruelty. My next act is to prepare to accompany Cornelia Darling in His [NNHer] little Garden Chair to the bathing House abt. a miles distance Col Dumaresq drives & our party is increased by the addition of my little Son (How do you think it sounds? I fancy very oddly indeed) two Newfoundland dogs & a Spaniel. The three latter personages accompany me into the sea where we all seem very much to enjoy ourselves. We return to breakfast at 1/2 past eight immediately after which Col Dumaresq leaves me to my own concerns & attends the duties of his office (alias Treadmill) for the remainder of the day my time is almost entirely engrossed by my baby in this odious country (for I must call it so) it is impossible to trust the most trivial thing out of ones sight & since the departure of the Servants we brought with us from England I am never comfortable in leaving home for a minute without him. [107] My maid immediately commenced by following the terrible fashion of this part of the world of producing olive branches & in consequence has set up for herself as Milliner & dress Maker & I have no doubt will soon realize a fortune. She made a bonnet out of a piece of Gauze I gave her (wh. was literally the fag end of one of the famous East Riding Turbans) wh. she sold for 30s. On her departure poor baby & I were left to the mercy of a Convict Woman who had been with us four months previously & had as far as I cd. judge behaved perfectly well. I was prejudiced in her favor the more because she was Yorkshire & spoke the dialect charmingly. When she was more immediately placed under my observation however I began to suspect she was fonder of the Brandy bottle than I quite approved of & this idea was only too well confirmed soon after by her coming upstairs to me so intoxicated that she scarcely knew what I said to her & on attempting to undress the baby exposed herself so much that I took him from her & ever since have dressed & undressed him myself. Her conduct was altogether so abominable that Col Dumaresq sent her off to the Watch House from whence she was committed to the Penitentiary for 6 months.  It is one of the most serious objections to the Country & certainly a great evil I mean the difficulty almost amounting to an impossibility of procuring servants with the requisites generally applied for namely Honesty Sobriety & obliging disposition. If one qualification is met with there is sure to be an absence of the others. In my own individual case however I probably care less at least feel the inconvenience less than others who are more addicted to straying where "two or three are gathered together". I really never leave my own quiet home to go any where in search of Society not one of the Gowns belonging to my Wedding paraphernalia have been put-together since their arrival in this Kangaroo Land; & till the parties at Governt House are resumed I think they are likely to remain a long time in their packing cases - I have rather digressed from the account I was giving you of the order of the day the rest is soon told however; after breakfast I wash & dress baby order dinner (wh. by the bye I absolutely detest all the other cares of housekeeping included) & to play with & amuse him till 4 or 5 o'clock when I trot over to invade Col Dumaresq's office & bring him back with me to an early dinner after which we ride out till 8 or 9 & by ten I am in bed with my baby boy lying on the outside at my feet where he now sleeps being very hot weather in general however he has his own little Cot wh. is placed by his papas side who is the very best nurse you can imagine - [108] I will give you an instance of this assertion. Whenever his boy wakes during the night wh. he usually does two or three times for me to nurse him Col Dumaresq takes him up & holds him out wh the young man quite understands & immediately performs what is required of him. Where wd. you find another Papa to do as much? By the bye it is quite extraordinary how used I am become to these sort of things: I am really now downright impudent almost improper wh. you know was not the case once. I was obliged to get you & Louise to talk abt. Water closets for me to Col Dumaresq. Do you remember? At present however I cd. save you the trouble but it is all my husbands fault; Stories he used to tell & make me blush at I now enjoy extremely & think very good fun. In short I realize the old Proverb "Evil Communication &c." You know the rest - I am thinking if I have written to you since my confinement & cannot recollect having done so I must therefore now assure you that Little Fitzroy is a very nice little fellow (in his Nurses - ma & papas opinion at least) & is becoming more engaging & intelligent Every day. His eyes & complexion are the most clear & brilliant possible but unluckily he has got my mouth instead of his papas wh. is a dire mistake & a nose wh. makes one rather uncomfortable not knowing how it is to turn out at present however it turns up - I think I have employed more of the paper in writing abt. self than I ought to have done but will not apologize because I am vain enough to imagine that the subject is not uninteresting to you my dearest Mrs Winn. . . What is there I wd. not give to see you all & show you my little mannikin but alas I see no prospect of such happiness being in store for me. This is not the Country for making fortunes; it is only calculated for living in not out of it & unless Col Dumaresq gets some Govt. appointment wh. wd. pay tolerably (wh. I now see no chance of being disappointed of the Treasury ship) I fear there is no reason against our passing the remainder of our lives here. Even if this place was the Paradise the Prejudiced & Enthusiastic represent in point of Climate Scenery &c such advantages wd. not compensate to me for the complete separation wh. exists between myself & those dearly loved friends I have left; I had rather be doomed to live in a perpetual yellow London fog & be within their reach than in the finest situation & climate at 1600 miles [NN] distance. I am however greatly disappointed in New South Wales in every instance that I have heard it given credit for. The climate to me is detestable The Lower orders of people more depraved than I cd. have conceived possible & the Country is dull & heavy & gloomy in the extreme. Every succeeding day however only proves to me more forcibly that place has very little to do with happiness for I decidedly do not like the climate or admire the Character of the Country in general Sydney being excepted as beautiful yet I am very very happy. [109] If we were not forbidden to praise ones own I shd. launch out in Col Dumaresqs nothing can exceed his care tenderness cheerfulness & unremitting solicitude towards me in Every way. . By the bye I must particularly mention that he wants a few yards of Silk to cover his stocks with he says that Mr Winn will know what sort it shd. be I imagined it shd. resemble the lining of a certain old coat of his in fact of the tatters of wh. my first born sweet baby was wrapped in the night of my unexpected accouchement in the Salon at Nostel however Col Dumaresq says he thinks it shd. be a kind of ribbed silk whereas what I allude to (& have now) is a twill - I have a great deal more I might say but so many letters are on my mind to write that I can indulge myself no longer in lengthening this.  7th February [18301. - 'My dear friend never did any of your dear letters reach me at a more critical moment than the last - of 29th of August - yet it lay three days unread. I opened it and looked at the signature but read it I could not; - you will wonder when I tell you that my baby the very light of my eyes was then quite despaired of and given up by all but myself - even when there was no hope to any other still I said She will not die. She is now out of danger and renews her wonted smiles and endearments. But oh! what have I suffered! Sleep has altogether forsaken me my strength too is wasted; though I force myself to eat and drink for her sake it oppresses not revives me.  5th May  And is this an anniversary of marriage? Eheu! What a bewildering dream of a few nights since this day recalls. I fancied myself yet unmarried and living in Ireland. ... I raised myself with an indescribable terror of what of who was that child. Nor was it till after I sat up in bed and by the lamp looked steadily at her and at Fenton both sound asleep that I regained a conviction of my identity; but with renewed consciousness came also a faint and giddy sickness which actually forced me to lie down and close my eyes. Floods of repressed tears at length enabled me to breathe and I lay in sad and troubled rumination till daylight. These dreams are truly terrible they seem to let loose all the long pent up waters of affliction on the soul. Indeed for two days after I could not regain the composure of my mind. [125] Strange voices seemed about me and visionary shapes passing before my eyes.  12th August [1830] Fenton Forest - On the 12th [of July] the weather had cleared; a very bright morning too bright to last decided Fenton and though he was extremely weak we set off in our buggy with Flora on my knee her nurse and a girl from the Orphan Asylum having gone the evening before to wait our arrival at New Norfolk. I need not detail all promises to write and parting regrets. The thing was to be done one way or other and though I felt both ill and very nervous from knowing my illness was only the commencement of a period of indefinite suffering I knew too that the effort must be made and the sooner the better for all parties. [...]  The [following] day seeming tolerably clear we sent off the women in their bullock cart calculating they would have good light to get home before us. To the nurse I gave the baby's night things etc. etc. When they were gone and we were going Mrs. Bridger [the innkeeper] came up to me with an important face to caution me with respect to my nurse whom she believed to be one of the worst women in the Colony - everything that was bad and depraved - she had gone away nearly drunk and was quite drunk on her arrival the day before. This was pleasant intelligence to one with my anticipations but I thanked her warmly for her caution.  We proceeded as far as a terrific ledge of rocks overhanging the river round which the road wound midway between the river and a perpendicular cliff along whose edge and at whose summit huge masses of rock jutted out and seemed as if they must inevitably crush us at every onward step; even the motion of the carriage below seemed sufficient to impel them forward and through their angles you saw the sky above at intervals: these threatening on the left and the abyss of the river many fathoms below constituted together a fearful position. On entering this pass Fenton pulled up the hood of the buggy and drove our spirited horse on at full speed expecting I might not observe our situation. I did see it but forbore to speak until fairly past. I could not then resist remonstrating on such a mode of driving over such awful roads. We had no more precipices but the road if road it might be called was a succession of gulfs and mire through which it required the utmost effort of our fine horse to drag us. Every step I believed an upset inevitable. [126]  I grasped the poor infant to save her from the bruises I received on every side. My comb was broken and my head cut by one sudden jolt and I perceived too late the personal danger that such a journey exposed me to.  If I might bear up until we reached the shelter of a house was the extent of my wishes and expectations; as we stood to breathe the poor horse after toiling up a steep and slippery hill a storm of blinding hail and snow swept down from the mountains in our faces and Fenton had to get out and turn the carriage off the road where a clump of mimosas formed a shelter from the storm. He was drenched with rain and snow and if my fears for myself were strong you may judge what I dreaded at seeing him who had just arisen from a bed of illness in such a condition.  The baby too cold and hungry was fretting on my knee and I shed bitter tears over her as the gloom of the evening approached. After the storm was passed we again proceeded but very slowly the horse seeming quite spent. After toiling up another weary hill the snow again came on and again we stopped. I then in despair inquired if there was no human habitation within reach where we might pass the night. He told me he thought we must be near the residence of Frederick Bell whom I had met at the Hamiltons; if we could find the entrance as each side of the road was fenced with fallen trees piled on each other. After some difficulty we reached a gate and entered a waste of wood without trace of either man or animal and drove onward at hazard for now it was so dark we could barely distinguish one object from another.  Judge of my distress at this juncture with a sick infant on my knee and almost powerless with fear and cold myself. The distant bark of a dog was to me a sound whose blessedness I never shall forget and then the report of a gun directed us where to drive and we approached a dwelling. In the darkness the light of fires within was a joyful revelation.  Without inquiry as to who were within Fenton assisted me out and gave the child into the arms of a man who informed him that Mr. Bell was just come back from Hobarton and showed us into a small apartment where Mr. Bell sat drying himself before an immense fire. You may well imagine his amazement when I staggered in faint and blind with the sudden glare of light - a lady and an infant at such an hour!  Most kind and cordial was our welcome - every effort of master and man to revive and refresh us was bestowed; a cup of nice soup brought for the baby who seemed quite joyful at the sudden change from the darkness and storm without to the cheerful scene; so after the refreshment of warm water and dry clothes for Fenton we joined Mr. Bell at his excellent dinner though a late one. When it was concluded and we heard and told the "on dits" of the day I had leisure to notice that Flora seemed flushed and her pulse rapid and unsteady. [127] Mr Bell summoned his man "John" to procure me some water for a bath and told me he had a medicine chest out of which I at once prepared the prescribed dose.  It was then I recollected with dismay that I had not a single article to put on her and she had always slept in flannel. Here was a difficulty beyond Mr. Bell's hospitality to remedy. The only linen article he could afford me was a shirt or a sheet so selecting the former I divested myself of my only warm garment - my under petticoat - into which I put my poor Flora and gathered it round her throat somewhat in the fashion of a mantle. Over this was a muslin shirt confined round her waist with the band of my gown. Her papa's silk hankerchief bound her head and in this guise she dropped asleep.  Where to lay her down was my next perplexity for Mr. Bell's accommodation was strictly that of a bachelor. He had slept in his sea cot swung in the only bedchamber which he most kindly offered to us and a couch was prepared on the floor which no doubt might have been very comfortable for one person but for three was scanty quarters. Such as it was I was very glad to see Fenton and Flora asleep thereon.  It was extremely cold and how to manage the night without a fire or a lamp I could not divine. For myself I was faint and shivering with cold and nothing to put on but Mr. Bell's shirt to which I added a sheet folded something as a shawl and thus I laid me down on the hard edge of the cot fearing to disturb those who each needed sleep so much. I did not care to cover myself with the blankets lest the baby should be disturbed and for her to sleep after taking calomel was of vital importance. My anxiety was too great for sleep and I lay watching her as long as the candle burned. But long and dreary was that vigil. Towards morning she awoke very sick but as it was utterly dark my only mode of keeping her quiet was walking to and fro through the apartment with her in my arms until Fenton woke.  It was then the cold pale twilight of a winter morning and I did not scruple to send him to rouse our friend "John" to get a fire made and some tea of which we most thankfully partook. I was in addition to loss of sleep and fatigue struggling against the most overpowering sickness. The only thing I had to keep me up was that after Flora was bathed and had got a sufficiency of warm nourishment she appeared evidently relieved by the calomel which I rejoiced I had so timely administered.  It was one of those bright days which generally follow a snowstorm warm and invigorating; but Mr. Bell strongly advised us to give up the idea of pursuing our journey on this side of the Derwent as our buggy would never get through it. Fenton then took a survey of Mr. Bell's boat and said he would attempt the Indian mode of crossing with the body of the vehicle in the boat the wheels over the side. [128] All who listened said it was impossible but the thing was done and the horse swam the river gallantly.  I ought to tell you the object of this excursion was to gain a certain point where a boat would pass from the farm of a Mr. Barker to that of a Mr. Ballatine. Once at Mr. Ballatine's we were nearly on our own property and could drive over the plains in an hour; - furthermore I must tell you the said Mr Barker was introduced to me while getting into the buggy at the inn at New Norfolk as a "neighbour" and I "guess" my acknowledgment of him was not very alluring - for truth to tell he looked mean and dirty and I should have forgotten him only for the present arrangement.  On inquiring of Fenton who and what he was he told me he was now a man of very large property one of our squires! had been a shopkeeper partner with another illustrious Kemp who still kept the concern in town only calling himself an agent or merchant. They were among the very early settlers and had both feathered their nest in the "good old times" when they sold a pound of tea for £1 2p 6d.  I had hoped when the river was safely passed my troubles were well over but a new and very embarrassing dilemma presented itself; neither soothing nor force would induce our horse to go into the buggy (I mean into the shafts). They said it was fright at the uproar of crossing the water but it was evident his resolution was taken and whenever backed to the carriage he reared and plunged in a way that would have intimidated a more daring person than myself. It was then suggested that if once on the road and out of sight of the water he would get quiet and proceed; so Mr Bell kindly sent two men to drag the buggy into the road about a mile at least and bade us farewell business requiring his return. He promised an early visit to Fenton Forest.  The day was delightful and with renewed hope and energy I took Flora in my arms and followed the procession Fenton leading the horse while I took a path through the trees that seemed drier.  I wish my dear I could honestly keep back one fact which was that that I had been so very absurd as to set out on this expedition in black satin boots; but the truth must be told otherwise you could not understand why it was that ever and anon I sat down to ease the pain of my bruised feet for the boots were in fragments with the rough ground I had to walk through. Then finding the mile lengthened fearfully out my strength quite failed. I put Flora as the Indian women do on my hips on my back tried to induce her to walk all in vain. The thought of "Hagar in the desert" came to me as I lay down under a mimosa which spread bower-like over the footpath and some few tears of weariness and pain were shed in spite of all my striving against them: and then again I pursued my way with the double toil of trying to amuse the child as well as carry. [129]  The road attained with some little difficulty the horse reluctantly was harnessed but when he once got the rein he flew on on while I was breathless with horror supposing some greater evil yet to come. We were on Macquarie plains and the way had hitherto been level but steep hills were in view which tenfold aggravated my horror. Fenton pointed out the site of Mr Barker's house but my sight was dim with fear and weariness. My expedition seemed like that of Leonora and the Spectre Horseman.  The road wound up a hill whose inequalities and side motion were so dreadful that I implored Fenton to let me out and not kill the infant if he would himself. I vowed in my terror never again to let him drive me and at last succeeded in getting out with the baby. It was so close to Mr. Barker's house and heedless of mire I got as far from the buggy as I could. Mr B. was at that moment engaged in the pastoral duty of ploughing but he approached and offered me his arm and so we neared his house which was a new and capacious stone building of handsome appearance. To enter was not so easy for every species of filth you can imagine had been quietly deposited about the doors and it was floating with mud. Hesitating how to emerge into this Augean pool and dreading being overthrown by contact with large pigs if I invaded their "pleasure ground" I decided the point by letting Fenton carry me into the hall. A handsome hail it might have been but just then seemed doing double duty of barn and sculleiy. I was introduced into the parlour and after being told the lady of the mansion would instantly wait on me the gentlemen went off to investigate the prospect of the boat and river. [...]  It was a long shapeless naked brick cottage outside but oh! within there was confusion worse confounded. Every article of baggage that had been sent up furniture packing cases had all been piled up promiscuously as they presented themselves. The vile servants we had sent out had profited by the opportunity to pillage everything they could abstract. All the farm servants had collected in the house and the nurse - my right-hand woman as I took her to be - had opened a keg of rum for their refreshment; rum tobacco noise and dirt assailed every sense with horror and dismay.  My choice of accommodation was not difficult for there was only one apartment with a door. Turn where I would comfort found I none. Oh! how I wished myself back in India after a comfortless dinner; by the time I got out some things for the child weary of everything I undressed and went to bed and I must fairly confess cried myself to sleep. [130]   We have lately experienced another disadvantage of a newly cultivated country and have witnessed what I have only heard of before and read in Cooper's novels - I mean the burning of the woods and it is indeed a fearful and extraordinary sight. For the last fortnight the whole country around has been in a blaze and between this place and the Gloucester a distance of more than seventy miles there is scarcely a blade of grass left: it is one continued black plain and the stems of the trees are all scorched and blackened. We were in hopes we should have escaped near the house but after two or three days we saw there was but little prospect of our avoiding the general destruction. Just as we were coming home from church last Sunday a man came running to say that the fire had reached his house and was rapidly approaching our garden. Immediately all hands were sent off to save the poor garden and I am happy to say succeeded though it was only by a few minutes. Edward made them set fire to a broad space all round and this was only just completed when the fire reached the place we had burnt and finding no food to supply its flames turned off in another direction.  6th December  Government House. . . Papa landed at twelve with the usual ceremonies of guns and cheering and bands playing and soldiers marching the commission was read in the veranda and then a levy. Last night the town was very handsomely illuminated with every manner of rockets squibs guns from the batteries and ships the Margaret's were really quite fine and an immense bonfire was lighted. . . which gave a beautiful effect to the shipping the cheering was tremendous. The staff (wives and all) had a holiday and stayed at their hotel only Mr. Innis and Dr. Stevenson dined with us however after dinner as we were standing in the veranda they all walked up together and we drank tea out of doors the effect was very good the evening was so sultry and to add to the scene the lightning was beyond any thing I ever saw.. . We sat up till eleven the fireworks were kept up the greater part of the night. Today is hotter than I ever felt it at the Cape it is like a fiery furnace out of doors. We went to church last Sunday Mrs McLeay sent her carriage for me it is a very large church and our pew is very large and comfortable it held the whole staff including Mr. Innis who is at present Papa's chaplain he comes every morning to read prayers and breakfasts with us. Archdeacon Broughton preached us a tolerably good sermon - St. James' is the church it has a good organ and very good singers.  8th [December]  I have been very busy unpacking these two days tho' we have not got half the things from the ship yet. We experienced the day before yesterday the only disagreeable part of this climate which is the hot northwest wind it blew with great force for about 5 hours during which time the heat was insufferable I never felt any thing like it at the Cape nor has Capt. W. at the Mauritius. . . My piano forte is very well thank you the master of the 17th Band is now tuning it I shall have all the evening to tune myself up as Papa and staff including Mr. Innis and Dr. Stevenson dine at the mess of the 39th Regt. commanded by Col. Lindsey. [76] Dick was gazetted today to be private secretary by command of his Excellency. A great number of ladies have left their cards more than I thought were in the colony I have not seen any of them. Mama does not yet come down stairs she is I hope getting stronger but very slowly  Every place Mr. Innis goes to they ask him so many questions about me whether I am fond of gaiety and whether I dance and all manner of questions which he together with his answers tells me every morning .  10th [December]  I am today established in my room and have unpacked most of the things fancy the wet getting thro' the tin cases to our dresses however we have escaped tolerably well my satin slip is quite dished and one of my gowns a little we are fortunate it is no worse we reckoned the Margaret a dry ship but we find that there is hardly a box that is not more or less touched by salt water the only thing really injured is the chariot the linen what with water and cockroaches is completely in tatters there being no lining silk in the colony it is relined with cloth which will be very hot.. . The town is I hear very bad but only saw George Street which is wide and has some very good shops. Our two nearest neighbours are Mr. McLeay the colonial secretary and Mr. Chief Justice Forbes they have houses just outside the entrance gate which formerly belonged to the Government. They are both very civil and send to know how Mama is every day we have not seen the ladies of the family yet. The Westmacotts have got a cottage in the grounds which belonged to Col. Dumaresq and family.. . [The newspapers] give [Governor Bourke] a great number of hints in the papers indeed I should say instructions as to his behaviour pointing out the faults of Genl. Darling all good points of Governors Macquarie and Brisbane. They beg he will spend his income in the colony like a Prince and show himself about the town and not shut himself up as his predecessor did and save money (as they elegantly express it) "to the tune of 20000£" whilst he was here. I very much doubt any body's saving that sum in six years out of five thousand a year - everything is very dear except just the bare necessaries of meat and bread and I believe they are cheap. You know how I hate the liberty of the press and it is most terribly free here.  14th [December]  A ship came in this morning the Bussorah merchant from Dublin she brings out our solicitor general and a great many convicts amongst others that horrible Mr. Luke Dillon what a creature to have in the same colony as one. ... [77]  19th [December]  We had a little petit dinner party yesterday consisting of Colonel Lindsey and a Mr. Therry who is Commissioner of the court of Enquiry Watty of course and his wife. The two strangers are both agreeable people Colonel Lindsey is very like old Hal in manner and face he is an old bachelor and the commandant here. Mrs. W. begins to stick out very much but she behaved very well I believe she is afraid of Dick and me she sees we laugh at people so much. Of course I sung and of course they said such singing was never heard in the colony before there are very few if any singers here but a good many ladies play the harp and pianoforte very well.. . I get up at six o'clock every morning they are so heavenly at first I tried going out but I found it had the usual effect of knocking me up for the remainder of the day besides giving me such a weakness in my back as almost to prevent my walking across the room. I applied to Dr. Stevenson and he made me leave off walking and told me to drink a double allowance of port wine which has restored me entirely to my usual vulgar health and I have appropriated the hours to practising as I am not then interrupted till breakfast after that you are as well to be in the streets as in the drawing room the veranda is a complete thoroughfare to Papa's room and they generally stray into the drawing room.  23rd [December]  We cannot drive out today as it is blowing what they call here a brick fielder a strong wind which blowing over some very large brick fields to the back of the town brings such a terrible deal of brick dust with it as to darken every object in the town it generally blows after a hot northwest wind which we experienced a little last night. Much worse than a southeaster. That I have seen of the place I like very much the people I cannot speak about not having seen any of them.  27th [December]  Yesterday some of the Sydney gentlemen came to present an address to the Governor to congratulate him on having assumed the government in this address they had the bad taste to mix up a little abuse of Mr. McLeay the colonial secretary who having been the adviser and friend of Genl. Darling is very unpopular. Papa plainly shewed them in his answer that he did not like it and hoped there would be no party spirit shewn for the future. These people will certainly be very much harder to manage than the Dutch they are not half so tractable and there is a spirit of equality and independence amongst them which I should think will require a great deal of delicacy to manage. We had yesterday Chief Justice Forbes and Mr. McLeay two or three more men to dinner the former is a tremendous talker but very agreeable Mr. McLeay is only famous for the immense size of his legs which Capt. Hunter and I nearly died of yesterday we laughed so much at them. [78]  Hermitage Western Australia  August 19th 1831.  My last letter was dated from Perth where I then was. Nothing remarkable has occurred within the last two days except the appearance of seven spermaceti-whales from Fremantle and that the people have been smitten with the mania for whale fishing; but unfortunately there is no suitable fishing-tackle for an attack on these monsters of the deep which would otherwise (and will at a future time) have a successful result. I have been in vain endeavouring to obtain a Perth newspaper for you containing an account of our last agricultural meeting. I returned home partly by boat and partly on foot and found all well but my young cow has become plaguy restless and has broken away repeatedly into the bush we have her however in the cow - house now.  20th. - The weather is still very fine the temperature delightful. At this moment I am very much annoyed and am actually writing from my bed to tell you how uncomfortable I am from an incursion of blow-flies which have taken a fancy to my new blankets that have been so covered by them as to require fumigation with brimstone to effect their dislodgment and I am now bewailing the absence of my comfortable clothing.  22nd. - Dined after church service yesterday on delicious kangaroo soup a fine haunch of ditto lamb a pair of fowls ham and sausages turnips lettuce onions fruit - pies and plum and custard puddings. [58] Just think of such fare on the Swan River and confess whether your organs of taste can resist an extra humidity "from bare imagination of the feast." You know however that I care little for these things and detail them merely to show that we have not always hard fare.  It falls frequently to my lot to settle disputes about boundaries: the Dii Termini are very troublesome divinities to me; this day I have been arbitrator in a case of this nature besides one on a disputed point concerning a sale of horses.  I have to finish a certain memorial to the Home Government to attend an agricultural meeting on the second of next month and to prepare for an exploring expedition over the mountains on the fourth and have just written for Mrs. Tanner a song about this colony of which she wishes to send her friends a copy; but I have not time now to transcribe it but must do so at some other time.  I have a song in my mind suggested by that of a bird's notes; and if I can get my flute mended shall set it for you. I mean to try the system of robbing my own potatoes - viz taking away the large ones from the roots which is practised here with good effect.  23rd. - You will think me a most dissipated dog when I tell you that I have dined with the same large party three successive days.  Servants' wages are extremely high and all work proportionably so; £2 10s. per month for inside servants; from 5s. to 7s. per day (without diet) for labour. At present time cultivation of new ground will not pay where there is any difficulty beyond mere ploughing and that can only be performed in cleared flat meadows. The quantity of stock is still insufficient to support a shepherd. There are not yet more than a dozen persons possessing large flocks but we are in daily expectation of arrivals of sheep from Van Diemen's Land. [59] I am within the limit when I tell you that for even a small establishment like mine where everything is to be purchased it is necessary to have between £200 and £300 a year.  Our means will be greater and our wants less as our gardens and crops become productive. My stock of shoes for myself and people is already exhausted and the price is 18s. per pair. Clothes and provisions as in all infant societies are of course our chief wants but in some things money goes a great way. Wine tea and sugar are cheap. F - talks of sending goods here on commission - an excellent speculation; in shoes alone a profit of 150 per cent. might be effected.  As to clothing black and blue clothes are the most saleable. Our medical men lawyers clergymen and those in mourning as among you wear black; and there are persons here of each of the learned professions. The Government officers and naval and military men wear blue cloth coats with gilt crown buttons and blue frocks and trousers - on great occasions white duck trousers; but there is some hazard in this speculation unless on a small scale.  Substantial clothing seems to be the taste of our sensible people who are good judges of such matters. Blue striped shirts shoes boots buskins and corduroy trousers meet with ready sale. We are in great want of light black beaver hats which every one who can get them wears; but we can procure no male headpieces here except some villanous-looking silk ones of an old-fashioned shape. In the country or in undress little attention is paid to mere ornament; but in company or on state occasions we are a very well-dressed and particular people.  As to the ladies - I suppose you have hitherto been in the habit of mistaking them for Hottentot dames and consider them suitably appareled in linsey-wolsey or "in druggets drest of thirteen-pence a yard;" but our fair ones of the upper grades are of a very different class indeed: but alas ! alas! I cannot enumerate any of the thousand articles which they may wish for from the bustle (no allusion to the Hottentot ladies I assure you) to every other appendage of the person - pray interest yourself to have a well-selected cargo sent especially to them. [60] Among the common necessaries which would sell well in this colony are starch blue candles of every kind glass flannel and soap which now brings (and sold as a special favour) 2s. 6d. a pound.  Masters here are only so in name; they are the slaves of their indentured servants. In my absence [...] does nothing and if I speak to him - exit in a rage. I could send him to gaol but I do not like this extremity and yet I cannot afford to lose the advantage of his time and pay £30 besides diet to another in his place. Letty however continues faithful.  Yesterday after the adjustment of a boundary line between neighbours at the base of the hills a singular circumstance occurred when the last two trees were struck with an axe for the purpose of making a boundary mark - a jet d'eau issued from out of a blue gum tree and continued running without intermission during the time of our stay - a quarter of an hour. This water had a strong chalybeate [sic] taste. On my return we saw some native huts and graves; I picked up a man's underjaw and looked for a skull but in vain. These are the remains of the native who speared James; and the grave was dug soon afterwards by Corporal Fea who shot him. I have despatched one of my people with a venture of vegetables to the market - a hamper of cabbages turnips and lettuces - may success attend this grand speculation!  26th - No intelligence of the venture yet. My pigs have strayed away old and young without leave for two days. On this day se'night our next Agricultural Meeting will take place on which occasion the Governor is to give aim evening party and I believe there will be some dancing. I had no notion there would be so much society here so much gaiety so much dressing. I thought in my simplicity that I had for ever laid aside my slight shoes silk stockings and kid gloves; but I have been most agreeably disappointed. [61]  Spring is coming; I heard its herald a cuckoo last night. The weather has been very fine with occasional showers and this is our winter! It is really better than our summer in Ireland. Thermometer 64°.  27th. - No tidings of may vegetable servant yet; the pigs however have been found after a long search. There is now a great profusion of beautiful flowering shrubs and flowers in full bloom. The succession of them is endless; among them I must particularly notice a flower called I believe Amigozanthus which is very beautiful - it is of a greenish colour issuing from a crimson stem; the green flowers at the top protrude like fingers or expanded honeysuckles. We have also abundance of the clematis and another creeper of a brilliant blue. One of our grasses now in bloom bears a beautiful blue flower with yellow stamina and reminds me of the star of Bethlehem or spider lily.  28th. - James arrived here at three this morning; the venture produced 9s. 10d.; he got 2s. 6d. for twelve turnips and a high price for cabbages; but my lettuces and radishes were not in demand Captain Irwin's gardener having previously sent a boat-load of vegetables to the market. Potatoes would have sold well if I had them - mine have been fourteen weeks in the ground and are now of good size some of them weighing a pound; I shall send a small supply on Friday next to market and hope to get one shilling per pound. They are unfortunately of the kind called cups - not good for eating - better for selling.  A letter has this day reached me from Mr. Dale the officer who is to form the settlement at York. I intend to accompany him and shall take a fortnight's provisions a change of raiment a hammock and a cloak to sleep in. Our present intention is to make the site of York our head-quarters and to proceed from that central point four day's march up the river the same in the opposite direction down and the same distance eastward to the interior. [62]  From Guildford to York is I suppose 50 miles; from York to Beverley 20 miles; near the latter place is my grant; so that I shall have an opportunity of seeing it as well as so much of the interior. Expeditions however of this kind in perspective arrangement are often attended with serious difficulties in actual execution. In the present case thirty persons must be supplied for eleven days with gunpowder shot and clothes; and we can only muster three horses for us all. Thunder and rain - a good dramatic conclusion to one day's diary.  29th. - Worked hard in the garden planting Indian corn transplanting mangel-wurzel and preparing beds for rock and water melons cucumbers and pumpkins and sowing five different kinds of strawberry seeds and as many sorts of gooseberry which latter seeds will not probably succeed in this climate.  Letty has been preparing striped cotton shirts for my expedition these being more suited than linen ones to our climate.  301h. - The pigs confound them! are gone astray again.  This day I have been burning weed for ashes and planting maize of which I shall have half an acre in drills one yard asunder; and the intervals which will be perfectly cleared are to be planted with turnips and cabbages.  Flax and asparagus are indigenous plants here. Of the former I have seen very fine stalks which before the general use of cotton would have been valuable; the asparagus is not good. I have been actively at work this day and shall be again to-morrow in getting in the remainder of my maize previously to my departure. These two days have been very warm particularly so to James who has been fruitlessly hunting for the pigs. We shall be roasted to-morrow if this heat continues and all the world here is going to the ball. [63]  Perth Sept. 3rd. - I must tell you all about the great doings since the last entry in my logbook.  Yesterday I came down here for our market and meeting of the Agricultural Society and for the Governor's hail.  The brig had just arrived bringing the first Indian invalid to our shores. Quartermaster-General Colonel Hanson and also Lord F. Beauclerk All Perth was alive; upwards of fifty sat down to the Agricultural dinner at which we had (as honorary members) Lord F. Beauclerk Col. Hanson and Capt. Parker R.N. And at this dinner a memorial to the Home Government was read and approved of. It is now in course of signature and will soon be sent home. In the evening at the Governor's house we had 180 ladies and gentlemen !!!  The ball was kept up with the greatest spirit until six in the morning; and the dancing almost without interval - contre-dances quadrilles Spanish dances and gallopades. I never before witnessed such gaiety at a ball nor ever before danced so much in one night; four rooms and an arcade were all filled and connected with the verandah; a superb tent was fitted up decorated and festooned with naval flags and in this we had supper - an elegant and abundant one. The gentlemen from India were astonished for they had heard the most gloomy reports; and the invalid confessed that when coming ashore he had been considering with the captain the expediency of sending some provisions from the ship as a preventive against starvation; his amazement at seeing ample supplies of butter eggs vegetables poultry and butcher's meat may be guessed at; he purchased freely and paid liberally; has rented a house for some time and is now recovering; indeed he was actually frolicksome all the evening. [64]  That these gentlemen should have arrived here at this critical period when the climate is delicious is considered a fortunate circumstance for the colony.  5th. - The Cruizer goes on Wednesday to Trincomalee and I shall send my letter by her; when you may get it God alone can tell; but I shall go on as before connecting as well as I can my very rambling journal in which I scribble down every thing as it occurs - slapdash. Thinking of home gives me strange sensations; where is my home now?   I am living at Captain Irvine's new house (a large brick one with two stories and a thed floor) which has been pretty well filled of late; its occupants being Lord F. Beauclerk Captain Pickering Mr. Gilbert Dr. Littleton the Messrs. Burgess and myself. We hear of two vessels coming to Eng-land. I hope you have written and perhaps sent me some shoes : for I am almost barefooted.  Yours ever  G. F. M.  The Black Snake  THIS PEST of the Bush is the most numerous of its kind although there are many other snakes equally venomous and deadly - as the grey the brown or earth coloured snake the whip and the yellow snakes - and the only one whose bite is not venomous is the Diamond snake which is the largest and the most beautiful. I have killed as many as thirteen of a day on the banks of the Wollondilly River in Argyle - for (with the exception of the Diamond snake) they all frequent the banks of rivers and marshy places - I was an inveterate enemy to them and made a rule never to pass one without killing it if possible consequently many a valuable hour has been thrown away by myself and men in the service of Government in rooting or cutting out one of these accursed reptiles - I have often frightened people by cutting the head of a black snake close off and then taking it in my hand allow the headless monster to twist round my arm and so carry it for miles - while they imagined I had its head compressed in my hand and shuddered lest I should be unable to disengage it.  Nor do I think that I should to this day have been afraid of them had I not witnessed the dreadful and fatal effects of their venomous bite. I was out with a Gentleman surveying a Dividing Range of country and we were upon the point of crossing a swamp when a Flier (swift Kangaroo) brushed by us. Away went my dogs Duke and Spanker away my men and I awaited by my Instrument the event of the chase. Almost immediately after the dogs had left I heard one of them make a peculiar howl or shriek - it was a sound unnatural for either man or dog and expressive of excessive terror. The men returned the Kangaroo having escaped owing to the thickness of the underwood and I commenced crossing the swamp with my pack horses when young Duncomb called out 'Stop Sir stop! [40] There's something the matter with Duke.' I turned round and observed the Dog lying down among the rushes I patted him he got up and looked piteously in my face and walked slowly after us while we were crossing the swamp. [41] My attention was again directed to the dog who went to the water and tried to vomit retching violently. He again came back to us who were all now watching the poor creature. The dog opened his mouth which was choked with white foam. 'He has been bit by a snake' I cried and before I could examine him he reeled a few paces between us like a drunken man and fell down dead!! Ten minutes had not elapsed from the time I heard the shriek and so virulent was the poison that when the dog fell you could observe the carcase swelling and no blood could be brought from him.  From that time my blood curdled when I crossed a snake and I was always coming in serious contact with them. Imagine if you can the horror the feeling the shudder which is caused by stepping accidentally on a snake of this description. Such was the case with me atone day returning to my tents in stepping over a fallen tree I felt the coil of a large snake round my leg - I was fixed and stood motionless - oh agony agony! [illegible] I felt for I cannot. - 'Can't bite you' cried one. 'I'll settle him' cried the other man - 'Don't move sir. There you black beast. There and there' cried the men as they battered his head with their tomahawks. 'His head is off sir.' And I moved from the spot half stupefied and sick with the fright.  February 13th  At home all morning. In the afternoon rode Bryant's horse beyond Roseway across the stream and into the woods on the other side. Magnificent scenery - Mount Wellington rearing his giant head above the tall trees at every turn - and the deep purple shadows of the Ravines formed fine contrasts with the bright parts rich with streams of yellow light from the declining sun.  Such scenes never fail to have a powerful effect over my mind and heart. The one appears to become sensible of its adaptation for the highest conceptions; seems to feel its connection with the great creator of all things; imbibes as it were conviction of its immortality. The other swells with gratitude to the being of whose fatherly protection and animating though awful presence it feels itself the peculiar object. These sensations lose none of their freshness and strength by repetition; on the contrary they seem to become more intense and perfect in their development by the frequency of their occurrence. This is not enthusiasm - there is no fanaticism in this. The heart and soul expand under the influence of such natural objects wild and magnificent 'tis true in the greatest degree - increase as it were in volume become eminently susceptible of their enlarged capacity for enjoyment and all these as naturally as the lungs become inflated and invigorated with the pure and balmy breeze which seems to infuse new life and health and elasticity into the most secret recesses of our animal being. [110]  If my sensations are participated by others generally - there requires little urging from our spiritual teachers to inspire us with a pure and a holy love of our creator.  Read in Joshua.  October 16th  Raining and blowing hard in Squalls. More snow upon the mountain than yesterday and more yesterday than the day before. Cold wind.  At home all day reading prayers and lessons and some chapters in the Bible. Flag up for a brig.  In my last visit to New Norfolk I was accompanied by a promising young man the Assistant Surgeon of the 63rd Regiment - previously to our leaving on the Monday he had been requested to visit the Hospital at Bridgewater where there is about 100 men working in chains forming a bridge and causeway across the Derwent. A Mr Officer of New Norfolk whose duty it was to attend the sick at Bridgewater had with the view of saving himself a twelve mile ride made the request of my companion and apparently he could not have selected a substitute better calculated for summary proceedings:  The Chain gang is composed of Convict assigned servants and others whose misconduct has brought them into a situation which to men not entirely callous to bodily suffering nor lost to a sense of human degradation must be one of exquisite moral and physical misery.  The Convicts are there for a definite time varying from one to twelve months - and on expiration of their sentence they are either returned to their Masters or transferred to Public Works of less painful employment.  Wooden Barracks have been erected for their use and also for the military guard placed over them the latter commanded by some subaltern officer - whose apparent tact has pointed him out to the Government as well adapted for such a duty. Here the convicts labour and with short intervals of refreshment and repose it may be said incessantly. They quarry stone break it shape it - or not as required wheel it to the Causeway and apply it either to form a foundation or in the erection of piers upon foundations already formed. The work is almost of an endless description - from the extent and depth of the mud in [NN]  which it is constructing and the unhappy labourers are therefore not even cheered by viewing the progress of their daily toil. [111]  Within the Court Yard appropriated for their use are seen some of the means by which discipline is preserved. Here stands constantly the triangle - and there ranged along one side of the small square are cells for close incarceration. These are of a peculiar construction and owe their origin to some modern Phalaris - who it is hoped brought the efficacy of the invention to the test in his own person.  Each cell is about 7 feet in length by 2 feet 6 in height and breadth; of course a stout man could not turn himself and when put in durance must be pushed in head foremost and when relieved drawn out by the heels - (However I need not indulge in speculation. There are few if any stout men amongst these poor wretches; a more speedy means of diminishing the bulk of human expansion could hardly have been devised than the treatment at this penal station.)  The cells when not occupied by the refractory are the depositories for the sick and when used on the latter occasion are dominated "The Hospital".  The entrance to each is secured by a strong wooden frame with a heavily barred gate swinging upon hinges which admits cold or heat in unmitigated intenseness.  There are other modest of punishment besides the cells and Triangle - such as reducing the quantity of food depriving one of soup and another of meat etc.  I have been thus particular in describing this penal station because it is very probably a specimen of the rest - and I believe they have never yet appeared on paper.  After a short consultation with the Officer commanding the sick were ordered to be assembled and the Surgeon proceeded to inspect them. They consisted of 12 or 14 squalid famine stricken distressed wretches - drawn up in a line in front of the Barracks. Approaching the nearest the Surgeon enquired his complaint.  "I have got a bad eye Sir and can't bear the light."  'Let me look at them - how long have they been in this state?'  "They have been getting bad about ten days Sir."  The Surgeon then speaking to the overseer in attendance:  'See that this man washes his eyes three or four times a day with warm water and let him work in the shade."  The second in the line was then asked what he had done to his arms? [112]  "I haven't done anything Sir." replied the man "but they are all come out in this way. I have no peace with them night or day."  "Oh!" exclaimed the Officer of the guard "He has just got the itch that's all!"  The surgeon then desired the overseer to give the man a dose of salts and let him go to work as usual.  "What is the matter with you?' said the Surgeon to a third.  "I don't know Sir - my knee is very much swelled and it has been getting worse and worse every day for the last month."  "Oh you have struck it I perceive." rejoined the Surgeon "You must bathe it several times a day in warm water and Overseer let him rest today from work and tomorrow his knee will be well."  Another poor fellow's leg had been sore for three weeks and on the Surgeon's intimation took off a portion of a dirty cotton handkerchief under which was spread upon a broad unhealthy sore about two square inches of an old chequed shirt much soiled with long use.  "I see how it is" said the Surgeon. "You don't keep it clean."  "Yes Sir" replied the man "I do as well as I can."  "You do no such thing" reiterated the Surgeon "Wash it frequently with warm water and Overseer - take this man from the wheelbarrow for the present and let him break stones only."  "Why Martin" here interrupted the Officer on duty: "You were in hospital some time ago."  "Yes Sir" replied the poor wretch "But I was very ill."  "Pooh" interjected the Officer "I'll tell you what - a damned good flogging would be the best thing for him. However let him break stones as the Doctor directs."  "Thank you your honour" said the man "I would rather go to work than stay in the Hospital." (I have already described the oven-like dens called the Hospital).  I was rather surprised at the extreme simplicity of the remedies prescribed by the young Surgeon which in every case consisted of either cold or warm water or a dose of salts although the latter being a costly medicine was directed in only one instance.  I learnt afterwards that the prescription was regulated not by the necessity of the case but by the state of the medicine chest which the Surgeon previously to the inspection had been informed contained neither more or less than a few ounces of Epsom salts. The Officer referred to in this mem. had been recently relieved from the station and was then in the temporary performance of duty during the illness of his successor. Upon finishing the Sick Inspection this Gentleman looked wise - shook his head and affected to complain of the number of Sick. While during the period of his commanding he said there were only two cases. One of these was ill when sent to the gang and the other had his leg crushed by a mass of rock falling upon it. He was of the opinion that a more liberal application of the Cat o' nine tails would render the attendance of a Medical Officer at the Station altogether superfluous but it was no business of his and therefore he said nothing about it. [113]  As so long a period has elapsed I of course imagine you will not or do not wish to come but surely you could have answered my letter. I should rather impute your silence to the non receipt of said letter rather than to any other cause. I have now the pleasure of writing again and inform you that God has prospered my industry and exertions and that I have now the means with a continuation of industry to obtain a comfortable living much more so than I could in Ireland - however as you let that favourable opportunity pass I as I am now a Free Subject can not obtain such another but if you wish to come you can procure a cheap passage with Female Emigrants whose passage is defrayed by Government [...]   Launceston 18th April 1852  Dear Cousin  My Brother and his Family are thinking to make a trip Home next year / he wishes take his children in order to place them at school in England.  My Wife feels grateful for your kind expression in her favor contained in your last letter and hopes one of these days yet to have the pleasure of seeing you. Mr and Mrs Thomson are well they have six children and are but poorly off he has not yet got quit of the Government claims and as my brother and Self are bound for him we have no idea how it will end he is the most lazy fellow I ever met with in all the course of my life / Mrs P [?] I have not seen her since I received your last letter / Mr & Mrs Innes go on to India with the Regt. about September next / they have two little girls my mother is quite well the last time I heard she has turned Farmer in her old days she cultivates a farm on the Hawkesbury. Mr Atkinson was down here shortly and intends to bring his Family down to settle here at Pattersons Plains / they are also but poorly of but he is Industrious and deserves to get on. This is of course all private. Old Mrs Foster is now here she has a farm and works as a mantle maker / the only good one of that Family was Eliza Mrs Pitman and she poor thing was Cut off in her prime / Jane her eldest daughter is married to a man of the name of Patten who keeps a Public House and who uses her very ill / the Eldest son I have never seen but he is also here somewhere but I do not know what he is doing James the Youngest is Apprenticed to a Carpenter / the old man you are aware was murdered in New South Wales some years ago Now my dear Sir I have given you all the News of Family aiffairs and I conclude with Saying how happy I will be to hear from you on all occasions. I am getting quite sound in my health after four years suffering  I remain My dear Cousin yours very truly  James H. Reibey  Tuesday 1 January  1833  There are a few Blacks here but I find it very difficult to raise their attention to listen to anything concerning religion so as to make any impression upon them. They hear what is said to them but make no farther inquiry; nor do I suppose that they think about what is said to them any longer than just for the moment.  Friday 4 January.  A large party of Blacks came this morning to Wellington. Their chief design appeared to be to get something to eat; for after dinner they all went off again. I had a conversation with several of them and asked them various questions about the things around me in order to inform their minds of the Author of all and to distinguish those to them which had been made by art by white people. One who had a pipe asked me simply whether God had made it. I was much pleased with this question as it afforded me opportunity and encouragement to say something more on the subject; for it is not often that they ask such questions. Praise be unto God through our Lord Jesus Christ for having sustained me hitherto and for every little encouragement he has given to me with regard to the Blacks. May the happy time soon arrive when they shall worship in the courts of Jehovah and sing praises unto the Lamb.  Good Friday5 April.  Had divine service which was tolerably well attended. The Blacks are as indifferent to spiritual things as they were before. Every thing we can say to them seems to have but a momentary effect.  Sunday 7 April.  Easterday. Had divine service a good number attended. There are very few Blacks here at present.  Sunday 14 April.  A few Blacks came this afternoon but they soon went away again. I am a little discouraged with regard to them; but we must persevere till it pleases the Lord to produce a change in their disposition by the power of his Holy Spirit.  Monday 15 April.  Intended to go into the country among the Blacks but having been informed that the horse was required at home I was obliged to relinquish my design. I went therefore to Cobolyen only where I met with a few Blacks with whom I sat down and talked learning at the same time a few words from them.  Wednesday 17 April.  Went with Mrs Handt and Mrs Watson to Cobolyen. I found some Blacks there who had not been frequently in these parts.  Thursday 18 April.   There are now several Blacks here a few of whom came from Cobolyen to-day. It is a great hindrance not to be able to speak freely to them in their own language but I hope these mountains of difficulties will be gradually moved so that they will hear in their own tongue "the wonderful works of God" wrought in the redemption of mankind through his only begotten Son.  Sunday 21 April.  The services as usual were regularly performed. A blind black man called Boby came this evening to us with his family in order to stay for a while. The Blacks have been more numerous last week than usual and I hope that the time will soon arrive when they will receive instruction and believe the blessed Gospel of the Saviour.  Tuesday 23 April.  The black man who came here with his family last Sunday seems to be superior to his countrymen in intellect. He asked me more questions about God and religion than all the Blacks have done with whom I ever conversed. O may the Lord begin his work of grace in this poor man's heart. Received a letter this day from one of my Christian friends in Sydney which greatly refreshed my mind.  Thursday 25 April.  Conversed with the black man Boby. He asked me whether God lived in a house in heaven and whether he did eat bread. I endeavoured to give him a short description of God as far as I was able in his own language. He asked me also whether God had made "War-gan" (large canoe or boat.) I told him that white men made it but that God made the trees grow which they cut down for that purpose. The idea of a large canoe he had probably received from white men or from a boat which was formerly on the Settlement previous to the losing of his eye-sight. Their own canoes called Gum-bi-lan consist of a mere sheet of bark tied together on both ends with a string so that the ends are above the water.  Friday 26 April.   The black man Wesley mentioned under date the 26th of March has been treacherously speared by one of his countrymen and has since died in consequence of the wound.  Sunday 28 April.  The wife of the black man who came here last Sunday was found last night in the bush about to kill the child she had just brought forth. She had already given it a kick with her foot and thrust it towards the fire so that its back was burnt by it. Just before her delivery she had gone a short distance into the bush in order to be unnoticed that she might conceal her atrocious act. It is a halfcast child and that was probably the chief reason why she intended to kill it. I spoke this morning with the blind husband and reproved him for having prostituted his wife. He replied that white men should know that it was wrong and not have asked her of him as they know about God etc. A just reply indeed. They who should endeavour to teach them good things render them by their conduct and conversation worse than they were before. O how long shall the name of our Lord be thus profaned by those who bear it!  Wednesday 1 May.   A young black man came today one of the most intelligent I ever have seen among them. He gave satisfactory answers to the questions I put to him (considering their incomparable degraded state;) and made several inquiries which they do in general but seldom. We should like him to have stayed with us but he went back again with the white man he had accompanied here who had come on some business. If they could be persuaded to stay at one place there would be more hope of doing good among them but their wandering and roving disposition and their indifference to the comforts of a civilised life is the great barrier in the way of their improvement. Nor are they prevented by a want of food from so doing for this they can procure every where.  Saturday 4 May.  An old black man called Billy came fighting today with another Black and had his left leg speared through. The other had killed his dog yesterday which gave rise to the quarrel. The blind man is yet here with his family and I find him profitable to me with regard to the language.  Friday 10 May.  Have conversed with the Blacks several times about God and their future state. May the gracious Saviour bless and own my feeble endeavours. The blind man Boby went away to-day with his wife but will soon return.  Monday 13 May.  This morning at 8 o'clock my wife was safely delivered of a son. We had felt some anxiety respecting this event as we are so far from medical help in cases of this kind. But our God has been gracious to us in hearing our prayers and preserving both the root and the branch. Praise to his name! May our dear boy be a child of God and an heir of glory! Whether he lives or dies may he be the Lord's.  Monday 27 May.   Some Blacks brought us the intelligence to-day that the black man who killed Wesley mentioned under date April the 26th has been killed in return by some of the deceased's friends. We learnt however afterwards that they had not been able to accomplish their design that man being so strong for them. Should they succeed in putting their design into execution this act would probably occasion more mischief as it would enrage the friends of this person so that there might be no end of retaliating. May they soon be taught divine grace to obey the excellent precept of the Gospel not to render evil for evil. Mrs Handt has been unwell for the last fortnight from taking cold soon after her confinement and has consequently required much attention and care. The child also has been ill.  Wednesday 29 May.  Some of the Blacks came to-day most of whom were infected with the venereal disorder. They are certainly most pitiful objects both with regard to their temporal and eternal condition. Here they lay around their little fires in the open air exposed to cold and wet; and frequently too lazy to get up and fetch their victuals when already prepared for them. As to what regards their souls they are in reality as dry bones.  Friday 31 May.  Three of the Blacks who are sometimes staying here for a few days had been hunting today and returned with two Oppossums which served for their supper.  Sunday June 2 May.   A rainy day. Very few persons attended divine service.  Monday 10 May.  There have not been many Blacks here of late and their numbers altogether appear but small.  Friday 14 May.  When I was in the garden to-day two Blacks came up to me one called Billy Sixfoot and another whose name is Neddy. The latter asked me for a turnip which when received he gave to his comrade and then asked another for himself. In complying with his requests I tried to direct their minds to Him who causes the turnips to grow.  Saturday 15 May.   Was sawing some wood to-day and as I at length found it too fatiguing I requested two Blacks who had come this morning to Wellington to assist me; but neither of them would do so as they were too idle and as they had just before received plenty of meat. Food is their only inducement to do anything and on that account they remained unmoved by all my persuasions.  Monday 17 May.   Succeeded to-day in getting one of the Blacks to assist me in sawing wood in return of which I gave him some bread and meat. If they could be induced to stay and to do every day a little work; a great point would by this means be gained as it would afford us more opportunity to instruct them. But as this is not the case we labour under many disadvantages and must confine ourselves to speak with them about God just as we every now and then meet with them; when their minds are apparently not at all in a proper state to receive any impression. May God hear our prayer for them in opening their hearts to receive the truth of the Gospel.  Sunday 23 May.  One of the black girls who are staying here when standing near the fire this morning met with a dreadful accident. Her clothes suddenly took fire and very soon was all in a blaze. Nobody was with her at the moment but some children who were frightened and could render her no assistance. She struck with terror ran out of doors where by reason of the wind the fire became more dreadful; and before she received assistance her back shoulders and several other parts of her body were severely burned. She is now in exquisite pain.  Sunday 30 May.  The girl who burnt herself last Sunday has been very bad but is more in a state of recovery. The Blacks are according to all appearance very few in number. I have never seen more together than about 50. The females are particularly few compared with the men. The cause of their being so small in number may be chiefly ascribed to their barbarous practice of destroying not very unfrequently their offspring. Of late it was reported that a mother had killed her new-born infant in the bush. First she had broken its neck and then burnt it. This is horrid and unnatural. It is however but too true that they not unfrequently commit such atrocities. They stand indeed in great need of a Saviour to deliver them from their barbarity as well as from their wretchedness both temporal and spiritual. And we want new courage and strength; for as yet there has been very little appearance of their paying attention to what they hear or of inducing them to practice the rudiments of civilisation. May the Lord change them in their disposition inclinations and habits otherwise nothing good can be done to them; for vain is the help of man.   My occupations have been during the last quarter from July to October 1833 as follows:  Collecting words and sentences from the Natives as opportunity afforded.  Copying the whole of those words and sentences which I had already obtained and frequently reading them all over in order to impress them upon my mind.  Talking on religious subjects with the Natives when I could meet with any.  Working every now and then in the garden to raise some vegetables.  Composing a sermon for every alternate Sunday.  Reading sometimes a little Greek and Hebrew in order to refresh my memory or some other books to assist me in the English language.  At intervals engaged in doing little jobs necessary to be done in and about the house etc  J.C.S. Handt  [Note] Read in Committee Dec.14 1833  [Signed] William Watson  July 4.  Many of the Blacks have left these parts at present and gone in search of the "mial" (strange) Black mentioned under date May 27 who killed Wesley in order to kill him in return. May divine grace soon enable and teach them not to avenge themselves but to render good from evil.  Monday 8.  A neighbouring tribe of Blacks was said this morning to be coming up to Wellington which circumstance occasioned great fear among the Blacks here especially as it was said that they came on purpose to kill one of them who is indeed a very bad man. They had been seen by the Wellington Blacks about 3 or 4 miles from here. Br. Watson and I took a ride in the afternoon to see them accompanied by the son of the black man whom they were said to intend to kill and another Black. But when we came to Tea-pot-pinch about 9 miles from here where they met some other Blacks of their own tribe they desisted from going any farther for fear of being killed. When they had shewed us the direction we had to take to pursue our way we left them. One of them however the son of the intended object of revenge took courage afterwards as it proved for he soon followed us. We rode on then towards the place where the strange Blacks were supposed to sit down but could not discover any trace of them and had to return towards evening without having obtained the object in view.  Wednesday 10.  There are more Blacks here than usual. Some of them were curious to see our little boy. Mr Betts from Parramatta Son in law to the Rev. S. Marsden paid us a visit today. Went with him to the cave where we found the air being winter here at present very warm. Besides the curiosities mentioned under date the 19th of Nov. 1832 we discovered many bats sticking to the rocks which had taken their shelter in the cave from the cold.  Wednesday 17.  Succeeded in obtaining one of the Blacks to assist me in fetching some wood out of the bush and carrying it to the garden where I am building a Shed to keep tools in etc. It has been very dry weather of late. The seeds of the vegetables in the ground cannot well come up on that account; and those vegetables which are out are hindered in their growth. But I hope the Lord will soon send a gracious and refreshing rain for the benefit both of man and beast.  Friday 19.  The white men on the various stock stations up and down the country cause the Blacks to be worse than they formerly were as they teach them to swear and to curse etc. They prove a great hindrance to Missionary work; although this should not discourage us as the Blacks are the more to pitied on that account and have a greater claim to be instructed in better things. Have they received the evil things and should they not partake of the good things? Spoke to day with some of them about the Saviour that he died for them etc. but I cannot say what impression it made upon them; for they kept silence neither making any inquiry nor giving an answer.  Sunday 28.  Had divine service. Several of the Blacks attended. May the time soon arrive when they shall attend the divine ordinances with devotion.  Saturday August 3.  A black man very ill is staying here in order that he may have some medical assistance. He is called "Coborn" (great) Billy and has three wives two of them are also sick. They are indeed a very wretched family and the cause of their disease proves that they are more so with regard to their souls than their bodies.  Sunday 4.  Another Sabbath is ended. The duties and services of the day have been performed in the usual manner. Went in the afternoon to see the family of the Blacks above mentioned. The man sat by a small fire boiling a handful of wheat in a pot. Two of his wives lay almost buried in dust and ashes one of them was embracing and kissing a half-starved dog and the other was asleep. The third an elderly woman had two interesting little boys sitting beside her. She and her children are not sick but as dirty as the rest. More pitiable objects than this diseased and filthy family were perhaps scarcely ever beheld. May he whose bowels melt with tenderness and who alone can relieve them speedily appear for their help.  Wednesday 14.  A black man called Coborn Neddy came to-day for medical assistance being much diseased of their usual abominable disorder. To be cured of this malady is an inducement for them to come here. But as soon as they are returned to health and even frequently before they have recovered they creep into the bush again and turn to their former habits as the dog to his own vomit.  Thursday 15.  Coborn Neddy who came yesterday went away again. This is their manner. They come to be cured but seldom wait till this effected their patience being very soon exhausted.  Wednesday 21.  Took some cabbage to Coborn Billy and his three wives and at the same time endeavoured to converse with them about religion and the Saviour; but as far as I could judge they paid no serious attention to it. The cabbage they eat raw being too idle to dress it.  Saturday 24.  A large party of the Blacks came here this morning both men and women. Their design for visiting us was to get some blankets. I talked to them about God and Jesus Christ. upon which they asked me for some bread though they had already received a quantity of meat for their dinner. They seldom boil this meat but throw it on the fire and roast it a little except they receive some salt meat from white people and have a pot lent to them. They have no property nor do they care about it. Their whole riches consist in a short cloak made of oppossum skins sewed together so as to form nearly a square. Not every one however is possessed of one and if they can get a blanket they are sure not to trouble themselves so far as to make an oppossum skin cloak though they might easily do it considering the many oppossums they kill. Besides this cloak they have some spears womeras and clubs. If one has a wife she is generally obliged to carry these weapons at least some of them. The wealth of the female sex is a cloak of the same description or a blanket a stick which they use to dig up roots for their sustenance and generally a drinking vessel the excrescence of a tree prepared for that purpose about the size of a man's head. Besides these things they carry a little bag on their backs in which they have some trifles perhaps some remaining food and some pipe clay with which the men paint themselves when they have a "Corobera" (dance). Both sexes generally wear a headband and the males wear also a girdle from which hangs down in the front and behind a small bunch of various strips of the skin of the oppossum.  Monday 26.  Spoke with the Blacks about religion; they made one inquiry only and I could not discover that my conversation made any serious impression upon their minds. We must sow weeping and leave the event to the Lord who may perhaps grant a joyful harvest though we may not be permitted to see it.  Tuesday 27.  Took a ride to a Stockstation to see a white man who was said to retain a blacks man's wife who had been (as the common expression is) lent to him. He denied that he had kept her back; but said he had sent her away a few days ago and told her not to come near his hut any more because she had endeavoured to take his cloak. I spoke very seriously to him about his soul and his conduct as he is a notoriously wicked character. He confessed that he was a wicked man and seemed to be a little moved. I did however not give much credit to his sincerity of being sorry about his conduct for there is a great deal of duplicity in him. Notwithstanding as he expressed a desire to have a New Testament and I happened to have one in my pocket I thought it my duty to part with it.  Saturday 31.  Have been talking several times with the Blacks and I trust that the Lord will cause our conversations with them to produce a good effect. But alas they are apparently insensible and indifferent with regard to spiritual things. Reflection and gratitude do not seem to enter their minds. With regard to sympathy they are far from it. To see them and to witness their habits and conduct indeed is quite sufficient to sink one's heart. But however degraded however wretched however equal to the brute beasts they are in many respects it is not impossible for the Almighty to change them. May he do so speedily.  Monday September 2.  Went to see Coborn Billy mentioned under the 21st of last month. As he was sick and seemingly in want of food I returned and brought him some meat. When he was eating one of his wives who had been seeking grass roots for food returned from the bush. She was extremely weak and sickly and as it appeared almost starved. The reason of their privation is because they are too lazy to grind wheat for themselves. I told him he should give her some of the meat which he did in a reluctant manner. They are unfeeling even towards their nearest relation and envy each other of a mouthful of food. If this women had been his favourite wife he might perhaps have given her willingly some of his meat but unhappily she did not happen to be the person. I saw him however sitting with some other Blacks a few days ago and feasting with them on a warm cake baked in the coals while his three wives were sitting hungry at a distance not having received a bit of it. And when I asked him and his comrades why they did not give any to those poor women who had no food at all he as well as the others laughed at me. That was all the sympathy showed by them. May divine grace teach and incline them to do to their neighbours as they wish that they should behave towards them.  Thursday 5.  Have been several times conversing with the Blacks wishing to impart to them some knowledge of divine things and to make at the same time some progress in the language. But they like better to hear about "patter" (food) than anything else; and are constantly complaining that they are hungry. The oppossums which they are catching at this time are generally very young. They have as far as I have seen one or two which they carry in a bag with which providence has furnished them. In this bag there are also the teats which are sucked by their young. It is singular to see the little creatures moving in the bag after the mother is dead; and to see them creep in again when they have been taken out seemingly unconscious of their parents death.  Friday 6.  Spoke to Coborn Billy who is yet sick and told him to pray God to make him better; for he could do so; but if God did not restore him he would never be well again.  Saturday 7.  When speaking with the Blacks to day I was asked for some bread. I replied that we had very little of it at present. Upon which they said that they supposed when the wheat was ripe we should have plenty to give them. I answered we should but that they should pray God to make the wheat grow that we might have a plentiful harvest.  Monday 9.  Spoke with a black woman called Poll. When I asked her who made her she replied 'A black man'. From this answer I took occasion to tell her more about God. I received this answer several times when asking them this question but I refrained from mentioning it.  Wednesday 11.  When conversing with a black man he asked me whether God was a "Diribany" (old man). May the Lord enlighten his mind to a further inquiry about these things.  Thursday 12.  Last evening Colonel Despard and two Officers arrived here on a visit. The Col. accepted of a lodging at the Mission house. He was very agreeable in his conversation and appeared well inclined towards religion.  Saturday 14.  The Blacks who were staying here suddenly took their departure this afternoon as they intend to have a grand Corobera. On these occasions remonstrances are of no avail and those who before appeared almost civilised will go with the party and unite with them in all their heathenish customs with great avidity.  Sunday 15.  A melancholy accident happened not far from here last week. A little black boy called Wellington was sitting upon the top of a loaded dray which unexpectedly upset and crushed him to death.  Monday 30  A few Blacks who had been frequently here before returned to day from the place where they had been to Corobera. Thus their wandering disposition often brings them here; and though they will not remain here they never I believe go away again without hearing something of religion. May God over-rule this evil for their everlasting good and his glory.  Thursday 3  Have been talking to the Blacks as opportunity afforded itself; and my prayer is that it may be for their spiritual benefit. A year of our being here is ended. We have not been able to give flourishing accounts of the success of our labour; but not withstanding we have great cause for thankfulness to God for all the mercies enjoyed and for having been supported and preserved thus far. We have been sowing in tears may we ere long reap in joy!  October 4.  Conversed with a young black man called Tommy who has several times done some little jobs for me. I asked why he did not stop here always and work a little every day that he might have his victuals regularly and live like white men. He replied that black men were accustomed to walk in the bush but confessed that it was not so good a mode of living as that of white people. This man when here at Wellington is sometimes induced to work a little in order to get some food; yet he cannot be persuaded to abstain from wandering about in the wilds of the forest. Another Black when he saw me came up and saluted me as he had just returned from the bush. I told him he looked very thin after his ramble in the bush. Yes he replied and therefore I ought to take him into the room and give him plenty to eat then he would get fat again. Thus they are cunning enough as regards their stomach though very indifferent with respect to their souls.  Monday 7.  When talking to the Blacks one of them asked me whether God had made the knife which he held in his hand and which he had borrowed from one of our men for the purpose of dividing some meat among themselves. When they are in the bush they tear their meat to pieces not having knives to cut it. The sinews and gristle they sometimes cut with a shell.  Monday 14.  Br. Watson left us to day to go to Sydney. Observed this evening that only one Black of those who are at present here came to family prayer. I went to them therefore afterwards and inquired the reason: all were silent except one who replied in a witty manner (as he seemed to think it) that he must have some tobacco given him or he would not come: he could not go to prayer without first having a smoke. May they soon learn and experience that in attending the divine ordinances and in serving the Lord there is to be found great reward and much delight.  Tuesday 15.  One of the Blacks by the name of Nerang Jacky was very troublesome last night and used threatening language to Mrs Watson.  Wednesday 16.  The Blacks went away this morning but said they would come back again in a few days. It seems almost impossible for them to stay long at one place.  Monday 21.  Some of the Blacks came back to day from their excursion. They had promised me to cut some bark when they returned; but did not feel the least incentive now to keep their engagement their idleness being to great to allow them to do so.  Tuesday 22.  It is very discouraging to see these poor creatures when spoken to about the things which belong to their peace not give them apparently any consideration. But many of the Europeans are as little concerned for their souls as these poor wretched Blacks and who knows whether the Lord will yet in his own good time reveal unto them his Son and give them spiritual light and genuine repentance. It is ours to sow though it be with sighing and tears but the issue must be left to him who must give the increase and who has said "My word shall not return empty." One of them in telling me that he was hungry used an oath to confirm the truth of it. I reproved him and told him that he should never say so again as the great God was displeased at it etc. He seemed to be unconscious of having said anything amiss but promised not to say so any more. They all went away to-day into the bush in order to make young men of some boys.  Thursday 24.  Succeeded to-day in persuading the Blacks to cut some bark which is very useful for covering a shed or cot and for several other purposes.  Friday 25.  The black man Nerang Jacky had found honey in the bush and caught some oppussums besides so that all of them had plenty to eat. I told them that God was very kind to them in giving them so much food. 'Yes" answered Nerang Jacky "God that burhery (good) fellow that gave it mine (my) plenty oppossum."   Sunday 27.  Had divine service the Blacks who are at present here attended. Nerang Jacky began to be again unruly this evening owing as the other Blacks said to the crazy fits he is sometimes subject to. By the aid of providence however we prevented him from doing injury to any person till he became more calm.  Thursday 31.  Nerang Jacky went away this evening to fight with another black man by the name of Gentleman Jacky for a woman whom each of them called his own. The most singular circumstance is that the women does not live with either; for she has been with white men for some years and is living with one. Last Monday Nerang Jacky said he would go to him and take her away but when he returned and I asked him whether he had brought her he replied "No that white fellow mahne it altogedder" (would keep her altogether.)  Friday November 1.  Nerang Jacky returned this morning but had not been fighting. A party of other Blacks about 20 in number visited us and are yet staying here. They received 36 lb of meat which they consumed in a very short time; and when I afterwards asked one whether they had had a good meal he answered a small one. I endeavoured to speak with them about the great Giver of all good and wish that it may have proved beneficial to their souls. Brother Watson returned this evening from Sydney.  Saturday 2.  Some more Blacks came to day so that there were together with the others about thirty. Their craving appetites were appeased with fresh meat an ox having been killed yesterday. Some women also were here among whom was she whom I mentioned in my diary under date the first of February as having been delivered of a half-caste male child. She had the little boy on her back. This child's life it appeared had been spared by the mother which is indeed a rare case among the Blacks of these quarters. For in general they kill the half-bred children as you will remember from several instances recorded in our journals.  Sunday 3.  Some of the Blacks attended divine service and conducted themselves in a quiet manner as they usually do. May we soon have the satisfaction of stating that they hear the word of life with attention and devotion.  Monday 4.  The Blacks had been fighting last night and one of them had his arm severely wounded. The occasion of the quarrel was that one of them had been neglected in dividing the meat which they had received in common for their dinner. Thus in the morning they had been attending divine service (some of them at least) and in the evening a combat took place among them. It was however pleasing to observe that one who is frequently here one who has not gone with the others expressed his disapprobation of the conduct of his country-men in fighting especially on Sunday.  One of the black women belonging to the Wellington tribe who had been lent by her husband to a white man and been staying with him a considerable time was delivered of a child by him a few days ago; and she is said to have burnt the infant as soon as she had given birth to it. O what will be the end of these things but the diminution of the poor aborigines. May the Lord speedily make bare his saving arm unto them!  Wednesday 6.  A few Blacks came to day but they could not be induced to stay but went away again shortly after their arrival. I endeavoured to talk to them about religion they paid however no great attention. The chief thought which seemed to occupy their minds was that they might get something to eat. One women however said "You pialle burhery" (speak good things.)  Friday 8.  Two very interesting young black men who were strangers here visited us together with several others who had been here before. They said they were brothers and farther to explain themselves they said "Like you and Mr Watson you know" taking it for granted that we also were related and seeming to suppose that we could not then misunderstand them.  Sunday 10.  The services were performed as usual. Some of the Blacks also attended.  Saturday 16.  Again a week has past and I fear I have done very little in promoting our Saviour's kingdom. O that he would speedily appear in his saving strength that we may not spend or time in vain and that these poor Blacks no longer remain in darkness.  Sunday 17.  One of the Blacks called and desired to speak with me after service. When I asked him what his desire was he explained that he was hungry and he wished me to give him something to eat. I thought he had perhaps noticed something in the prayers or in the sermon but upon inquiring I found he had not paid the least attention to either. May the Lord Jesus for his own sake give them of his spirit to attend to his word and to become his people. We were last week employed in altering and repairing part of a house at the back of this to use as a Church as the room which we now use is inconvenient and sometimes too small for the congregation.  Thursday 28.  Nothing new or interesting has happened with regard to the Blacks. May the Lord increase our faith zeal and love lest we suffer in our minds when we find that our endeavours are apparently fruitless. May he also make these poor people sensible of our desire to do them good!  Monday December 2.  It has been exceedingly dry this season. Our wheat is dried up on the ground before it came to any perfection: all the labour in ploughing and sowing the ground has been in vain. The cattle are wandering about for food and can find but little. The vegetables in the garden are withered so that we have none to eat. There has been rain at several places in our neighbourhood of late but we were not favoured with any. Something more has been done last week towards the Church. The floor is paved and the rail pulpit and reading desk are erected.  Saturday 7.  We have had several showers of rain since the last date. The forest and the fields begin now to look green again to the comfort and support of man and beast. Thanks be unto God who again begins to smile upon us by his providence. The Blacks are going and moving to and fro and we endeavour to speak with them as often as we have an opportunity. I could wish to write something more pleasant and encouraging about them but we are as it were groping in the dark not seeing much prosperity in our work. No journal of any other Missionary labouring in another field can scarcely be more uninteresting than mine. But though the prospect be dark now the clouds might be gradually dispersed.  Wednesday 11.  Few Blacks here at present. Their roving disposition does not allow them to stay long at one place. O that the Lord would pity them in their low and most wretched state; and appear with help out of Zion in their behalf!  Tuesday 17.  Left for Sydney with Mrs Handt and the little one. Went about 40 miles to day to Mr Marsden's station called Molong. There were several Blacks at a small distance from here to whom I went conversed. One of them called King Bogen had accompanied us with his family from the place at Wellington when we first went there but since that time he has never visited us. I asked him the reason of his staying away. He replied that he was afraid of the Wellington Blacks and thought they would kill him if he went there again. One of his wives being sick he desired me to cure her.  Wednesday 18.  King Bogen came this morning to fetch the tobacco which I had promised him last night. Several other Blacks also came to whom I talked till we were about to start. I found them extremely ignorant which circumstance convinced me that though we may have done but little with regard to the Wellington Blacks we have at least been the means of enlightening their minds in some degree. Did not meet with any Blacks on the road to day.  Friday 20.  Met with two Blacks who it seemed had learned something of the value of money for they asked us for a copper shilling.  Another incident which I know you will see the propriety of making a subject of thanksgiving occurred on Friday the 15th September 1833 Molloy has lately had a mud wall and fire place built adjoining the House - On the coming of that day Kitty - her husband (Ludlow) Tom (a most interesting servant boy) on going out for the Kettle said "The wall is coming down." They said "Oh no it's the noise of the rain on it." Kitty caught up her crutches. Tom replied "I tell you it is." Ludlow who was sitting behind his wife on the hencoop had only time to thrust his wife into an adjoining tent down a step - when down came all the chimney and wall and broke into the side of this tent which comprised of Bulrushes and [NN] (you must remember our primitive state) Kitty now seized her crutches and most providentially when Tom spoke the second time and she was first down the step (owing to Ludlow's push and expression "Like enough it is Get out of the way old woman") when the clay fell just at her heels and with its force - although it did not touch her - she fell against a box from the concussion. But for this miraculous interposition the poor lame creature must have been crushed to death. Tom exclaimed "Thank God I have saved your life Kitty" but judge of my situation and inexpressible gratitude to the Almighty when just as we heard the noise of it falling - I was [NN] Sabina to go into Kitty at the new fireplace and she said "No tay (stay) with 'Mama'." I was on the point of telling Tom to take her out on his going for the Kettle - but was withheld by mercy from the Lord who had compassion recall the threatenings sent out against us She every evening sits on Kitty's knee about that time.  I cannot express my feelings to you . . . for had the child been on Kitty's knee - and she not able to walk without her crutches they must inevitably have perished. I forgot to name that Ludlow had leapt into the corner whilst the ponderous mass was falling. It was the work of two days to recover the clay matted together as it was with stones and rushes (for want of straw) and had not the Almighty spared them - judge of the care and time required to extract their bodies. Every time I embrace Sabina I feel how different it might have been - that instead of a dear little child blooming with health she might have been a mutilated pallid corpse. Oh dearest Helen and Mr Story - I tremble now and wonder - Do return thanks and praises although inadequate I feel they are.  We had not long retired to bed the same night when a person in a very disturbed state of mind burst into the house (for we lock no doors or windows) calling on Captn. Molloy to save him from two men who had attempted to shoot him - He rushed into my room - adjoining the room he entered - Sabina did not cry and I was not much alarmed at anything but the cause of such abomination as I regret to state it arises from great intemperance.  Molloy had to go for a light from the kitchen about 40 yards whilst Molloy was about the person was trembling and begging protection - he had jumped from a window 12 feet high. On Molloy's bringing a candle the gentleman perceived some blood on his trousers and fell into a dreadful convulsion fit - foaming at the mouth and kicking violently as he lay on the floor. This was too much for Sabina - she and I were up by this time - and she clung alarmed to me - I was obliged to walk out with nothing but my nightdress on - and no shoes - up to Mrs Dawson's rooms about the same distance as the kitchen - I sent down the menservants with some cold water and remained absent on dear Baby's account until the person was taken back to Charles Bussell's house over the garden he again returned and kept us in a sad confused state until 10 in the morning. Nothing would convince him it was an illusion - I spoke to him seriously when he recovered which was the following day - But I fear without hope of amendment as this is the third fit from the same cause He spoke the most ridiculous things and took leave of us for the last time said he was going to enter on a world of spirits when Molloy was reproving him for his habitual excesses.  These incidents will interest you and give you some idea of the singular events to which we are exposed in this precarious life. [...] [192]  This is certainly a very beautiful place - but were it not for domestic charms the eye of the emmigrant [sic] would soon weary of the unbounded limits of thickly clothed dark green forests where nothing can be [NN] to feast the imagination and when you can only say there must be some tribes of Natives in those woods and they are the most degraded of humanity.  Our clime is heavenly and while you are burning the front breadth of your frock and the nebs of your shoes at an excellent fire of Newcastle coals - I am sitting in the Verandah surrounded by my little flower-garden of British Cape and Australian flowers pouring forth their odour. (for the large white lily is now in bloom) and a variety of beautiful little birds most brilliant in plumage sporting around me. These little creatures seem quite delighted at the acquisition they have made in our emigration and are much tamer than any but the robin and sparrow in England.  There is a small bird called the Australian robin with shining black back and head and the breast of a very bright scarlet Also a little bird of a complete blue colour all over resembling Smalt or Cobalt with short green wings and the Honeyeater are so minutely beautiful. I cannot describe them - they have a long curved beak which they insert into the cup of the different flowers and the symmetry of their form is perfect accords with the elegance of their food you see them perch on the most slender flower stalk and apply the beak to the blossom every moment expecting to see the flower drop off but their light weight does not in the least effect this.  The native flowers are all exceedingly small but beautiful in colour although that flies when dried. I only know three kinds and those are two white and one blue of the herbaceous plants possessing an odour Many of the shrubs are powerfully sweet some like may some like bergamote. Another remarkable feature in the Botany of this country S.W. Australia is the numerous kinds of leaves with the identical flowers - some of the leguminous now I know one purple pea flower with three kinds of leaves one of which is a creeper and called the blue vine the other is an erect shrub with no smell and leaves like a holly the third is also erect with leaves like the Privet - and in shady places the blossom emits a scent about 3 in the afternoon like allspice or clover. Another sort is yellow and straw colour of which there are five sorts of flowers with leaves utterly distinct - but I fear this last page may be somewhat tedious as you are not likely to behold all these aborigines.  My beloved Maggie  I received your and dear Mary Ker's letters of September 1831 in October 1832. You do us an injustice to censure us for a moment for not writing and thinking of you. Never a day passes that we do not speak of you and as I have all along told you so few vessels call at this port except to barely supply us with provisions that we have not frequent opportunities of sending. Besides I always hesitate to send a single letter knowing the expense thereof.  We have all been quite well since writing. In November Molloy went to the Swan on business. He remained a month and was brought back in H.M.S. Imogene. Capn Blackwood perhaps a friend of Roberts' as he is a nephew of Sir H. Blackwood from whose name this river is called. He is a very nice gentlemanly man and connected with the Grahams of Netherby.  Molloy went away again last Monday to view his large "grant" on the Vasse - a most pleasing country and answering with truth to the description given of its park-like appearance with long waving grass and abounding also in kangaroos.  In the interim a vessel has come in which has given me not only my own but Jack's letters to write which I am almost unable to do as at the beginning of the week I was confined to bed from over-exertion. For in truth Maggie I have not time to say my prayers as I ought. I must unbosom myself to you my dear girl which I have never done - but this life is too much both for dear Molloy and myself; & what I lament is that in his decline of life he will have to lead a much more laborious life than he did in one and twenty years' service. He does not despair but I never knew anyone having his losses to bear but who would.  May God have mercy on us and poor little Sabina Dunlop who is remarkably well and as I lay in bed on Monday she all at once got up and began to walk. She came to my bedside and said "Mam Mam". She keeps going backwards and forwards the whole day long with something for me & never cries though I dip her in a tub of water. She has 10 teeth two of which are double. She began to toddle in Molloy's absence. On Monday she was 14 months old. She is a great blessing. I need not blush to tell you I am of necessity my own nursery-maid. If I could afford to keep one they are so exceptional I durst not trust my child with them...  By this I write to Mary and Mrs Caldicott. I have had seven letters of Molloy's relating to business to answer besides my own correspondent; to weigh out rations attend to Baby & although needlework of every kind both for her Molloy myself and servant is required I have not touched a needle for this week. [194] I am now exhausted and the day uncommonly hot.  I told you how it would be! I should have to take in washing and Jack carry home the clean clothes in a swill. The last of this has not happened yet; but between ourselves dear Maggie the 'washing' is no uncommon occurrence! But time will show! What goes to my heart is that dear Molloy has so much exertion bodily & mental. But I am repaid with interest when any part I can perform eases his burden. The Lord is good and has shown Himself to us in many wonderful instances but we are sadly forgetful of His Love and bounty amid the hurried concerns of this life.  Oh! my loved "sister"! I cannot contain myself when I think of the past. I never never trust myself to think of all we have said to one another...  What is all this about Irving and the supernatural gifts? Please tell me. My head aches & I have all the clothes to put away from the wash; Baby to put to Bed make tea & drink it without milk as they shot our cow for a "trespass"; read prayers and go to bed besides sending off this tableful of letters. I wish I had you here to help me! What golden dreams we used to have about your coming to stay with me! How would you like to be nearly three years without a woman of your own rank to speak to or to be with you whatever happened?  Sabina has just toddled in hiding her little face with her hand in play. She is sometimes so lively she is "neither to hand nor to find" as James Angus would express it. Pray remember me to them all. I wish Andrew would write & find us out. I shall write to him. My kind love to Robert and accept the same with unabated affection from your sincerely attached sister.  January 19th 1833  I have taken up my pen which I laid down in disgust to give you an idea of the penguins which have been our companions on board since we left St Paul's. They are I think a connecting link between a kangaroo and a flying fish and its wings are in reality fins and its legs placed so far back that it walks upright. They are when young of a bright purple with primrose coloured crests. They are awkward stupid things amusing from their very ugliness...  We are running on delightfully 7 knots an hour with a bright sky smooth sea and a delicious air. This they tell me is the Swan River climate. In four days we shall see land the land which is to be henceforth the abode of all our interests hopes and affections. Dear happy England already seems to us like the land of shadows beautiful and beloved but abandoned for ever and yet how many dear ones are left behind. It does not always do to think of this...  We are collecting our property books etc etc. Bessie and I have been very busy with Phoebe's gown it looks so nicely she will really be a princess in it. We shall put the finishing touches to it this morning. You would smile at the next employment which we propose to ourselves.  Monday 21st. January.  Almost a calm. I must describe the anxiety and trepidation which now accompanies every moment bringing us as it does nearer to our Augusta home. At times I am excited almost to pain when I anticipate the approaching meeting. I am writing now because I can settle to no other employment.  As we were sitting in the Cuddy this morning the alarm was given - "Two Swans! Black Swans in sight". I cannot say how it overcame me. [212]  They proved however to be albatrosses and were shot accordingly two beautiful birds 10 feet in width Capt Rolles has given me the foot.  I ought not to scribble so much but where can I go if not to you my own Mamma when I feel as I do now. But I won't tease you any more with my egotism and so on. God grant that we may find the dear brothers to whom we are going well and happy and that we may be the means of making them more so. I shall not now write more until our arrival. Every face has now the appearance of anxiety and watchfulness. We are 60 miles nearer to Augusta than Swan River 300 miles from the latter.  1833 26th January.  Now indeed we are in sight of the Swan River. Some days later than I had expected when I closed this. Capt Toby was the first person on board this morning and from him we heard that our dear brothers were all when he saw them last six weeks since Vernon had accompanied him down to King George's Sound. The boys have a grant at Port Leschenault and at King George's Sound. He says they are grown such rough creatures. Vernon and Alfred are quite young men. Miss Turner is married to a Mr McDermot so there was no truth in the report of Ally's engagement.  The coast looks very flat we can discover some houses or rather wigwams tho built of stone as the habitations it rather reminds me of Stonehenge. Two boats here just appeared containing Mr Luke Leake that shocking affair Mr Philip Dodd and others. Poor Mrs Leake what a meeting for her! They say she is sadly altered. We have felt much disappointment at not finding Capt. Stirling at home.  I broke off this morning because a boat was in sight and I was anxious to see a specimen of the creatures who are hereafter to be our compatriots. Quite a crowd of young men came on board but I have not time to talk about them as their images have been obliterated by the variety of characters which have since passed in review before us.  My first sensation was that of desolation. Capt. Stirling was absent we knew no one in a strange land we will not go on shore we will stay in our own ship which has at least been hallowed by Mamma's presence. In the evening when we were alone we sat down and tried to occupy ourselves. I attempted to dry the seaweed which you will find in this book but Mr MacDermott soon put a stop to such domestic pursuits.  In this colony "NO" is never an answer and tho Bessie and I virtuously determined to abide by the ship we soon found he was determined not to go without us so we set off with him and Mr Toby and were greeted on the jetty at Fremantle by several gentlemen. [213]  Mr MacDermott's is a splendid house a nice drawing room with every English comfort except a looking glass a tea table with all "appliances and means to boot" seemed like home but the Hindoo servants in attending partook more of the Oriental style. Mrs MacDermott is a nice little woman but as I have left a letter there to be forwarded by the Cornwallis I need not dwell upon this period of my narrative any farther.  On Monday 27th we had a terrible fright. Bessie had sent for her music and portfolio and in the evening we were expecting it when Lenox came in wet through. He had not he said thought it safe to bring it in the dinghy with him but had put [it] in the Captain's long boat which had been capsized on the Bar.  What regrets followed! All Bessies dear songs her portfolio with our drawings journals Len's passing certificates and Charlie's Power of Attorney. Bessie went out to agonise on the sand and got a great deal in her eyes which brought on a touch of opthalmia in fact we went to bed full of miseries and self reproach...  Bessie has described our voyage up the Swan lovely indeed it was! like Chepstow Clifton Henley every beautiful place I have ever seen only broader clearer fuller than any river in England and then such a lovely clear sky and a gentle breeze...  I quite love Mr Brown he speaks of John just as people used to speak of Papa dearest Mother on such occasions. I can only pray that we may all be equally worthy of him and you and that you may when you arrive hear your girls spoken of as we do the boys. We are received by Mrs Brown most kindly. She is a very pretty young woman with the whitest skin and the prettiest black hair and eyes I ever saw. The first evening we had music but I derived more pleasure in merely looking from the window even than in listening to the songs which I most dearly love.  The heat is great certainly and the mosquitoes here are very troublesome; and I may truly say I never was better in my life. The warm climate suits me even better than I expected. This is an extremely pretty place with all the comforts and luxuries of an English country house with a few incongruities which by the charm of novelty prevents perfection from becoming insipid. . . The Kingsfords are staying here also they know the Browns in England and Miss [NN] a very delightful girl so domestic and active and good completes as cheerful and agreeable a circle as can often be found. [...]  The society has not degenerated in the least and instead of anyone or anything for the Swan I should say selectness and refinement are more prevalent than in England. Yet no one scruples to assist in the duties of the "menage" - 'Here I am well aware and at the McDermott's we have seen emigration divested of all its miseries to use the popular term. But the Browns have gone through more than we will have to undergo in exposure to climate and trials unknown.  To continue my recital - On Wednesday Mr Dawson called much surprised to find John's sister. I could not but view him immediately in the light of an old friend. He had so much to tell us and I assure you we were not sparing in asking questions.  John he says has made a vow not to shave until you come out tho his beard rests on his shirt but it looks well as he keeps it beautifully combed. Their exertions have been wonderful and their perseverance unanimity and industry are quite proverbial. Mr Dawson will tell you all about them as he has promised to see you .  Mr Dawson and Mr Moore the Judge Advocate (these titles will amuse you I know) dined here and we strolled about in the beautiful moonlight and talked alternately of Augusta and England.  Perth is a very promising city but the sand is greatly against it. The country residences are far preferable and I do not at all join in the universal regret that we are so soon to retire so completely from the world and its gaieties.  The boys are so methodical the mornings are devoted to work two hours in the heat of the day to study and then labour again. We have not spend [sic] any of our money and Mr Brown thinks it better to take it to them unbroken and expend it at their own discretion. Candles are dreadfully expensive and would be good things to send out so would soap and starch.  Shoes are more valuable than gold. Our dresses and things have been very well chosen and we feel quite comfortable Mrs Brown proposes giving a dance next week there is much curiosity felt on our account and a great deal of speculation I daresay if we were not so fortunately out of the way of it all.  Nothing can exceed the hospitality here. Mr Brown advises us not to go on the Ellen but to abide by our property but Mr Toby is very urgent to take us and our inclinations are decidedly with him. [215] [...]  Everyone is very busy in preparing their despatches for the Cornwallis. This will go by Mr Dawson our first journal unfortunately left at Fremantle cannot go by this opportunity but we will forward them by the Cygnet I fear I shall not have time to write other letters but this is public property...  Mr Brown the other day told us an anecdote of John which I must retail. The Governor in reward for his great exertions in the Colony presented him with three miles frontage on the banks of the river. Mr Turner and Capt Molloy thought it rather unjust and John in a beautiful letter to the Governor requested permission to resign one third judging it more advantageous to the Colony that friendly interest should yield to public good...  Whilst we were at the Botanical Gardens Mr Irwin received a packet from the Colonial office which he opened before me. It was directed to Capt Molloy and proved to be a long letter from Mary to the boys. We have brought out a number of newspapers also which we probably put into the post office ourselves. I shall leave you now.  Bessie tells me her journal is to be devoted to [NN] and she puts down everything as it pops into her head. This she intends as an apology for Scramble Hall tho I consider hers far more methodical than my own. Yesterday Saturday we had a pleasant little evening party beginning with music and ending with quadrilles much amazement but no dearly beloveds. Mr Lewis and Mr Dawson were my partners with the latter I had one of my tremendous tête-a-têtes despite Bessie's reproving looks but I could not resist hearing all about our darlings. But she will tell you all about this [...]  Perth April 5th 1833  You will be justly surprised my own Mother that we have not yet attained the "Ultima Thule" of our hopes but the fact is that the Cygnet has been detained far beyond our expectations and is only now under sailing orders for next Tuesday. I write this by the Merope quite a venture as the mail closes this evening and I have been prevented in a thousand ways from settling to letter writing before tho I have daily threatened to do so for the last month.  You will readily believe from our description of Mr & Mrs Brown's family which closed my last that our stay here has not been wearisome indeed no kindness no attention has been spared and your two girls have found that the spoiling system commenced in England has been rather carried out than counteracted here. [216]  When we left Bassendean it was to visit Mr & Mrs Roe with whom we are now staying. Delightful people whose kindness have been equal to the Browns' I cannot say more. Society here is on a delightful footing no formality yet a strict adherence to all that is nice and right.  Shortly after our arrival the Government schooner Ellen was ordered South and greatly tempted we were to embrace such an opportunity of joining our beloved colonists without delay. A party was formed consisting of Captain Irwin the Lieut. Governor his Aide de Camp Mr Dale and Mr Moore. It was with beating hearts we took leave of them all feeling that they would so very soon reach our future home but Lenox was so decided in wishing us not to remove from the ship in which all our property was embarked that we declined going and only commissioned these new friends to inform our brothers of our arrival.  I must confess however that "Time on airy pinions flew" and a fortnight found us alternately domesticating ourselves with the Browns or the Roes Len making our old Cygnet home his headquarters still as well as Phoebe etc.  At last however I decided on a trip to Fremantle and a visit to the ship and accompanied Lenox one lovely morning on this expedition how little did I dream of the happiness in store for me. I refused all temptations to stay at the McDermotts' by the way and spent the day in packing books arranging cabins scolding Emma who is my most anxious care and comforting Phoebe.  It was on Monday 8th of March. "A ship in sight" "A schooner" is announced by the cabin boy. Oh can it be the Ellen? It seemed too much happiness to expect for she is to bring us such late tidings of our darlings. I ran on deck to watch her approach not as I had often done before from the listless desire for something new but with all the delirious excitement of hope. "It is the Ellen" for she comes not in as a stranger but as if she knew the harbour well. And now she comes nearer and nearer red coats are visible and Mr Toby's form was recognised by Capt Bolles who watched the movement with his glass and reported it to me.  A Whaleboat is lowered and makes for the shore. The Lieut. Governor has left the vessel with his suite and now another boat is lowered nearer and nearer it comes towards us "There's a Bussell in that boat I am sure" said Capt Bolles and shortly even I could recognise a row of white teeth which seemed to claim relationship with my own.  In a few minutes more dearest John was on board looking so well my Mother rather barbarous but quite poetical large canvas trousers made by his own hands a broad leather belt hair and beard both long somewhat and moustaches enough to give a bandit look. [217] All this was seen in a moment (you know how I do see) and then too there was a mingled likeness to you my Mother and to Emily which had never struck me before.  The moment of meeting was decidedly the happiest and brightest I have ever experienced forgive me if I have dwelt upon it too long but I need not say this to you. Mr Toby the kind Mr Toby accompanied him and really this our meeting seemed an affair of general interest.  Lenox who had gone to Perth for me a few hours before returned on the news of the arrival of the Ellen and surely so happy a trio has seldom met in a merchantman's cuddy. We only wanted our poor little Bessie who had been left at Mrs Roe's. The next morning we started by the sea breeze and the kindness and hospitality which we had so long enjoyed was extended to this our dear Johnnie. [...]  A month has elapsed since then which we have passed either here or at Bassendean. Our next remove will be to Augusta to the dear ones there. It is not without regret that we shall say Goodbye to the new friends who have made our stay here so pleasant. . . The weather now is getting cooler and it is so exhilarating after the heat which awaited our arrival. Our worst evils are the mosquitos they have no mercy upon newcomers. Bessie is a great sufferer I am bitten all over but the inflammation is not so great as at first. The fleas here are numerous and tremendous in size and bugs are not a few.  Walking at Perth is very disagreeable on account of the sand. From the first and last of these evils we shall be free at Augusta and the climate there is much more agreeable than here. You cannot conceive the annoyance that servants are here few and therefore expensive and full of consumate impudence. Yesterday we were all at church for the last time Easter Sunday. How I thought of you dearest Mother and of Winchester dear Winchester...  My journal I will make up and send by the Cygnet this is so completely a chance letter that you must count it for nothing and we have been so interrupted by visitors that I scarcely know what I have said.  I commence another sheet because our meeting with the dear boys will obliterate for the time the events that are passing around us. While we were at Bassendean Mrs Brown was confined. I was with her when a dear little boy was ushered into this world of woe I almost felt like a mother myself I think. [218] But the sequel to my story is a sad one. Our baby only lived two days and dear Bassendean when we left it was a house of disappointment and mourning.  To turn to lighter subjects which Bessie had called to my mind by mentioning the "Inflamatory Book" you would smile to hear the reports that have been circulated about us. Bessie especially has been given in turn to everyone here almost and I have been appropriated I am told to the Lieut. Governor and to Mr Lewis I do not know what the people think of us you will hear when you come.  Dear Mary will be so petted and admired she must be a favourite as she always has been with all who know her. I see no one dearest Mother like my own brothers and sisters. The Harrises have got a very nice grant on the Swan River. Mrs Leake is with her husband. The Kingfords are in quest of land for their mill and will decidedly settle here. So much for our Cygnet companions. [...]  The natives are very troublesome Mr Brown had four sheep speared last week they are such things to look upon these wild brethren of ours. This morning when I came up to breakfast I saw a black face looking at me. "What your name" said I "Monday" was the answer I suppose he liked my complexion something akin to his own for in a few minutes he said "Your name Monday" It is a proof of affection I hear to change names so I of course gave him mine in return. "Bussell" I said "You Monday I Bussell" He laughed and pointed at some bread certainly more attractive to him than my brightest smile. This Monday is a shocking affair however having speared his wife and mother only a fortnight ago. His countenance is very bad decidedly ferocious.  At Bassendean we had a "Corrobborree" (Native Dance)  One evening a large fire was kindled and the natives having chalked their bodies very tastefully soon commenced accompanying their movements with an ugly panting noise like a thirsty dog. One of them imitated the kangaroo and went through all the movements of the animals eating grass scratching its side. Another very gracefully advanced with a spear pretending extreme caution until within reach of its victim; I thought of Cooper's North American Warriors. [219] At last the hunt is supposed to be up and all join in a general dance. I have nearly got to the end of my paper. [...]  Remember me most kindly to Ben and Foot we have not forgotten their kindness to us and we never shall. How delicious will be our meeting in about 9 months. Oh! may we be found worthy of you our own Mother and as useful to the dear boys as we hope to be. We have two cows one is a heifer the other in calf.  Our garden at Augusta thrives beautifully. I long to begin my arrangements there. Send out guernsey frocks for the boys. Bessie would like you to bring out cambric muslin frocks for her. It will be cold enough at Augusta in the winter to wear anything and I still have a great weakness for silks. But just one will do Mother. Let our dresses if you have them made be marked as to save confusion. We are grown capital dressmakers however and have had some experience. [...]  Soap is invaluable (at least it is now 8/- per lb). Shoes are still more so. I would like you to bring me out some boots made beautifully neat. I must now close this. Love to all at Henley no one must forget their fondly affectionate Bessie and Fanny. Straw bonnets are the nicest wear here so light cool and durable. The boys have received their seeds newspapers and quarterly review. I do not think many packages have miscarried.  Don't send or bring many coloured robes for us simple good shirting stripes we prefer for morning dresses or things of one colour. Merinos for winter will not be too warm but remember we shall not want anything yet but clothes out here do wear out dreadfully stockings especially from the black sand you are obliged to change them three or four times daily and washing so often does not add to their strength. Remember me to Brown and Wells. Read what you please to Brown. Kind regards to Mr Mayo. Love to La chere Tips I meant to have written her she must not however think that I am going to break off my promised correspondence because I have not yet. Bess has addressed her journal to her but she must surely come with you my little Mother. Our sister our friend will join our circle again or will it not be incomplete? Once more Farewell. [...] [220]  My dearest Mother  I have left out my desk that I may scribble to the last moment; we are still in the Cygnet and Bessy and I have been busy since 4 o'clock in the morning we are shipping our goods all in good preservation & none of the cargo in the least damaged indeed they look as fresh as when first put on board.  We have not yet landed; so this cannot be an all satisfactory letter. Dear Alfred was on board us all yesterday. Oh my dear Mother how would your maternal feelings exist in seeing this noble boy & how did his sisters' hearts triumph in looking & listening. Captn Bolles says Charles is a delightful young man we have not yet seen him nor Vernon who is up the country. John as you will hear from a long letter of mine which I left at Perth spent the last month of our sojourn there with us. You cannot think how well and how young he is looking. Lenox looks older by far. This is our last day on board the Cygnet pray thank Captn Bolles for his kindness to us if you have an opportunity with all his occasional violence his attention to us has been unremitting. Dear Mother your girls are as little inured to unkindness and "roughing it" as when they left England. Bessy is quite tired with her exertions this morning & will not write she is not so strong as I am but in this lovely climate & with so many kind nurses she will soon become so...  Augusta April 21st  I continue my narrative. Yesterday all our goods were landed. Captn Bolles pressed us to dine on board - the last day that we could not nor [NN] did we wish to refuse. The boys & Mr Green resigned the honour of wafting us to shore to the Captn but we were met on the beach by the soldiers & our own darlings. Mr Green (how Lord Halsingham would laugh) escorted me to Mrs Molloys. It was nearly dark but I could perceive that the river was broad & beautiful & the country more richly wooded than an English imagination can conceive. Mrs Molloy came out to meet us with her little Sabina in her arms looking so youthful & interesting her house is very comfortable & she is so active. We are to stay here for a few days but as she has not accommodations for us she has fitted up one of Mr Dawson's houses so nicely a French bed & all sorts of land comforts; a vase of sweet mignonette upon the table & your picture my mother were its ornaments & a large wood fire blazing on the hearth cast a cheerful light around. We spent a very pleasant evening but broke up early and as we had little inclination to sleep we proposed taking the boys by surprise & walked down to their almost deserted abode. We proposed a walk on the beach tho' it was getting very late Bessy with John myself with Charley & Alfred (how nice to lean on two of them again). Now I feel in my element said Alfred drawing a long happy sigh. [221] And so did we. It is here that one sees the magnificence of emigration; at the Swan European comforts & luxuries have already robbed this life of somewhat of its romance; but here it is in all its wildness & grandeur don't smile at me my feelings are not more excited than when I left home but I feel the same wish to act right & the same energy to do so. We slept delightfully & I have slipt away from all society & employment for the sake of scribbling to you. I am now in my home (pro tempore). Bessy Phoebe & Emma are on the beach looking after the goods. Emma is herself again & I hope will improve now I have got her away from the ship - Pearce is grown a very fine young man & is much improved. Alfred relieves Vernon at the Adelphi to day & we shall see him tomorrow. Len is very well indeed. The climate is scarcely warmer [NNl than in England - I must not write more as I think my presence must be wanted at the beach - Let the cases be small - many of ours must be unpacked before sent to the Adelphi.  Have had A long angry and wholly unexpected conference to-day with the very spirit of evil himself I mean the notorious Ya-gan. On seeing several natives approach the horse. I went towards them as usual thinking they were my old friends. To my surprise the first I met was Migo whom I had known well at Perth as the servant of Captain Ellis and the friend of the chieftain Mundy. On looking round I then saw Munday [sic] himself (who is proclaimed with a price on his head): this made me took still closer and at last I saw Ya-gan standing a little aloof scrutinising my countenance narrowly and my manner of receiving them. I had been taxing Migo with having been present at the murder which he energetically denied. When my eyes first fell upon Ya-gan I said immediately 'What name?' They all answered 'Boolgat.' I said 'No; Ya-gan.' At first he was inclined to persist in the assumed character; but seeing that I knew him perfectly he came forward avowed himself and entered into along argument and defence of his conduct in a way that I can hardly make intelligible to you; and I confess he had almost as much of the argument as I had. Both parties seemed to consider us as respectively arguing the question. Ya-gan listened with respectful anxiety and used bold and emphatic language and graceful gesture. with abundant action: he delivered himself boldly. I did not understand him but replied. 'If white man queeple (steal) white man shoot while man; if black man queeple white man shoot black man: if black man no gydyell (kill) cow no gydyell sheep no gydyell pig white man all same as brother to black man shake hands plenty. co-robbery plenty.' Here I advanced with open hands so them which all ran eagerly to grasp. save the moody chief himself.  They had grouped around evidently attending to the arguments on both sides with great interest and glad of anything like a friendly termination. Ya-gan again stepped forward and leaning familiarly with his left hand on my shoulder while he gesticulated with his right delivered a sort of recitative looking earnestly at my face. [54] I regret that I could not understand him but I conjectured from the tone and manner that the purport was this: 'You came to our country; you have driven us from our haunts and disturbed us in our occupations: as we walk in our own country we are fired upon by the white men; why should the white men treat us so?'  This reminded me of a chorus in a Greek tragedy; and the other natives seemed to act as subordinate characters to Ya-gan. After a short interval the chief approached again and fixing his eyes as if he read my countenance said inquiringly 'Midgegoroo shoot? walk?' (meaning was Midgegoroo dead or alive?) I felt that the question was full of personal hazard to me and gave no reply. Even Weeip came and anxiously asked the same question putting his finger to my ear to know if! heard or understood him. I answered slowly 'White man angry - Governor angry.' However my men assured them that both Midgegoroo and his son were gone on board a ship. Ya-gan still continued to read my countenance and when he could obtain no answer from me he said with extraordinary vehemence of manner distinctness of utterance and emphasis of tone 'White man shoot Midgegoroo Ya-gan kill three' (holding up three fingers). I said 'Ya-gan kill all white man soldier man and every man kill Ya-gan.' He scowled a look of daring defiance and turned on his heel with an air of ineffable contempt. During the latter part of this conference he held a beautifully tapered and exquisitely pointed spear grasped like a stiletto about fourteen inches from the point while the shaft lay over his shoulder with a seeming carelessness. He evidently suspected treachery and was on his guard against it taking care not to let my men press on him too closely and keeping some of the natives between myself and them.  Nothing short of an overpowering force (which I did not possess) or a cold-blooded deliberate treachery (of which I was incapable) would have enabled me to have secured him as he then stood: it was perhaps my duty to have attempted his arrest dead or alive; however consider the circumstances of my situation - I had gone among them unarmed little thinking that the 'Wallace' of the tribe was there; he did not relinquish his spear till he was certain of my pacific intentions; and there were ten of them and only three of us myself rather invalided.  I dispatched a letter instantly to Mr. Bull as a magistrate apprising him of Ya-gan's vicinity. He went off for the soldiers; and in the meantime this proclaimed and dangerous outlaw with a price on his head and threats (not idle) on his tongue in sight of the military quarters and of a magistrate's residence hemmed in between three or four settlements and almost in presence of a large force of armed men was suffered to escape unmolested. The truth is every one wishes him taken but no one likes to be the captor. How could any person unless a professed blood-hunter spring upon a man in cold blood and lead him so the death? [55] [56] How could any one who has a heart fire upon him treacherously from a secure ambush though he be an unfeeling and reckless savage? There is something in his daring which one is forced to admire.  SYDNEY NEW SOUTH WALES  18th January 1834  My Dear Edmund  I wrote to you on the 29th of November and to Robert on the 5th December thanking you for the kind exertions you have made for me. I am now about again to draw upon your zeal as I think an opportunity offers for doing so effectually. I told you in the two above mentioned letters that the Chief Justice (Forbes) was apparently unresolved upon his plans connected with visiting England. He has now informed me (confidentially and therefore I must bet you to treat it as such) that he has determined to ask for leave of absence to visit England and his application either has already gone home or will go about this time. He has formed this resolution because Mrs. Forbes health requires her to visit England and she is too ill to part with her two boys who are also going for their education - and he is also desirous of renewing some of his old acquaintances. His intention is to return and settle himself as Chief Justice for as long as his bodily strength will admit of his performing his duty then to retire to his country property. But he will be absent for eighteen months or two years during which time if I am appointed Chief Justice pro tempore something more permanent may offer for me but at all counts the addition of five hundred pounds per annum to my income for that period will make up for my losses at the Cape and enable me to pay all I owe and by that time my ten years will nearly have expired and I shall be anxious to revisit England. The Governor here has not the power to grant leave to so important a function and as the Chief Justice accordingly his application must go home to the Secretary of State and arrangement will be made of the sending out someone either as acting Chief Justice during his absence or as acting puisne Judge during the time that one of us holds the Chief's appointment. Of course it would be unjust to us that a new man should be put over both of us but someone must be sent for it will never do to throw the whole burden upon two Judges; as it is the weak state of both Dowling and Forbes is such that I have scarcely ever more than one of them acting with me at the same time and if one is removed even temporarily the other cannot take the additional labour and I shall not choose to take the whole - indeed I should fall ........ it. If therefore there be any trust to be placed in our expectation arising from the expressions used to you in Downing Street Mr. Kay will have an opportunity of forefilling them by sending out an acting P. Judge and sending out an order to the Governor to appoint me Chief during Forbes' absence.  My request to you now is that you would take the opportunity of seeing Mr. Kay and state to him that I am not yet promoted and displeased at being kept here as a Puisne Judge that in fact it is not worth my holding and urge that no opportunity may be lost of appointing me. Do not mention that Forbes intended asking for leave but make him promise if you can that if he should ask for and obtain it I will be promoted and interim. Urge my claims rising from my hopes show him how I thus be reimbursed without additional expense to the treasury; it is probably I think that the object will be gained.  I continue well in health Margret very ailing as usual it could be a comfort to me if I could have afforded to visit England with her but circumstances put that out of my power. I find my income worse here than at the Cape in every way - all I have not spent in actual housekeeping and current expenses during the year I have been here has been one hundred and fifty pounds for furniture and two hundred and ten pounds reimbursed to England so that the appointment literally affords only a simple maintenance whilst the sacrifice of all my friends is to be endured for it.  We have at present no Clerks allowed to us as at the Cape but we have made a strong remonstrance on the subject which is going home to the Secretary of State and there is little doubt that next year we shall have them allowed - If we so long live - The Governor has offered me an appointment for Harry of a Clerkship in the surveyor general's office one hundred and twenty pounds a year which I shall probably accept for him but at present I hesitate for some reasons. If he showed any predelection for a country life I would rather put him with a grazier and let him work his way to opulance? Or if for accounts - with a bench - as presenting the most independent modes of life. But he does neither and I fear whether a government clerkship is not most adapted to his views. I have indeed lately been trying without success to get some of the merchants? to take him in a counting house. But none with whom I would trust him are willing to do so unless as a learned without salary of any kind and scarcely that ....... Also ...... he is willing poor boy to do anything I recommend to him. I will write more fully in a day or two as there are several vessels now about to sail and tell you what I resolve upon.  In the meantime adieu. Believe me to by my Dear Edmund your ever affectionate brother.  W.H BURTON.  SYDNEY NEW SOUTH WALES  17th February 1834  My dear Edmund  I write a few lines not having time at this moment to do more to inform you that - from what the Chief Justice has said to me this day - I think that it is by this opportunity he is sending home his request for leave of absence. He told me that he has forwarded it to the Governor stating as the ground of his application his declining health. My earnest request to you is that at the moment of receiving this letter to urge my claims for a Chief Justiceship upon the Secretary of State through whatever channels you may be able and at all events endeavour to obtain the promise that in the event of the C.J. leaving this country either permanently or temporarily that I shall be appointed to the office. We shall have an early opportunity of proving whether Mr. Hay was sincere or not in his expressions and whether the Department are just or evil in their intentions towards me. It will be worth my while to have the appointment even temporarily in as much as it will give me an increased income and enable me in a short time to free myself of all difficulties and either to assist those who have a right to expect it from me or to avail myself on Forbes return to this Colony of a light leave of absence - which will give me time and opportunity to urge my claim in person to some fixed reward in my own country for my labours out of it. That Forbes will return - if he lives - I have no doubt and in that event I should ask for leave immediately afterwards.  I have no late letters from you. My last to you was on the 10th January. I then told you of the Governor having offered Harry a clerkship in one of the officers. Since then the Chief Justice offered him one more eligible - both in money and situation - in the Supreme Court office - £160 per annum. He accepted and was appointed on the 8th or 9th of this month. I still keep him under my roof. That of course I should under any circumstances do out of regard to my duty as a parent towards him but I have thought it fair to stipulate with him that in consideration of my so doing he shall pay his grandma £30 a year for his sister's board which he can well afford to do as he does not pay for his own and shall also give his sister £30 a year for her clothes - which I shall take care he does. The first remittance of £15 will be made very shortly as I stipulate for the first produce of his labour being remitted home which he can also afford to do as he had received from me his quarterly allowance for his own clothes the previous month to receiving his appointment. There is no doubt of our being allowed salaries for our own clerks next year but I shall continue Harry in the Registrar's office - he is better there than with me. I would therefore offer my clerkship to Lowdell's eldest boy if it were worth his acceptance and he would send him out to me by the month of January next. If he declines then I would give it to Robert's friend Bowney's brother of whom he wrote to me two years ago on condition of his coming out forthwith to join me. And if he declines than I think my old clerk Allen if he has maintained a good character hietherto [sic] ought in justice to have it. I shall write to Lowdell and in the event of declining I shall be much obliged to you to inform Robert of it and if he declines I shall be still further obliged if you will tell Francis who may probably be aware of Allen's address to offer it to him. But I must make the appointment in January next. It will lead after service with and tuition under me to a resident magistracy of £250 to £300 per annum and which may be held together with the practice of a Conveyancer but not Attorney.  I request you to give my love to our dear mother and Maria and all your little ones little Anne and all my dear brothers and believe me to be my dear Edmund ever your affectionate brother.  W.H. BURTON  I wrote home on the 17th of Febry last which letter I hope will reach London about this time informing you that we arrvd at Sydney on the 16 Decr and that I had engaged here with a Mr Hunt to do his apholsterary needle work salary to be 8£ a year. For several months after landing I was afflicted with the scurvy and other complaints from which I am now got quite better of and at present in good health. [146] I am much surprised and disappointed at receiving no letter from you considering how strictly I charged you to write soon and how faithfully you promised to do so. It is now ten months since I left home yet no letter from any of you. I regularly enquire at the post office every Packet that comes from England and as often return home disappointed. I can get no intelligence of the Mail Brigg the ship which Richard was to come by. It is conjectured here that the owners of it must have failed and in consiquence of that the ship will not come here at all at this time but if so it is strange he has not come out by any other ship whither he has changed his mind and is not coming at all or what has become of him I cannot ascertain. I form numberless conjectures but all in vain every day adds to my anxiety - I still remain at Mr Hunts and at the end of the first quarter had my wages raised from 2£ per quarter to 3 10£ which is 14£ a year this is the most they will give they are well satisfied with me or they would not have advanced it so much but in addition to my needlework I have now to make 8 beds and sweep out 6 rooms every morning. If I were assured that Richard would never come I would endeavour to return home as soon as possible if I could find it at all practicable but I doubt whither it will ever be in my power. Today I requisted the editor of a newspaper to advertise me to engage with any family that was going to England and wanted a female servant he said that he might do so but that I would find it a difficult matter to succeed there were such numerous applications of the same kind by people that were disappointed in their expectation of endeavouring to return home. He said that by advertising he thought I might procure a larger sallery if I could undertake to be a governess but in no other capacity accordingly I am going to advertise for a nursery governess (that is to begin young children and take the charge of them) free emigrants are sometimes allowed the priviledge of inserting an advertisement gratis in this newspaper so mine is at this time to be put in free of expense but I do not well know what is best to do there are so very few places that is any way tolerable here that I am afraid to risk leaving Hunts they are such quiet people and have never once found fault with me since I came to their house. But I trust that providence will direct me for the best for I have none either to care for or assist me. Shop work of any kind is rarely to be had here what is sold in the shops is most all brought from London ready made Millinery and dressmaking are I understand better paid for than what the dressmakers made me to believe when I was trying amongst them for employment they charge from three shillings to 12 for making gowns and from 4 to 7 or 8 shillings for covering a silk or Velvet bonnet willow for bonnet shapes 1/6 per sheet and 2/6 or 3 sh when made into a shape it is mostly gause ribbon that they are trimmed with here and that is about 2 sh per yd. [147] I lay out as little as possible on clothing but the family I am in require that their servants well dressed so I am obliged to do so. I had my straw bonnet cleaned & pressed lately for which I paid 2/6d. I regret that I have no person to live with me that I could trust or I would take a room and make bonnets and frocks and sell a few toys penny dolls sell here for 6d each or take in apolstering needlework. Miss Vetch the Scotch woman is the only person I could put my confidence in and I understand she is expecting to be married soon to a farmer 150 miles up the country - A farmer and his family that came out with us in the ship went to live at that place and a few of his neighbour farmers employed him to return to Sidney and bespeak wives for them among the free women that he could recommend he fixed on Miss V. for one and she has had two letters from the man saying that he intends to come to Sidney soon when if they approve of each other at sight they will be directly married. If I was to give the least hint of such a thing being agreeable to me I might have the same opportunity but I could not bring my mind however destitute I may be to think of marrying any person I had no regard for on this account I declined accepting one offer I have had already from a man who has lived a while in this family as cook and butler an Englishman about 45 years of age he has been most of his life time a soldier & has now a pension of 15£ a year and a house and 20 acres of land from government about 70 miles from Sidney he has now left his service here and gone to live at his little property. A number of women that came out with me have married prisoners - Dear H I hope you will not on any account delay writing to me immediately on receiving this. On my own account I would like to see you here but for my fathers sake and your own I could not advise you to come because I am conscious by doing so you would run the risk of suffering more hardships than I would like to see any of you subjected to. I hope Christina is continuing better that my father is keeping his health and that all of you are well let me know if the cholera has been in London this summer. Being so close confined here I have almost no opportunity of hearing any news or seeing any of my ship acquaintances. . . I dread the coming of the warm weather again if I could get home I would not wish to remain here longer than the month of Feby next. If so I might have time to have an answer to this letter from you before I left here at all events if you are alive and well do not be so long in writing to me again.  My dear Mother  I have a great deal of domestic news and chit chat for this letter. I think it will be some weeks before a ship will leave for England and I therefore think I shall more than fill this sheet. [...]  On the 9th of this month Charles complained a good deal of a fixed pain in his stomach which he had felt something of nearly a week before tho' I could not before the above named day get him to take any medicine but that morning he took 5 grains of calomel stayed in bed till 2 o'clock when some neighbours came and he got up. They left about 6 and had not been gone more than 20 minutes when Charles complained of sickness. . . and in a moment after Charles complained of his head (I must make another parenthesis to say Charles is nearly well now) and I could not make him place himself on the floor until he half fell there insensible almost on his face. He was quite immovable in my hands - I rang and Rossiter happened to be out of the house a few minutes and the wet cloth braces etc. to be undone windows opened head to be raised - all done in ten minutes at farthest but tho' I constantly bathed his face with water I think 20 minutes must have elapsed before he showed any signs of life. I then thought it was more than a fainting fit and sent a man for a neighbour who can bleed. In a few minutes Charles became slightly convulsed and kept up a moaning - then relapsed into insensibility. Twice this happened at last the men took him to bed when he became so much better that we did not bleed him (fortunately).  I wanted him to take 10 grains of calomel but he said he should be well tomorrow (I knew better). The fit was on Wednesday. That evening I wrote to Mr Strang to come and sent the letter the next morning but he was from home and did not come until the next evening when Charles was so much worse that Strang did not leave him night or day till the following Monday afternoon. The constipation of the bowels was such that 2 drops of croton oil given twice in six hours with injections of oil and salts given had no effect except in allaying pain. [184] Mr. Strang then gave him 3 pills of calomel and gums which Charles brought up likewise 3 drops of croton oil which shared the same fate. The nausea and vomiting was so constant. . . that on Saturday we thought a warm bath was the only hope and we trusted it might make the bowels act. We had sold all our puncheons but one which was carried away with the flood last winter however on Saturday before light I sent to a neighbour for one and was unsuccessful but I luckily thought of a case the wool bagging came in from Milroy and had it pitched and the bath was ready between 12 and one which so refreshed him (tho' it did not aid in moving the bowels) that we had time to take other measures.  That morning Saturday Charles had looked deathlike and all feared he would not live. Thomson came and I got him to stay to help in bathing as we feared Charles would faint in the bath but he did not. Mr. Strang had proposed calling in Cotter (district Surgeon who is anything but clever) or Mr. Cameron an old man and I should think not clever or Mr. McNab (very clever but very drunken) I asked Thomson's advice and he decided at once for the latter. We sent in the night and he came almost as soon as light on Sunday very steady. He stayed till the evening thinking most seriously of the case and putting innumerable questions as to constitution etc. He ordered 6 grains of calomel every 3 hours which Charles took the whole of Sunday and during the night. As that gave very partial sleep it was changed to blue pill and cole-sinth [colocynth?] every 2 hours. Pray all bear in mind what McNab dwelt much on namely if one medicine does not act a change of medicine may even a less powerful one act even in cases of less importance than this.  On Sunday afternoon Mr. Sutherland came and his loud talking quite knocked me up having been only just able to wait on Charles. The annoyance of Mr. Sutherland who is always imprudent made my spirit give way perhaps a night earlier but this was I believe the saving of my life. I had eaten nothing since Thursday night when I took some bread and tea with Mr. Strang most ravenously and until Monday it remained in my stomach - I felt just as I swallowed it notwithstanding 6 grains of calomel 4 other pills and salts besides 2 injections of salts. I had drunk the cocoa and fowl broth 2 or 3 times day and night which with the necessity of my presence near Charles had exerted me to rush about. At 9 on Sunday I gave way and from exhaustion could neither stand or sit my legs seem paralized (from fever I now know and the want of rest to my back). On Saturday morning I had sent for the washer woman who came quickly tho' she had saved me immense fatigue in changing the beds and making the drink for Charles (he could not endure any one but me or Mr. Strang to stay with or wait on him). [185]   On Sunday night we went for Thomson to sit up with Charles to give pills every 2 hours between which he was to have nourishment and soda water to allay the sickness which had the excellent effect and the bowels began to act slightly. The soda water was continued many days. On Monday I was just able to crawl in to see Charles and then returned to my bed till Tuesday when I was again able to be with him and danger was over unless he made a relapse. Charles said Thomson was the best nurse except me. Mr. McNab slept here on Monday Charles was so recovered as to be up on Thursday. This was wonderful but I attributed it to the great attention in giving him during the night beef tea fowl broth arrowroot etc. every hour and a half night and day after the danger was over (a relapse would have destroyed him). McNab said if Charles had been a robust man inflamation would have carried him off but he was of so low a habit that he had fever only one night and no thirst. This latter made him very weak together with the nausea for he took scarcely 2 drinks in the day till Sunday night.  When I got ill Mrs. Allison came to nurse one day Mrs. Thomson one and Mrs. Allison again. It would be impossible to express to you half the kindness and attention shewn us by our neighbours during this illness all offering to sit up help in the day and sending fresh beef white bread light cakes eggs oatmeal coffee jelly (cows feet) milk. I never can forget it and am confident nothing like it would have been met with in England. But they say "in England you would have had your relations and friends to have aided you instead." It is true but we shall always like this country infinitely better. Charles cares less about leaving it now.  Charles thought on the Saturday he could not live (I did not know at the time that he was so fully sensible of his danger but found he most narrowly observed my countenance) and was most anxious to appoint Mr. Simpson joint executor with me seeing I should be incapable of business for some time. He has now asked Mr. Simpson if he may. Rossiter behaved incomparibly well night and day coming as long as I was well to ask me what the men should do next day. Bill the gardner and factotum likewise very well 3 other men very badly refusing to even chop wood. One I sent on Monday mid day to Campbell Town for medicine remained out till Tuesday mid day tho' told by McNab when the medicine was given him to return quickly. He is sent to a chain gang for a year. 2 others Charles wanted me to get punished but it made me so nervous being still weak (on Wednesday when I made the charge against the other) that I begged them off besides I thought one as an example would do much good and it has. They thought Charles would die and did not perhaps know that I could act that I had the power of acting. This would now never happen again. Charles has given Rossiter and Bill a pound each and spoken severely to the others and told them he will be severe with them until by good conduct they made him forget this. [...] [186]  Mr. McNab came 4 times to Charles and slept twice and came twice to me and we payed him £10 He said half would amply pay him but we thought it not too much as he doubtless saved Charles life. I had not been very well some time before Charles' illness but I am now very well. McNab after several consultations and deliberation says he could swear I never had the complaint I and Dr. Scott believed I had and if he has not quite convinced me he has made me hope I have not. I have no doubt McNab is the most clever of the two and has had nearly as much experience and certainly is less trusty in his conclusions. He is likewise particularly clever in complaints of females midwifery and was under (in Edinborough) a man who wrote on stricture (White I think). He thinks the inactivity of the bowels has proceeded from the deranged weakened state of the stomach. There is he says an enlargement of the colon . . . which produces nearly the effect of a stricture . . . He has ordered me castor oil as often as I like (never pills they increasing my complaint of stomach and bowels) and by way of change rhubarb and magnesium (3d. the former 3s. the latter) and 3 wine glasses daily of camomile tea - the best stimulative he says its simplicity alone having sent it out of fashion.  He says his stomach was so debilitated that from weakness of body and mind he was obliged to have some one lead him about when he luckily saw at an auction a jar of camomile and purchased it which cured him. He will see me again in some weeks to know how I go on and if it should be necessary to use mechanical means (which he does not believe) he will use the intestine of a pig. . . [NN] .. . introduced with the bougie [NN] and filled by injecting water which may be retained many hours without irritation. If it should be stricture he says it would be easily overcome. He is a very well informed man as well as being so clever in his profession. He is a Highlander. He says my digestive organs are in the most damaged state but by following his plan I shall enjoy better health than for many years past. I think this would do for you dear Mother. If the camomile tea is taken warm it will produce nausea or vomiting. The wonder is I lived through taking pills so many years. He gives reasons for everything. He said Charles should eat often always having only a small appetite and being debilitated every 4 hours. He should above every thing keep his feet warm by wearing cork shoes and worsted stockings. [...]  There is a meeting tomorrow at Campbell Town to express gratitude to Mr. Robinson who has succeeded in peaceably capturing the Aborigines. Charles will not attend but will send £5. [187]  I am going to send this by way of Sydney. Charles began a very long letter to you about 5 weeks ago and he will send it by the first ship which leaves this colony for England. Charles still complains of nausea frequently this I do not like but probably he is quite as well as he ought to expect he is still very weak but has been out 3 or 4 days and gets up at 9 and stays up until 10 without complaining of fatigue. I am much better than I have been for many weeks.   One very good way of packing trees or plants is by putting them in tanner's bark enclosed in an iron pot or pan well closed down. Some fig and vine cuttings for the Bussells arrived here the other day in this manner and the figs had shoots on them 3 or 4 inches.  You could not send old Georgy a greater treat than some seeds both floral and culinary - but they must all be seeds of that year's growth. In return I will send you some Australian seeds. I should last time but Molloy had forgot where he put them.  I hope ere this you will have received some little memento per Cygnet. I send you a bunch of emu feathers given me by Mobin a native chief - you will perceive that they are covered with a sort of red earth. This they paint themselves with and mixed with fat they extract from their food they besmear the hair which is turned up a la Grecque and confined by many strings of the oppossum hair which the women spin. [...]  The natives are very fond of all the settlers at Augusta and we live on the most peaceful terms - but at the Swan - from the indiscretion of several persons and particularly their servants they are hostile. The natives call Molloy King Kandarung and me Kymbin. They are delighted with Sabina and she is not the least alarmed at their black figures and rude voices. She will dance opposite the native children with great glee and an old native woman seized her by the leg the other day and embraced it without producing the slightest emotion of fear.' [...]  You are I presume acquainted with the existence of the Bussell family. They have lately been so unfortunate as to have their dwelling house composed of mud and wickerwork burnt to the ground and the property much injured by the flames. Fanny the eldest girl happened to be staying at the time with me. No lives were lost - but all their shoes needles and thread destroyed which in this far distant clime is really irreparable. [196] They have a cottage at Augusta and thither they have all repaired bringing with them their goods and chattels - amongst which Bessie's piano - placed in my sitting room.  You may well conceive my gladness at this acquisition as I have not heard the sound of music for four years. Sabina at first was a little afraid but in an hour soon overcame it. She seemed to think it was an animal and insisted on tying a piece of cord round one of its legs hearing us speak of the legs of the Piano - She put her fingers to the opening in the front board where the silk is visible and exclaimed "Oh! Mama its coming out - It's coming out!" Hearing the vibrations at night when eating her supper she said "If the piano had a mouth Mama I could give it some sop." in time she has become fond of it & her great delight is to sit upon the music stool. She asks me to sit by her. She strikes the keys and attempts to sing - it is most ridiculous to see her - she sings "Come a Rose my brave Tossy Boy" (Come arouse thee My Brave Swiss Boy) "Little BoPeep from Ingle (England) I come" "Buy a broom" and "There grows a bonnie briar bush in our Kail Yard". Yesterday morning on entering the room she asked Mrs Dawson the servant if the piano was awake yet?" I should perhaps suppress all these juvenile Details but my dear Eliza to Molloy and me they are not only amusing but instructive more especially when we rarely hear the sound of any loved voices but our own two. [...]  The Bussells always intended leaving The Adelphi their residence up the river but this accident has obliged them to halt at Augusta instead of going go the Vasse where Molloy and they have taken their large grants. They are genteel nice people and that sort of thing - but terribly close fisted which gives us the idea they belong to the Take All family as we have on several occasions been most liberal to them yet they are not ashamed of receiving everything & you will hardly believe they have made no return - nor have Molloy or myself ever broken their bread - This must be secret - I told Mama but charged her not mention it. [...] [197]  [...] he will never leave me again unless it is to enrich ourselves and procure more comforts than we have hitherto enjoyed. True we have drunk many dregs since we embarked on this fatal Swan River expedition fraught with continued care and deprivations. [...]  I wish you would send Jack two pairs of List slippers to put on while dressing and some Honey in jars. If not expensive also 20 yards of good black cotton velvet as much as would make me a very full dress and some over for children's frocks- Iname the uses I shall apply it to as I am ignorant of the width - perhaps by taking a whole piece you might obtain an abatement and I should not object to that quantity but let it be a very good black as you will be making up a box dear Eliza I will trouble you to get me some other things - the only impediment the reimbursement which Molloy will pay in time.  A little watering pot for Sabina and any letter book with pictures or other little bagatelle.  I am very ill off for net to use for children's caps and that if you can meet with any proper width at a cheap rate and good in kind send some also.  I wrote to Mama for Hail Oil Pomatum and very fine tooth combs If she has not got them enclose three combs three short large size two hair and six nail brushes very hard I had better draw out a list.  You never can do wrong in sending us out soap for which we sometimes pay 3/6 per lb. Let it be yellow or brown. Candles also and glass would materially serve us as what we do not want I could sell to great advantage.  Do make me a present of a nice new tea pot for Molloy and myself I like either biscuit ware or stone ware such as mustard pots are made of with silver rims. The one I use is a black one sine handle and half a spout. The consequence is loss of time and burnt fingers. Ask the price of a tea set of this kind if such are ever made - Its strength is its great recommendation. I mean brown looking with raised figures.   When I last wrote to you my dear Helen - I believe I complained of multiplicity of business - but on 16 June this year - my third daughter was born and I have not only to nurse and carry her about but all my former occupations to attend to having only Mrs Dawson as female servant. I do not hesitate to say that I am overwhelmed with too much labour and indeed my frame bears testimony to it as I every day expect to see some bone poking through its epidermis. My beloved husband much assists me and more than many would do except such treasures as yours and mine dear Nelly. You will be able fully to believe me when I say I must either leave writing alone or some useful requisite needlework undone. The latter I would not attempt for Molloy myself and the children but there is not a person to be had here to do any - I never open a book - and if I can read a chapter on Sundays it is quite a treat to have so much leisure.  Baby will be six months old on the 16th of this month. She is a very large fat child and remarkably healthy With great thankfulness I avow she has never had even infantile illness. . . Everyone says she is a beautiful child and though it may appear very vain I coincide with them. She is very fair. I call her French white and her flesh is so hard and plump that her arms and legs are like polished marble Her face is more like mine than dear Sabina's is. Her eyes are rather dark blue.  In November poor darling Sabina was seized with a remittent fever which came on suddenly At last. At 2 o'clock in the day I perceived her very drowsy and she would scarcely leave my side - though at another time I cannot get her to remain with baby & me - we are too quiet - Well before ten she was in a warm bath - her head shaved and blistered. She was quite incoherent and at one time convulsed and before this she had never been half an hour ill from her birth. We were greatly distressed - Molloy and I prayed the Almighty to spare her our dearest hope - she was only 3 on the 7th of this month and on the 30th Death was certainly hovering about her. She sat on my knee to have her head shaved she said "Mama you will bring Baby in" and kept continually talking about Baby of whom she is very fond.  Molloy commanded me to go to bed as Baby who lays all night in one of my arms was restless. I went but not to close my watchful eyes. Molloy dearest creature sat up with Diddy who remained in the same state till about three when God be praised & glorified the medicine took effect. The instant this occurred she was better her pulse which beat at 130 and had never been lower than 120 fell she began babbling in her usual gay manner. She had a relapse a few days after but thank God that was the last and though still very weak and ill looking - I trust will shortly regain her strength though she is not the same looking child she was. [199] I felt peculiarly grieved for though the medicine man thought that it was a stroke of sun Molloy and I were persuaded that the symptoms were more those of remittent fever and I had for some time been lamenting my total inability to look after her who had always been my sole object of care - I know she ran about too much for her tender years - she was often so tired that when the poor child sat down to dinner she would almost fall from her chair with fatigue & be quite asleep - her spirits which are very great are too much for her strength and in the winter she would be running about without cap or bonnet from 6 o'clock to 5. Then having baby both to nurse & attend to the darling child was neglected - I wish now I had a proper person to take care of her and when I know there are so many that would be glad of such an asylum as my house would be to them I bewail my smallness of means that I could not offer to pay their passage money. I of course would prefer an educated person but would be grateful for one of good Christian principles and if you hear of anyone of sickly health wishing for such a situation I hope you will remember me; I would treat her with every kindness and she would only have to do a little needlework and be a companion to Sabina more to keep her from bad examples if she was not able to teach her. Sabina can say the Morning Hymn which Papa regularly hears at Prayers. He has taught her to say the Lord's Prayer and the Grace of our Lord etc. I never knew her to tell a direct untruth till last Saturday when she was whipt for the first time but still insensible to her fault - Tell me how you act when they are given to untruth. I have only one spelling book that your kind Father gave me and it is without pictures - for some object to engage her ever active mind I have already begun her letters but she manifests no predilection for them I wish we were nearer good instruction for I am persuaded many dear and precious minds will be lost for want of it. I am delighted you sent me your two year old letter - if you had not I should have been quite ignorant of the highly instructive circumstances it contained and which I had often much wished to be acquainted with. [...]  My dear & much loved Helen  Last Friday the 5th Dec. the box containing your much valued letters & Mary's kind present were given to me through the medium of Mrs Bussell to whose care Mrs Taylor entrusted it. [200] A strange fate awaited it. The vessel on which all Mrs Bussell's goods were placed has never been heard of and it is presumed is lost as it was only a small craft and a gale came on three hours after she left Fremantle the Port of Swan River. However this parcel has been put up with their [books] the only property they have saved from all they have brought out amounting to upwards of £1000.  None but herself would have ventured property of value in such a vessel as it was only a boat built on. This is not the worst The poor man Captn. McDermott and three hands so sailors were on board. Captn. McDermott has left a young widow and child of about two years and is daily expecting to be confined without a penny to support themselves even now owing to his inadvertent speculations. [...]  We are so unfortunately remote a distance - you remember my reluctance to come out to Australia and I wish I never had. We enjoy health and our children will perhaps have more than a competency but Molloy and I have to work as hard and harder than servants will. In March our servants' indentures are up and we are literally expecting to be without and we shall be unless some vessel most unexpectedly brings people here. I know I cannot do without a woman servant however bad she may be especially when there is no one to be got to wash even and I have to carry baby. So fat she is she makes my back quite ache. As to Molloy he is a perfect slave; up at daybreak and doing the most menial work sometimes so that all the former part of our lives was all lost time and even reading and writing there is not time for here.  Friday January 31 1834  I ought to have commenced my journal with the new year you will all of you say in England but it so happens that as I was anxious to write several letters I made a "vow" I would not begin a diary until the second visit of the Ellen had relieved me from my most urgent correspondents. My desk is once more clear of the letters which had engrossed me during the absence of our little schooner and I find myself at liberty to return to my favourite method of communication with the beloved friends who will not find one line superfluous...  On Saturday the Caroline a small cutter belonging to Mr McDermott arrived with Mr Turner the sole passenger he brought another letter from Mamma which I read aloud to poor old Phoebe and Bessey I will not say with what sensations. Come by [NN] the Brilliant is now at Fremantle and will arrive by the next trip of the Ellen how we are longing to investigate its secret treasures! [222] Captain Molloy and Alfred are still at the Swan if my dearest Mother and Mary should accompany Sir James and Lady Stirling he will be there to greet them he has been treated with the greatest hospitality there but are not kindness and hospitality the characteristics of the place. You will soon be there to judge for yourself so I will return to Augusta the present theatre of all our hopes and wishes. Bessey in the closing pages of her diary detailed to you our reception of our two new inmates Mr Tobey and Mr Hillman of King George's Sound. Our still very dilapidated house is not a gloomy one and the task of entertainment is very easy where everyone is predisposed to be pleased that we soon forget to blush at the unwalled erections which served our guests for bedrooms with our cots strong and comfortably made the English appendages of jugs basins clean towels and quantities of water they formed singular "oases" in the unredeemed bush by which they were surrounded. [...]  I received by the Ellen a letter from my dear Fanny Bonjafield which I intended to answer tonight but find I have resumed my journal instead. As Captain Molloy and Johnny are absent we have had prayers home these last two Sundays Phoebe and Emma only attending. A sermon too from Wells invaluable collection which we really find a treasure. Books are here inestimable. Mr Tobey brought us from the Swan as a loan "the last Man" and one or two more of the same description. Bessey and I are delighted to welcome a novel once more. . . as I have just finished a long letter I will only enter the articles the boys commission me to mention.  Blue shirting like the last you sent us  Pea jackets  South Westers  Bedding  Blankets  Scrubbing brushes  Brooms  Mops  A new set of sails for the boat  Oars  Lead pipe water for sheets  Chain cable for boat [223]  All these things have been mentioned before but we are fearful of losing a chance . .  April 12th 183413  My dear Capel  The discontinuation of my journal for the last four months will perhaps make you expect a letter and I know you will be glad to hear from me altho' you may say why was not the journal continued for it must have been more minute and therefore I should prefer it the real reason is that I have not had time. Vernon John and Lenox are going to commence colonization anew on the banks of the Vasse which from all accounts must be far preferable to our beautiful Augusta it is not nearly so thickly wooded but the trees are very much larger (this I can hardly imagine) and of quite a different species denominated by the natives tuart [NN]  yate munyart and [NN] . The intermediate country is a beautiful undulating grassy lawn the river is small in comparison to the Blackwood very steep and with very high banks & full of fish Kangaroos are seen in herds which accounts for the natives being so numerous I hope they may be as harmless as the "Manyungas & Yungaries" which is the name the tribes about here give themselves I am afraid however their eyes are getting open to the superiority of our food & they will soon find out means to get bread if they are denied it after their repeated exclamations of "bread bread yulibue yulibue" which means they are very hungry. [224] They broke into the store the other day & stole & wasted three hundredweight of flour the Serjeants wife was the first to descry their black forms whitened with "bumla" retreating into the woods to enjoy a delicious meal One of the soldiers was immediately dispatched from "the Spring" to Augusta to inform Charles & get leave from John as magistrate to fire upon them. They had only managed to detain a little girl which its father threw down to expedite his escape Before the news could arrive at Augusta the party at the Spring had been obliged to let their prisoner go; one tribe of natives who had taken some of the flour returned with it & put it at a short distance making signs to give up the child & he would leave the flour they were obliged to consent to this agreement from want of numbers. John Lenox & Charles armed themselves & went in pursuit of the other delinquents & came on a place where one party had been making a damper quite a l'Anglaise on the head of a cask. One of the soldiers mistaking some grass trees for them cried out "there they are" they heard I suppose white voice [sic] & took flight before John & the others could come up & catch them in the act leaving their dinner to the mercy of their invaders who destroyed it & returned here knowing it would be quite useless attempting to discover them in their wild haunts I was writing quite in the dark & I find I have degenerated into almost an illegible scrawl but if I do not write as quickly as I can the ship may be in tomorrow & then I shall not even have time to thank you for the other volume of the Landscape Annual it certainly is inferior to the others but still very beautiful you can hardly imagine how these elegancies of life are greeted among us & I think you would smile at the sort of incongruous collection of culinary literary & drawingroom furniture but I do not find that any of us enjoy the elegancies of life at all the less from turning our hand to anything in the course of the day for when evening comes & all our duties are over I open the piano with I think much more pleasure than I ever did in England & all are ready to join in the chorus & then perhaps turn from the piano to admire & readmire [NN] the often looked at picture or poem.  Charles Vernon & Alfred were delighted with their waistcoats they are indeed the only things of the sort they have worn since they have been out here - Len would have been quite shoeless but for your timely present Fanny's basket is quite invaluable but when John found that he was the only person who had not a letter or anything he said "Well Bessie is there nothing sent for me!" my answer was "I suppose John they think you are on your way home" [225] I am very glad that that is not likely to happen indeed it is not possible I hope my dear Capel it will not be a great disappointment to you but other letters are gone home giving the reasons for & against this proceeding & I will not give you my opinion on the subject - I need not have been quite in such a hurry for the ship must be detained some time longer on account of the equinoxtial [sic] gales & they are certainly most tremendous united with the most awful thunder lightening & hail an English person can hardly imagine what it is - I daresay you would like to know what our employments have been lately but they are really almost always so much alike that I do not think I shall have much to [?] In the first place we have been very busy in converting your old plaid cloak you gave me into jackets for the boys John & Vernon have each got one all think them very pretty they are quite the admiration of the colony Then all their duck white shirts & canvass trowsers have wanted repair & that piece of shirting mamma sent has made them a shirt apiece & a neat dress for Emma. I wish we had much more of it to make frocks for ourselves I once said I did not wish any more mirrors but I have since learnt to appreciate them we drew lots for one sent the other day & the lot fell upon Fanny a pair of old boots of yours have likewise come in the very nick of time for the fire almost left me quite barefoot & the shoes I have obtained from Swan River are immensely dear & immensely larger.  I think I may say we have never [NN] safe our dispatches without being in the most desperate hurry but really I have said before I have not had a moments time to myself I suppose my dear Capel that if mamma has left England that you will undertake to be Fanny's & my agent if you remain all the little things we require the needful can be found out of some of the five hundreds so with this I hope useless explanation I shall begin to enumerate a few requisites; I have worn out all my thimbles - holes all the way up & too small - & am reduced to a pewter horror stay binding shoe string galleen [NN] coloured ferret red 4d [NN] marking cotton good [NN] reel cotton darning cotton straw coloured galleen whity brown black & green thread We have no [strong?] laces alas! buttons black & white bone small & large another of pearl plenty of worsted I have met with a most shocking misfortune & broken my glass my number is six & four for my spectacles Phoebe has broken her glasses too another pair of good scissors not forgetting buttonhole scissors a usual pair to fit my workbox they got very rusty on board & Vernon broke them for me indeed every day we miss something here that the terrible fire has deprived us of You have not an idea of the [mess] & confusion in which I am writing but you must excuse it. [...]  [...] there is nothing in this world grieves me but the delay of you and family [...] my son Thomas can't come in the same ship with you for being of age and the best thing that he can do is to go to the captain of the ship and enter with him as a working hand if he don't engage with the Captain he is sure to come in the next meal ship that leaves Ireland.  Thursday - A strange rumour has reached us here that the party who went to the Murray River have fallen in with the natives there and killed 35 of them Captain Ellis being slightly wounded and a soldier grazed by a spear. This is important if true. .  Saturday Nov. 1. - Went to Perth yesterday and got from the Governor an account of the battle of Pinjarra. They came upon the offending tribe in a position which I dare say the natives thought was most favourable for their manoeuvres but which was turned into a complete trap for them. In the first onset three out of five of the small party which went to reconnoitre them were unhorsed two being wounded. The Governor himself came up with a reinforcement just in time to prevent the natives rushing in upon and slaughtering that party. The natives then fled to cross at a ford but were met and driven back by a party which had been detached for that purpose. They tried to cross at another ford but were met there also when they took to the river lying hid under the overhanging banks and seeking opportunities of casting their spears but they were soon placed between two fires and punished severely. The women and children were protected and it is consolatory so know that none suffered but the daring fighting men of the very tribe that had been most hostile. The destruction of European lives and property committed by that tribe was such that they considered themselves quite our masters and had become so emboldened that either that part of the settlement must have been abandoned or a severe example made of them. It was a painful but urgent necessity and likely to be the most humane policy in the end. The Governor narrowly escaped a spear. Captain Ellis was struck in the temple and unhorsed. Being stunned by the blow he fell. [...]  Tuesday night.- Poor Captain Ellis has died in consequence of the injury he received at the time of the conflict with the natives; but it is supposed that it was from the concussion of the brain by the fall from his horse rather than by the wound from the spear (which was very trifling) that he died. [57] The natives here are uneasy thinking that we mean to take more lives in revenge.  Appended is a more detailed report of the encounter with the natives in the Pinjarrah District to which I briefly referred the other day. I was not one of that party.  The party consisted of His Excellency Sir Jas. Stirling Mr. Roe Capt. Meares and his son (Seymour) Mr. Peel Capt. Ellis Mr. Norcott with five of the mounted police (one sick) Mr. Surveyor Smythe a soldier to lead a pack horse Mr. Peel's servant two corporals and eight privates of H.M.'s 21st Regiment (to leave at Pinjarra) - in all 25 persons. On the night of October 27 the party bivouacked at a place called by the natives 'Jimjam' about ten or eleven miles in a direct line E.N.E. from the mouth of the Murray where is abundance of most luxurious feed for cattle at a broad and deep reach of the river flowing to the N. W and at this time perfectly fresh. After an early breakfast the whole encampment was in motion at ten minutes before six the next morning. Steered South Eastward for Pinjarra - another place of resort for the natives of the district and situated a little below the first ford across the river where it was intended to establish a town on a site reserved for the purpose and to leave half of the party including the military for the protection of Mr. Peel and such other settlers as that gentleman might induce to resort thither.  Crossing the ford where the river had an average depth of 2.5 feet and was running about 1.5 miles an hour to the north an Easterly course was taken for the purpose of looking at the adjoining country but the party had not proceeded more than a quarter of a mile over the undulating surface of the richest description covered with nutritious food for cattle when the voices of many natives were heard on the left. This being a neighbourhood much frequented by the native tribe of Kalyute which had long been indulging in almost unchecked commission of numerous outrages and atrocious murders on the white people resident in the district and which had hitherto succeeded in eluding the pursuit of the parties that had been searching for them since their treacherous murder of Private Nesbitt of the 21st Regiment and the spearing of Mr. Barron only a few weeks ago - the moment was considered propitiously favorable for punishing the perpetrators of such and other diabolical acts of a similar nature should this prove to be the offending tribe. For the purposes of ascertaining that point His Excellency rode forward 200 or 300 yards with Messrs. Peel and Norcott who were acquainted both with the persons of the natives and with their language and commenced calling out and talking to them for the purpose of bringing on an interview. Their own noise wax however so loud and clamorous that all other sounds appeared lost on theta or as mere echoes.  No answer being returned Captain Ellis in charge of the mounted police with Mr. Norcots his assistant and the remaining available men of his party amounting to three in number were dispatched across the ford again to the left bank where the natives were posted to bring on the interview required. [58] The instant the police were observed approaching at about 200 yards distance the natives to the number of about 70 started on their feet the men seized their numerous and recently made spears and showed a formidable front but finding their visitors still approached they seemed unable to stand a charge and sullenly retreated gradually quickening their pace until the word 'forward' from the leader of the gallant little party brought the horsemen in about half a minute dashing into the midst of them the tame moment having discovered the wellknown features of some of the most atrocious offenders of the obnoxious tribe. One of these celebrated for his audacity and outrage was the first to be recognised at the distance of five or six yards from Mr. Norcott who knew him well and immediately called out 'These are the fellows we want for here's that old rascal Noonar' - on which the savage turned round and cried with peculiar ferocity and emphasis 'Yes Noonar me' and was in the act of hurling his spear at Norcott in token of requital for the recognition when the latter shot him dead.  The identity of the tribe being now clearly established and the natives turning to assail their pursuers the firing continued and was returned by the former with spears as they retreated to the river. The first shot and the loud shouts and yells of the natives were sufficient signal to the party who had halted a quarter of a mile above who immediately followed Sir James Stirling at full speed and arrived opposite Captain Ellis' party just as some of the natives had crossed and others were in the river. It was just the critical moment for them. Five or six rushed up the right bank but were utterly confounded at meeting a second party of assailants who immediately drove back those who escaped the firing. Being thus exposed to a cross fire and having no time to rally their forces they adopted the alternative of taking to the river and secreting themselves amongst the roots and branches and holes on the banks or by immersing Themselves with the face only uncovered and ready with a spear under water to take advantage of any one who approached within reach. Those who were sufficiently hardy or desperate to expose themselves on the offensive or to attempt breaking through the assailants were soon cleared off and the remainder were gradually picked out of their concealment by the cross fire from both banks until between 25 and 30 were left dead on the field and in the river. The others had either escaped up and down the river or had secreted themselves too closely to be discovered except in the persons of eight women and some children who emerged from their hiding places (where in fact the creatures were not concealed) on being assured of personal safety and were detained prisoners until the determination of the fray. It is however very probable that more men were killed in the river and floated down with the stream.  Notwithstanding the care which was taken not to injure the women during the skirmish it cannot appear surprising that one and several children were killed and one woman amongst the prisoners had received a ball through the thigh. [59] On finding the women were spared and understanding the orders repeatedly issued to that effect many of the men cried out they were of the other sex; but evidence to the contrary was too strong to admit the plea. As it appeared by this time that sufficient punishment had been inflicted on this warlike and sanguinary tribe by the destruction of about half its male population and amongst whom were recognised on personal examination fifteen very old and desperate offenders the bugle sounded to cease firing and the divided party reassembled at the ford where the baggage had been left in charge of four soldiers who were also to maintain the post. Here Captain Ellis had arrived badly wounded in the right temple by a spear at three or four yards distance which knocked him off his horse and P. Heffron a constable of the police had received a bad spear wound above the right elbow. No surgical aid being at hand it was not without some little difficulty the spear was extracted and it then proved to be barbed at the distance of five inches from the point.  Having recrossed the river in good order with the baggage on three horses the whole party formed a junction on the left bank fully expecting the natives would return in stronger force but in this were disappointed. After a consultation over the prisoners it was resolved to set them free for the purpose of fully explaining to the remnant of the tribe the cause of the chastisement which had been inflicted and to bear a message to the effect that if they again offered to spear white men or their cattle or to revenge in any way the punishment which had just been inflicted on these for their numerous murders and outrages four times the present number of men would proceed amongst them and destroy every man woman and child. This was perfectly understood by the captives and they were glad to depart even under such an assurance; nor did several of their number who were the widows mothers and daughters of notorious offenders shot that day evince any stronger feeling on the occasion than what arose out of their anxiety to keep themselves warm.  Wednesday 1st January. A man came over from Goboleon to say that seven armed bushrangers had robbed a hut at a short distance and had intimitated their intention of coming to Wellington. We have indeed more danger to apprehend from such characters than from the untutored natives around us. Several natives worked in the mission garden today. We have 8 of them here. They often ask questions now respecting religion.  Saturday 4th. Eleven natives here. All of whom are under instruction and say their prayers morning and evening. They have been working in the garden for several days.  Friday 10th. Some more natives have come up exceedingly afflicted with a disease of the heart many of them are at present suffering from the same complaint.  Sunday 12. Only eight of the natives attended church today but they seemed to pay as much attention as if they felt deeply interested in the service. We have repeated evidences of their remembering many things which they hear at church and family worship. We have never taught them the Apostles Creed as part of their prayers but when I read over my translation of it into their language they immediately repeated it in English and they had learnt it only by hearing it at church.  Tuesday 14. Br and Sister Handt with child and servant arrived tonight from Sydney having been preserved from the attacks of the bushrangers with which the roads are so much infested at present.  Thursday Jan 24th. Rode 16 miles into the bush today and found the heat extremely oppressive. Ten natives with us at present. I could not prevent them from eating a calf which had died today of the "black leg".  Friday 25th. Another calf has died of the above named disease and it is truly affecting to witness the desire which our children show of eating it notwithstanding they receive a regular supply of good and wholesome food.  Sunday 27th. Ten natives at church today. They were catechised and instructed in the afternoon by Mrs Watson as I had gone a few miles to visit a sick man. They possess very retentive memories and are very quick at learning when they will bend their minds to it.  Friday 31st. Goongeen and I left home to go into the bush in a south westerly direction. After travelling for sometime we arrived at a sheep station where we found two Europeans; both could read but they possessed no book of any kind. One of them an Irishman paid no attention to what I said on the subject of religion but the other an Englishman entered [NN] into conversation on the subject. I gave them some tracts and travelled on till we arrived at another sheep station where we found two men without any book except a tract respecting a pious negro which they said they had read over so many times as to remember almost the whole of it.   I had seen one of these men before on the Sunday which I sometime ago spent among the shepherds. He had received religious instruction at a Sunday School and seemed to be affected when I spoke to him respecting his soul. I gave them some tracts. Hoping to find water we travelled till it was quite dark without succeeding. The difficulty of proceeding through the bush compelled us to stop. We had considerable difficulty in erecting our tent as the night was so dark that we could not see to cut poles for it. However having succeeded in finding what we were willing to be satisfied with we erected our tent spread our blankets on the ground and committed ourselves to the care of our heavenly father.  Sat Feb 1st. Rose this morning about 4 O'Clock. We had much rain during the night attended with thunder and lightening. We placed our pannikins outside the tent in order to catch a little rain to quench our thirst but could not succeed. This morning Goongeen found water at some distance which was seasonable relief to us. Having sought Divine direction we recommenced our journey and proceeded till we came to a sheep station where there were 3 Europeans. I gave them some tracts and spoke to the only one present on the subject of religion. In a few hours without having seen any natives we came to another hut. I alighted and went in but the conversation of the 4 or 5 white men there was of the most vicious kind. I spoke to them on the subject one of them acknowledged that it was an unprofitable practice. But another kept pacing the room whistling aloud as though he did not regard what I said. We learnt that 3 policemen had left this station in the morning in pursuit of an armed bushranger who fired at them yesterday and from whom they had taken a horse laden with tea sugar ammunition &c but he escaped with a black female who was accompanying him. After leaving this station we had not proceeded many miles before we reached another where we found between 20 and 30 natives. One little (native) girl who had been with us a short time came running to meet me saying "now parson now parson". I was acquainted with nearly all the natives that I found here. While speaking to some of them respecting religion one female said she believed that they "would all go to devil devil very soon'. There were several children here but I could not succeed in persuading any to go with me. There was also a fine boy here about 12 years of age who had been sometime with us at Wellington Valley but he would not return. The white men here seem'd very jealous of me one in particular followed me from one company of natives to another. We erected our tent on the bank of a fine creek made some tea of which the natives did not wait for a second invitation to partake. We removed from here a short time before sun setting and reached a station where we propose spending the Sabbath. Goongeen asked me to travel all the night in order to get to church at Wellington tomorrow. We arrived at the hut and had family worship after which we erected our tent at a short distance. Goongeen wished to sleep in the tent with me as it is a very small one made to be carried on horseback I could not accommodate him. He said that he was afraid of Wandong (the devil). I told him that he ought to pray to God to take Wandong out of his heart as it was his being there that he ought to be concerned for. He said he would go and sleep in the hut and then croppies (thieves) would immediately come and take me. I told him that he might go into the hut as I was not afraid. However he laid down and was very soon asleep.   Sunday Feb 2nd. Had Divine service and family worship in the hut today.  Monday Feb 3rd. Having had family prayer and given a Testament to one of the men we commenced our journey homewards for in no other direction would my native companion proceed one step. And as I was not able to take my tent &c on my mare I was compelled to yield. We reached home in the afternoon having travelled during the journey 80 or 90 miles. I cannot say that any good has been effected by this short tour. I have seen some of the natives and spoken to them respecting their souls. I have visited many of my own countrymen who are scattered as sheep having no shepherd. I have admonished them and given them tracts &c. May the Lord in infinite mercy grant that they may be made instrumental to the good of their souls in this wilderness.  Saturday Feb 8th. This day Mrs Watson myself and Geanil (our native girl) and Joseph left home with the cart and 3 horses in order to proceed into the interior to visit some of the wild natives. We were to start yesterday but Mrs Watson was not well. Her reason for hus exposing herself to additional privations and inconveniences is the hope that she may have some influence in persuading some native females to give or lend their children to us. Goongeen wanted to accompany us as did also Oombeedyoong another of our boys. I did not wish to take them away from the settlement. However they went before us and for 2 or 3 miles cut down large boughs of trees and laid them across the road to prevent us from proceeding. After we had got a few miles they showed themselves and expressed an anxious desire to accompany us. Though our stock of flour was small we consented to their going. Goongeen led us (as he said) a shorter way than the usual track but as it was through the deep bush and as we were overtaken by a very heavy storm of rain attended with tremendous thunder and lightning our horses proceeded very slowly. Having travelled about 18 miles we encamped near the river erected our tent and took up our abode for the night.  Sunday Feb 9th. The rain thunder and lightning continued during the whole of last night and we were teased by so large a host of small ants creeping over us that we had no rest. Our camp furniture consists of boxes and sacks of which we make pillows chairs tables &c. When the weather cleared a little we struck our tent and again proceeded intending if we should meet a party of natives to remain with them for the day. But not falling in with any we travelled till we arrived at a place called by the natives Murrambirdthiree [sic] where we found several. They immediately brought some wood and made us a fire while the tent was being erected &c. After having taken some tea we had family worship in the open air at which two white men from a neighbouring station and all the natives 8 in number attended. All the latter afterwards said prayers Goongeen taking the lead in a very solemn manner and the others repeating. Administered medicine to two sick Europeans. A native female Charlotte who is living here is very lame she has not been able to walk for a long time owing to pain and contraction of her knee. I gave her some compound liniment of ammonia to rub on it. She allowed us to take a little girl Kitty an orphan of whom she has the charge but who is generally living with an European in an improper manner.  Mond Feb 10th. Having had family worship we struck our tent and proceeded on our way several of the natives accompanying us. Their active and lively manouvers seemed to alleviate the monotony of bush travelling. Arrived at Warree about One O'Clock found here old Bobbaguk a Native who is generally at Wellington and a few others. Administered medicine to a sick European and travelled on to Dhubboo [sic] about 40 miles from Wellington. We determined to rest here for the night we therefore unyoked our horses and erected our tent. We are informed that there are many natives in this neighbourhood but as one of their number died here a short time ago they will not sleep near the place. The ceremony of making young men it's said is to take place soon not far from here and a large concourse of natives is expected to be present on the occasion. Several Europeans attended family prayers tonight held as usual in the open air but how little they are accustomed to such religious services may be well imagined from the fact that they stood up having their hats n during the time we were thus engaged. In this respect they were outdone in decorum by the poor unlettered Aborigines who all knelt down and said their prayers in the presence of the Europeans who expressed their astonishment at what they saw and heard in this respect. Tonight about 9 O'Clock Kabahrin (or Oorimbildwally) rose up and went for a considerable distance round the tent holding his hands over his head apparently in mental agony. Some of the natives said he saw the devil others said he said his father's spirit (he was interned in this neighbourhood a few months ago). For a considerable time he would not speak to anyone and the natives who were sitting round the fire kept up a continual puffing and spitting which I am told is to drive the devil away. When his [NN] struggling was over he laid down and called for some water saying that he was sick and ill.  Tuesd Feb 11th. Left Dhubboo before breakfast this morning and travelled about 9 miles to Bertherie where we turned our horses out to feed and erected our tent to rest for a while and to take a little tea for this is our general food in the bush tea and damper (unleavened cake baked in the ashes). Karbahrrin started this morning at daybreak and Goongeen remained behind with some natives of whom we met about 20 or 30 going to Dhubboo. I knew many of them. We met also a sick native so debilitated and crippled by disease that he was scarcely able to walk. I told him that I should soon return and then he must accompany us to Wellington. He was willing to do so and told me that he was brother to Booby or Booley of whom I have several times made mention as coming to Wellington in almost a dying state and afterwards recovering and reproving an European for swearing. We reached Munore about 60 miles from Wellington a short time before sunset. This is the most beautiful place I have yet seen on the banks of the McQuarrie. It is what some would indeed term a "Lovely Spot". Here we erected our tent and took up our abode for the present. We have found only two natives here one of them Tommy very ill he was with us at Wellington for a few weeks sometime ago. He says that he was very stupid to leave us. A stockman had many times advised him to come to me for medical aid but he always refused saying he was too mush afraid. He now promises to go but he is unable to walk such a distance. Had family worship as usual in the open air at which two Europeans Roman Catholics and the natives attended. We have seen many trees that had been struck by lightening in the late storm several of which had been split and driven to a considerable distance. Thus have we been graciously preserved by our God and Saviour. A thunder storm in this colony is truly awful.  Wednes Feb 12th. We this morning proceeded on our journey into the interior. Tommy was very anxious to accompany us the other natives begged that he might as he knew the road through the bush. His very diseased body rendered him a very unpleasant companion to Mrs Watson in the cart but she was willing to bear this inconvenience. They always emit a very unpleasant smell but in what a wretched condition his poor body was may be in some measure conceived from the circumstance that when he afterwards left the cart pieces of corrupt flesh were found where he had been sitting. It is impossible to convey in writing the sickening and disgusting scenes we are often compelled to witness in our attempts to do good to these degraded creatures. Not indeed that under such circumstances we are out of love with our work or with the scene of our labours we are willing and anxious to spend our whole life among them hoping and praying that God would make us useful to their souls.   Our journey today lay through very thick bush which was not passed without difficulty and through a deep creek. This with the heavy storm of rain thunder and lightning which we had for a considerable part of the day made us glad and grateful to find a convenient resting place where we could erect our tent which we did a short time before sunset having travelled for nearly 12 hours. On our way coming to the river our natives would take a swim one of them who is nearly blind dived to the bottom and brought up a very large turtle. We shot a wild pigeon yesterday which we found if not very substantial at least very grateful to common meal. Goongeen shot a duck tonight. We are now 320 miles from Sydney and about 80 from Wellington. I think that some place in this neighbourhood would be eligible for a missionary station. It is on the very borders of the wild natives. We expected to meet many today as a messenger had been dispatched to Gingin to summons them to Dhubboo but we have not met any. Our natives say that perhaps they have gone another way and they may be now at Munore. Some venomous insect of which there are very many in the bush stung Mrs Watson today in her left wrist it immediately swelled and run up her arm accompanied with most excruciating pain extending to her chest. The arm was bound up above the place were it was stung and it has been well bathed with a lotion but neither the pain or swelling has abated.  Thurd Feb 13th. Our servant man and Goongeen went out early this morning to endeavour to kill a kangaroo or some other animal for the dogs which have fared poorly since we left home. However though they saw several they could not come up with them. The pain in Mrs Watson's arm has prevented her sleeping during the night. It is much inflamed and swollen this morning. We engraved the initials of our names on two trees where we have been encamped. As we had not met the natives and it was believed that they might now be at Munore and especially as our stock of flour was getting very small we thought it advisable to return. The wild natives in this neighbourhood about 6 months ago in one of their excursions near one of the stock stations slaughtered some bullocks. The stockman said to some of their brethren afterwards that policemen would come from Sydney and take them down there and hang them. This has been the means of keeping them back in the bush lately. The road through the bush as yesterday was exceedingly rugged which shook the cart so violently as to make the pain in Mrs Watson's arm almost intolerable. We returned by a different route from that which we travelled yesterday. I felt exceedingly fatigued when we arrived at Munore though we had not come more than 18 or 19 miles but the sun was so oppressive and the bush so difficult to pass often scratching our faces or tearing our clothes as we proceeded. We encamped at Munore on the spot where we had encamped before. The messenger that had been sent to summon the Gingin natives returned today having travelled 60 or 70 miles without finding them. Another messenger who had been sent before him has not yet returned.  Friday 14th. Are resting our horses today. Goongeen shot a duck and caught two fishes [sic]. We have 6 natives here whom we are attempting to instruct in the great truths of religion but it seems almost like beating the mountains with a rod.  Sat 15th. We have remained here today in hope that the wild natives would come up but they have not. The natives caught a turtle and some fish. Goongeen shot 3 wild pigeons and a duck. Mrs Watson's arm much easier and less swollen tonight.   Sunday 16th. Had Divine service today as well as family worship in the open air. I endeavoured to speak to the natives respecting the creation &c &c today but they had no ears. I attempted again and again to fix their attention but without effect. O that God would be pleased to give them another heart and another spirit.  Monday 17th. Left Munore taking with us sick Tommy in the cart. We reached Berthiree about 11 O'Clock and stopped to rest our horses and to take breakfast. Having rested for a few hours we proceeded towards Dhubboo intending to spend the night at the camp of the natives but when we came there not a native was to be seen. A short time afterwards a young man joined us. At first Goongeen looked on him apparently with a jealous eye but having exchanged a few words they soon became familiar and we learnt that [neither] the Mudgee nor the Gingin natives having come up the others had gone to Murrambirthiree. We therefore proceeded to Dhubboo and encamped for the night. The overseer at this place was exceedingly kind accommodating us with some fresh mutton. Sometime ago he came to Wellington to beg a few cobs of maize corn which I gave him and he appears to have remembered it. Gratitude is so rare in this Colony that a single instance like this makes a deep impression on one's mind. I have several times taken in sick Europeans to afford them medical assistance much to my own personal inconvenience. And in return before they have left me though restored to health they have either robbed me or attempted to do worse to have connexion with our native females. All the Europeans at this station 6 or 7 in number attended family worship. Their behaviour was much more becoming the occasion now than it was when we were here before. The natives said prayers as usual.   Tuesday 18th. As one of the Europeans here is very ill for his sake we have remained another day.  Wednes 19th. Left Dhubboo and proceeded by Warree where there were only two or three natives to Murrambirthiree where we found about 60 natives. I administered medicine to 17 of their sick tonight. The diseased and corrupted state of their emaciated bodies is a true though not perfect emblem of their diseased souls. I visited them all tonight at their camp which took me some hours so that it was about 11 O'Clock when I returned to my tent. Their petitions are not for instruction in the way of life. But their fist and continual language is "Gathal deengunga Pyhook deengunga Weekga deengunga" give me tobacco give me a pipe give me bread.  Thurs 20th. We have work enough now before us and so long as the natives remain here and we have a morsel of bread and water from the river to make us tea we have no intention to depart. Many of the natives and especially females came and remained around our tent the whole of the day. They were shown many pictures with which they seemed much surprised and pleased. I administered medicine to the sick and endeavoured to impart some religious instructions to all around. Warrahbin is here with Narrang Jackey and she would go with us to Wellington but Jackey will not allow her. She said that she does not speak to the native females respecting God because they do not know anything. Mrs Watson told her that she ought to teach them and they would then perhaps begin respecting those good things of which she had heard so much at Wellington. Mrs Watson wished her to take the lead with the children in saying prayers but she would not perhaps she felt a degree of shame before so many natives however she readily united with them when Geanil took the lead. We have here a very old woman in a sorely diseased state. We wish her to go with us but do not know whether she will.  Friday 21st. The old woman had gone away very early this morning but has been brought back to us. Most of the natives are moving away to Buckambah as it is said to make young men there. Several females are left behind. Charlotte who had been lame for a long time has been completely cured by the liniment which I gave her on my way to Gingin she is now walking about without pain or stiffness. The many cures which the Divine Being has graciously effected on the diseased bodies of these natives through my instrumentality would one might imagine make them grateful. But I have not yet witnessed a single instance. Mrs Watson has succeeded in obtaining two more young girls. She saw them going towards the river but when they saw her they ran away with all possible speed. But taking Geanil with her she followed them to the camp. They were very much afraid and another which was there hid her face under an oppossum cloak. Geanil acted as an interpreter and was the means of encouraging them. For a wonder the other natives both male and female urged them to come without fear. One of the girls is blind we purchased her once before for a blanket but her mother took her away. And now again for a handkerchief and the other for necklaces. Geanil was very useful in my holding conversation with the natives on the subject of religion. It was truly surprising to hear how earnestly she argued with them in their own language. We have now five females and two sick males to accompany us to Wellington besides Geanil Goongeen and Kabarhinm making 10 in all.  Sat 22nd Feb. We have been up all the night as we were afraid some of our family would be decamping by moonlight. I was very anxious last evening to have the horses up and tethered at a small distance from the tent in order to commence our journey during the night. I could not prevail upon our man to get them up as they had broken the rope once he said I could have them soon enough in the morning. I dared not to tell him my intentions as it would soon have reached the ears of those who had given us the children and their coming again would cause us considerable inconvenience. As I had anticipated it has fallen out. Though we were ready to start before 6 O'Clock some of the natives were with us even earlier than that among whom were the parents of the blind girl. In addition to the handkerchief we gave them something to eat a pipe and some tobacco yet they were unwilling to let the child go. And the mother of the girl was determined to go with us. I used my utmost endeavours to dissuade her but all to no purpose. And indeed what can we say to such a circumstance. In addition to that affection which naturally has possession of the parent towards her child every means is used by the European stockman to prejudice their minds against by representing us as wanting the children only to send them to prison &c &c.   The old woman that is so very ill would not on any account go with us. One of the females here has a babe about a fortnight old. It is very ill. Its hands and feet and other parts appeared to be blistered perhaps by its being smoked as it is a custom to hold their infants in smoke for a considerable time and to rub them over with the bark of a certain tree which is exceedingly black. Mrs Watson washed the infant in warm water and made it a small gown &c. I felt very much inclined to baptise the child but expecting it would die I apprehended that its parents would say I had killed it. We proceeded on our journey homewards having eight persons in the cart. Kabahrin acted as [NN] riding the first horse. We reached Wellington between 5 and 6 O'Clock in the evening having been graciously preserved by our Heavenly Father not having suffered any accident and having had our health continued (except in the case of Mrs Watson's arm) though we have not slept in a hut during the whole of the time and have had only bush [NN] in the rudest sense of the word. We found 3 natives here on our arrival.  Mond Feb 24th. Being informed that an overseer about 12 miles off has sent for me on account of sickness I and Goongeen rode over today to see him.  Tuesd 25th. Eighteen natives here now 13 of whom said prayers. The remainder were either too sick or too proud to come in. Several attempts have already been made to get the blind girl away.  Wednes 26th. Our sick natives are recovering and the others are being instructed. A young man has come who is very ill. He has been a good deal about this establishment. He is very wicked and I have at different times had considerable trouble with him. I met him in the bush sometime ago and was speaking to him respecting his conduct when he replied that he would do as he pleased for me and made use of the worst language that was possible. I suppose he remembered this and [NN] not come to Wellington. However I saw him as I passed through Goboleon the other day and told him to come up and he has done so.  Thursd Feb 27th. As some of the natives being sick do not attend family prayers I have taught them tonight in the open air.  Saturd M'ch 1st. We have had all the girls sleeping in my study for seven nights in order to prevent their escaping. But they are so dirty and bring in so many things as fish bones &c &c that the smell and dirt they make has become almost intolerable. Today I made a shutter and put it on the window in the hut for them to sleep there. But they had not been in it half an hour before the blind girl had climbed up through a small hole which had been left to admit light into the hut. She however was brought in again. It is not to be understood that we keep them as prisoners night and day. During the day they have sufficient liberty but at night we are anxious to have them where there is neither ingress nor egress for several reasons.  Sunday M'ch 2nd. Preached this morning for the first time in the building which I have altered and fitted up as a church. It is commodious and convenient. Having a pulpit reading desk table for an alter and alter rail. May the time speedily come when it shall be filled by natives anxiously listening to the message of mercy in their own language. This afternoon I was teaching a few of the children in my study. I could not prevail on those which we brought with us out of the bush to come in. When I had been thus engaged about half an hour one of the children went out and immediately returned saying that Harry and the females had all gone. I could scarcely believe it though they had broken the door of the hut open during the night. I immediately took my mare and two native boys and went in one direction and one of our men in another. After having sought for them a long time in vain we returned. The man came back when it was nearly dark bringing the blankets which had been lent to the natives.   My DEAR MR BARBER  I had not time to write to you to mention the day of our departure from Upool - to thank you & my dear good Sisters at Salford for their many kindnesses to me. Of course you would hear of it in due Season. We have now commenced our 6th week and the time has passed quite as pleasantly as I could have anticipated except as regards some circumstances of which you will hear at a later date. The weather is extremely hot - the thermometer stands at 85 in the shade. We enjoy nevertheless a breeze which is very refreshing I cannot say I am much incommoded by the heat but poor Bede Sumner is quite in a melting mood & Mr. Cotham is not much better. We are all quite well & in excellent health & - for which God be praised. Quite united amongst ourselves & on good terms with our fellow passengers. We live in some sense Conventualiter. We meet three times each day for Office; have our meditation and Spiritual lecture together. I have commenced a course of Moral Theology with the young men; and the priests and myself hold a conference on the Sacrts three times each week. Tuesday and Thursday are half recreation days. Such is our present course of life which we commenced as soon as we recovered from sea sickness and have never interrupted one day. We received the Holy Commn for the first time on Maundy Thursday and again on Easter Sunday. I proposed saying Mass on that great festival but the water was so rough we could not meet except for Office. To my shame I must say I am as much inclined to laugh when I ought to be serious by sea as by land: indeed more so. Such queer things do sometimes happen. For instance I was giving the blessing at Prime on Easter Sunday and just as I said the word disponat the Ship gave a lurch and seated me on the floor of my cabin. Bede was thrown to the side opposite to that on which he was sitting and no sooner there than another lurch sent him back to his first position. [29]  Then we are so curiously habited. I of course am dressed a l'ordinaire - but of the rest one in jockey coat another without or else panting like expiring oysters. I celebrated Mass last Sunday and again today assisted by the Priests. Thus assisted there is small risk. I am sure you would enjoy the voyage extremely. The Captn is extremely civil & kind - our provisions hitherto as good as could be expected. The quantity of water is somewhat restricted - we have each half a pint for washing and by the time we reach Sydney I shall be enabled to wash in a thimblefull - I am slung up each night in a thing called a Cott. It swings about 2ft from the ceiling. How I should like to see you try to ride this most skittish horse. It goes to and fro like the pendulum of a Clock for a quarter of an hour after you are in but the danger is in getting in or of either going over or tumbling out. I have had two accidents. At one time the ropes at the feet broke & another those at the head - down I came & only hurt my toe. We have not had any stormy weather - the ocean generally presents a wild melancholy spread of water monotonous as a whole tho each individual part is in motion. We passed in sight of Antonio one of the Cape Verd Islands the only land we have seen ever since we bade adieu to Cape Clear. We have not observed many fish. Two or three whales and some binitos - one was speared two days since and we [had] it for dinner. Gregory who lives in the same Cabin with me saw yesterday a Shark astern. We hope to catch one shortly. It is delightful to witness the Shoals of flying fish about the size of a herring which sometimes take a course thro the air to avoid their enemies. One came into the Cabin of a Passenger. I hope all are quite well. Do write to me a long letter - direct Sydney New S.W.  Something is paid with the letter - 8d. in London. How is the arbitration going on? I do not think I shall have time to write so fully to Downside as I could wish - please therefore to send this letter and also mention to the President with our united respects and love and wish all that is kind to our good Sisters. My hand is shaking with the heat and the motion of the vessel is so great I am afraid you will scarcely make out this  EVER MOST AFFLY YR CONFRERE/+ J.B. POLDING  Ansley 15 June 1835.  Dear Mother and Father  This comes with my kind love to you hoping to find you in good health as thank God it leaves me at present very comfortable indeed. I have a place at a farm-house and I have got a good master which I am a great deal more comfortable than I expected. I works the same as I were at home; I have plenty to eat and drink thank God for it. I am allowed two ounces of tea one pound of sugar 12 pounds of meat 10 pounds and a half of flour two ounces of tobacco the week; three pair of shoes two suits of clothes four shirts a year; that is the allowance from Government. But we have as much to eat as we like as some masters are a great deal better than others. All a man has got to mind is to keep a still tongue in his head and do his master's duty and then he is looked upon as if he were at home; but if he don't he may as well be hung at once for they would take you to the magistrates and get 100 of lashes and then get sent to a place called Port Arthur to work in irons for two or three years and then he is disliked by everyone I hope you will study these few lines which I have wrote to you my dear mother and father brothers and sisters and all my friends belonging to me in that country; this country is far before England in everything both for work and money. Of a night after I have done my work I have a chance to make a few shillings; I can go out hunting or shooting of kangaroo that is about the size of a sheep or ducks or swans tigers tiger-cats or native cats; there is nothing that will hurt a man but a snake they are about five or six feet long but they will get away if they can. I have dogs and a gun of my own thank God for it to make me a few shillings anything that I want; thank God I am away from all beer-shops there is ne'er a one within 20 miles of where I live. [132] I have a fellow-prisoner living with me which he is a shoemaker and he is learning me to make shoes which will be a great help to me; in about two years I shall be able to make a pair of shoes myself; then thank God for it I am doing a great deal better than ever I was at home only for the wanting you with me that is all my uncomfortableness is in being away from you. Dear father and mother I hope you will understand it what I have wrote to you in this letter as it gave me much pleasure in writing it and always will let me be where - Dear mother and father I have eight years to serve with my master and then I shall have a ticket of [leave] relief that is to work for myself and then to keep that for four years if no trouble and to have my emancipation that is to be a free man in this country; I am now a prisoner then in this place and then after that I shall have my free pardon to come to England once more. But I should be a deal more comfortable if you could get the parish to send you out as it would be the making of you if they would pay your passage over and give you about £60 to land with you would do well. A farming man gets 5s. a day at day-work; if you was to come you could take me of Government for £1 for eight years to work for you and then we should be more comfortable than ever we have been as I am a prisoner; so I hope you will do your best endeavour to come to this country as it is far before England. Dear mother and father I had a most beautiful passage over thank God for it; we sailed on the 13th November from Spithead and we landed on the 7th March. From England to Van Diemen's Land is 17000 miles. Dear mother and father I hope you will answer this letter as soon as possible and I hope you will send me the particulars about everything at home. Dear brothers and sisters I hope that you will never give your poor mother and father so much trouble as I have. Dear mother and father I hope you don't fret about me as I am a doing well at present; thank God I don't want for anything but to see you my dears; so God bless you all for ever. Please to send me word how to farm hops from the beginning to the ending; but mind father it is winter here when it is summer at home and when you have day we have night; and you must be sure to pay the water carriage for the letter you send me which is about 8d.; and I have made enquiries for Henry Hart and the Newmans from Uckfield and cannot hear anything of them. So no more at the present from your loving though unfortunate  Henry Tingley.  Dear father when you write to me you must direct for me at Mr. Lyne's Apsley Lagoon Molter's Bay Great Swan Port Van Diemen's Land. [133]  After a silence of nearly three years that is to say February 1832 at which time I had done myself the pleasure of both writing to you as also to my beloved children as well at the same moment of having forwarded to the Home Government a memorial on behalf of having you and my dear children sent to me and as I am surprised at your neglect and silence I am now availing myself of the present opportunity of writing to you my dear wife by Doctr. John Osborn who leaves this Colony for his native country and which I hope my ever dear belovd. wife will find you and my ever dear children well in health as this present leave me for which I thank God for all his blessings and care of us all and as never hearing further from you respecting my anxious solicitation of your coming to me or whither you received any account of the application from Government there made by me and as it appears there has been indifference or wilful neglect in some department which I by no means attach to you my belovd. Eliza but a mind occupied as mine is day and night thinking of you and my fond children that the susceptibility of my feeling at your united absences is indeed indescribable to think for a moment that hundreds who at the same time since forwarded a similar application for their families now enjoy the felicity of their families company while I am left to linger in silent expectation of both you and my beloved children while my panting bosum and extended arms are every moment open to receive ye therefore come my dear dear wife and do not want a wresting place as I will on your arrival have one fit for my dears reception. But should you my love not have then received it and in any time after they thought it proper to send for you and that any circumstance at the time might have prevented you availing yourself of the opportunity of coming to me through sickness of your children or any other impediment you will therefore my dear love on receipt hereof address a Memorial to His Excellency the Viceroy of Ireland stating the then cause of your not coming and that you are now ready to join your husband praying His Excellency may admit you to share in his high considerations by granting you and your children a passage and there is no doubt of your ultimate success there has been many who have been similarly situated and none ever had been refused. I obtained the indulgence of sending for you at that time from Good Conduct which to the moment I am free to occupy my time as I may think proper having held the indulgence of a Ticket of Leave these two years back and will be as free as air the middle of March next. I will not say more on this subject than that I will look for your coming which God in his mercy may inspire your heart with equal desire of seeing me where I will now give you some account of this Country N.S.Wales otherwise named Australia is for salubrity of climate equal to that garden of the world Italy but with this exception not subject to brain fevers or European diseases that them countries are this country the soil of which grows wheat barley oats Rye Maizes with two crops of that well known vegetable the potatoe that contributes so much to Irish hospitality. [13] It grows all sorts of fruits tropical as well as European as well as all kinds of vegetable that are fit for man or beast and there is no part of the world where an industrious man can do better he can earn from 5 shillings to 7s.6d. per day take one with the other and there are many other indulgencies which a man can avail himself off that he cannot partake of in Ireland such as the following that is to say first he can take a piece of land on a clearing lease for 7 years without any rent all he grows is his own free from tythes or taxes and all he can accumulate during this time there is another you can place yourself on a piece of Government Land which you may occupy untill government may require it for sale and if you bid five shillings per acre you can get as much as you want and if industrious you can grow as much on the land as will be able to pay for the purchase of it which is more than you can get in Ireland where I will now leave this subject and turn my pen to the inquiry of my father my brothers and sisters as also my cousins McCormacks who I hope this will find well and to whom I desire particularly to be remembered having receivd. my father's letter two years ago I would have answered it before now but having written a little time before I waited with the hope of your coming so as to be able to mention your safe arrival. So as that I may no longer labour under suspense write to me on receipt hereof as the purport of your letter I will be governed by its dictates should you be disposed to come write to me and should you not have the candour to say so but do not deceive me as on receipt of your answer I will send you something for my children There is a neighbour of mine here most respectably married named Sarah Cramshee daughter to John Cramshee formerly of Millfield who at the time of her been transported left a boy child in the year 1825 in the poor house named William Daly in Belfast. You will therefore make all the necessary inquiry of Mr. Thompson after him as she is most anxious to get him out to her if living as she is well off. You will send me these particulars. She been a kind friend to me.  dere mary I receivd you loveing letter which wish for long time [...] this is the forth letter for me Der mary there is nact of Council past since thirty three that know man family cud come out until they wood be eight years in the Colony of new south wales and spesily lifers and when I come into the Cuntry it was onely Foure yeares which greeve me to heer and to say that you wood be so very far from me all my interest cud not get you out to the Cuntry one til the eight years wood be expired. der mary do what i am going to explaine to you and there is know fere but you can come out to me by geting petion drew out in proper manner [...] and send it to the lord lieutenent of Irland to come out as an migrant to new south Wales there is good [NN] of men wifes coming out to this cuntry and there is know other way that i know of but that. [14]  Der mary I am not table to do annything in the wourld to help you nor to help my selfe nor anny other man in new south Wales Der mary I never work one day but fourteen days for myselfe since I been in this cuntry because it is not allowed by Government but if i wonst got my liberty I cud [...] ten shillings per day Der mary let me know in youre next letter is my fathere live or know or did my sister go to meracar or know Der mary this is fine cuntry is there is in the wourld for ateing and drinking Der mary if you wore in this cuntry you cud be worth pound per week but by owne labour and if it be possible that you can come out bring your sister; there is fine girl comeing out as nemigrans.   28 May [1835]. - During the darkness of the night we passed King's Island and about 1 p.m. sighted a portion of New Holland the land of promise and to reach which we had already endured many anxious days and sleepless nights. We continued nearing this hitherto unappreciated portion of New Holland and as evening now cast its shadow over the waters the captain preferred lying off the land at a distance of about eighteen miles until the following morning when we anticipated the satisfaction of entering the port of Phillip. Several chain hooks being baited and attached to the ends of ropes were thrown over the vessel's side and two fine long bright and well-tasted barracoutas fish peculiar to the coast of Australia were caught not however until we had lost several hooks in consequence of the fish having bitten through the rope above its junction with the chain or wire part. [159]  May 29. - Daylight had no sooner broke this morning - and never had its cheerful return been so ardently longed for - than we were again greeted by the sight of Port Phillip heads at a distance not apparently exceeding eight miles.  By 9 a.m. we were between the heads with the tide running out and nearly at low water; a heavy surf and the wind light and baffling. We effected an entrance with difficulty at a part of the bay where the width was about a mile and a quarter. We took soundings and found the depth of water from five and a half to seven fathoms. We succeeded however in entering one of the finest bays or basins of water well sheltered that we remember to have seen. Within the bay the water was compared to our late tossing in the boiling and foaming waters outside as smooth as a millpond: and our little bark floated gently along like a sleeping gull. I shall however take this opportunity to remark that it will be desirable to enter its mouth only at the times of the tide running in.  At the distance of about fifteen miles we reached the point indicated and had no sooner anchored than we perceived my Sydney natives coming along the shore. I again landed for the purpose of taking another inspection of the country which we discerned as exceedingly rich and beautiful in the extreme; thinly-timbered richly-grassed and diversified by a few sweet vallies and hills of small elevation and of volcanic formation. The toil was of a fine rich oily decomposed whinstone. Nothing could be more satisfactory and in every point the reality far exceeded my most sanguine expectations. In these and other situations the kangaroo and other native grasses have attained at least two feet and thick as it could grow capable of affording hay of the best quality. The trees were thinly-scattered in a park-like form averaging five or six to the acre.  Robinson Crusoe was never better pleased with the appearance of the first ship which arrived and rescued him from his desolate island than I was with the vessel which proved the means of my thus opening to view a country capable of supporting a future nation and which we trust will be the means of relieving the Hobart Town country of its overstocked cattle and the mother country of her surplus and half-starved peasantry. Futurity must develop this prophecy! Further travelling and examination only added to my pre-conceived estimate of this extremely interesting and extensive territory; consisting of plains or downs at least twenty miles long by a width of ten miles and the distance may have been greater but for the interruption of hills more than ordinarily high which broke the horizon in different directions. One of these vistas which I have at present in view cannot form a less area than 100000 acres. Its general character presents that of cultivated pastures for centuries past; the few trees appear as though they owed their plantation to the hand of man. All the high hills are covered with grass to their summits.  I ascended these eminences or hill-summits from which the view was most satisfactory. The country on either hand presented the same continuation of rich pastoral plains apparently of greater extent than those already mentioned. The bay up which we sailed to-day and where we cast anchor varied in depth from two and a-half to six fathoms and to my great joy I discovered the fires of the natives or aboriginal inhabitants of this marvellously fertile country and felt delighted beyond expression that the task of its discovery should have devolved upon myself. [160] [161] [162] I intend going ashore tomorrow morning to the camp of natives and if possible shall establish a friendly intercourse with them in order to effect a treaty for the purchase of a large portion of their fertile and hitherto useless territory.  May 31 Sunday - The vessel lay last night in three fathom water in a fine little bay to which I gave the name of Gellibrand's harbour in honor of Gellibrand Esq late attorney-general of Hobart Town.  As soon as the day broke we landed for the purpose of carrying out our object with the Aborigines. We had not travelled more than smile and a half when we caught sight of the smoke arising from the fires of seven large gunyahs or huts. My Sydney natives immediately stripped off their clothes and introduced themselves purea naturabilis to the inhabitants of the gunyahs; at least they intended to have so done but on reaching the little village they discovered that the sable tenants had departed that morning. My natives forthwith beat for their trail and having found it we commenced to follow and continued on the track for about ten miles when one of my natives caught sight of a black at the distance of a mile. Having made a sign to us we again formed into Indian file and marched after him until we came up to the black he had seen who proved to be an old and crippled woman having no toes on one foot. About a mile ahead we saw the main body of the tribe whom we had followed and overtook them about 1 p.m.  My Sydney natives and their new companions by a sort of freemasonry or from a similarity of language appeared to perfectly understand each other and a friendly footing was at once established which augured well for the accomplishment of my projects.  A corroborree with song was got up in quick time in which both tribes joined to my great delight. The company was composed entirely of women twenty-four in number each having a child at her back excepting one who was young and very good looking. They informed us that the male members of their tribe had gone up the river. With this interesting group of females were four native dogs or dingos and independent of infant burdens they each had a net or basket hung around their shoulders. The weight of some of their loads could not be less than sixty or seventy pounds; these loads were so largess to form a hump behind on which their children rested. Each had besides two or three baskets of their own manufacture containing nets stone tomahawks bones crystals &c. In one of the bags which I took the trouble to examine. I found a piece of the tire of a cart wheel with the remains of two nail holes. This piece of iron was ground down to a sharp edge and fixed in a piece of wood for a handle: they used it for the purpose of cutting with as a tomahawk; with this were several pieces of iron hoop which they had likewise ground to a sharp edge and used as substitutes for knives. Several large wooden vessels of rude construction for the purpose of holding water were also among their utensils and in one of them was some water of a bad quality. [163] They very willingly came back with us to where I had a number of blankets glass-beads looking-glasses sweet sugar apples and handkerchiefs; and I distributed amongst them 8 pair of blankets 30 handkerchiefs 1 tomahawk 18 necklaces of beads 6 pounds of sugar 12 looking-glasses and a quantity of apples. They appeared to be very much pleased with the presents and shortly after receiving them took their departure. I had arranged that we were to meet again tomorrow.  The young woman of whom I have written gave me a very handsome basket of her own making: some of the other women alto presented me with two baskets and several spears; all of which I took with me on board. I have this day travelled over at least fifteen miles of country all of the same good character of open plains several of which seen from a neighbouring hill could not be less than twenty miles square. In the course of the journey I ascended a sugar loaf hill which was richly grassed to the top. This hill I dedicated to the honor of J. T. Collicott Esq postmaster-general and I hope and trust that should this magnificent country eventually be settled upon this hill may in future be allowed to retain the name of Mount Collicott. I never could have imagined it possible that so fine a country existed on the face of the globe - gentle hills plains and downs on which 5000 sheep might have been allowed to feed with little trouble to the shepherd. I cannot however shut my eyes to the fact that fine as the land undoubtedly is. from what I have yet seen of it. there is a great deficiency of water although I have no doubt whatever that water might be easily obtained by digging. [...]  June 6. - During the greater part of last night the wind was very high accompanied with a few showers of rain. We made an early breakfast and resumed our journey in order to reach the camp of the blacks the smoke of whose fires we had seen yesterday. We travelled over land equal to any that we had seen a deep black diluvium with grass three or four feet high and thinly-timbered. After travelling eight miles we struck the trail of the natives which in a short time led us to a branch of the tribe consisting of one chief his wife and three children - fine plump chubby healthy-looking urchins they were. To this distinguished royal chieftain of the prairies I gave one pair of blankets handkerchiefs beads and three pocket knives; upon the receipt of these presents he undertook the part of guide. We crossed a fresh water creek with good land on either bank. Our new guide informed us that he would take us to his tribe at the same time naming many of their chiefs.  After travelling about eight miles we were surprised to hear a number of voices calling after us and on looking round encountered six men armed with spears fixed in their wommeras. We stopped and they at once threw aside their spears and came up to us in the most friendly manner possible. We all shook hands and I gave them knives tomahawks &c whereupon they took the lead and brought us back about a mile to where we found huts or gunyahs and a number of women and children. [164] We sat down in the midst of these sooty and sable aboriginal children of Australia; amongst whom we ascertained were eight chiefs belonging to the country near Port Phillip over which we had travelled and with which we had so much reason to be pleased. The three principal chiefs were brothers. Two of them were fully six feet high and tolerably good-looking: the third was not so tall but much stouter than the others. The other five chiefs were equally fine men. And a question to myself here arises and the answer as speedily follows viz.: now is the time for entering into and effecting a purchase of their land. A full explanation that my object in visiting their shore was to purchase their land they appeared to understand; and the following negotiation or agreement was immediately entered into. I purchased two large blocks or tracts of land about 600000 acres more or less and in consideration there for I gave them blankets knives looking-glasses tomahawks beads scissors flour &c and I also further agreed to pay them a tribute or rent yearly. The parchment or deed was signed this afternoon by the eight chiefs each of them at the same time handing me a portion of the soil: thus giving me full possession of the tracts of land I had purchased.  This most extraordinary sale and purchase took place by the side of a lovely stream of water from whence my land commenced. A tree was here marked in four different ways to define the corner boundaries. Good land to any extent either for stock or tillage wish good water was here in abundance ready for sheep cattle or the plough. The timber was she-oak dwarf-gum and wattle. Our negotiation was terminated by my Sydney natives giving our newly-acquired friends a grand corroborree at night much to their delight.  Vandemans Land Septer 29 1836  Dear Father And Mother I have After A long Absence from you Imbraced the opportunity of writing to you hopeing those few lines may find you And All my Brothers And Sisters In Good Health As I Am happy to Inform you that this leaves me quite well at this time thank God for it I have likewise to Inform you that I Am Arived Safe In vandemans Land but I Am Sorry to Inform you that we had but A verry unpleasant Voiage for After we left Woolwich the Cholera raged on Board our Ship whitch Obliged us to Return Back to Chatham And lay there 21 days and we had 22 Persons died but I had but A Slight toutch of it my Self you must Excuse me for Not writeing Before As I have till Now been A Long way up the Country And have Not been Able till Now to get A Letter to the Post with any Safety but I Am happy to Inform you that I Am Now verry Comfortabley Situated within A mile of Hobart Town the head Town In the Collony I Am Situated In A Large Market Garden belonging to A Gentleman by the Name of Mr David Lamb Esqr And My Imploy Is to Drive A Horse And Cart Into Hobart Town with the Produce of the Garden for Sale As to my Liveing I find it Better than Ever I Expected thank God I want for Nothing In that Respect As for tea And Sugar I almost Could swim in it I am Alowed 2 Pound of Sugar and 1/4 Pound of tea Per week And Plenty of tobaco And Good white Bread And some times Beef Some times mutton sometimes Pork this I have Every day Plenty of fruit Pudings In the Season of all sorts And I have two Suits of Cloths A year And three Pair of shoes In A year And I want for Nothing but my Liberty but though I Am thus Situated It Is Not the Case with all that Come As Prisonners It Is all Owen to A Persons Good Conduct that they Get Good Situations for some through their misconduct Get Into Road Partys and some Into Chain Gangs and Live A misaberable Life my kind Love to my Brother James and I hope that my misfortune will be A worning to him and to all I send my kind Love to my Child An I hope that he Is well and besure Send me word how he Is And how Providence have Provided for him Since my departure from him As to the State of this Country Is As follows A Tradesman of Any kind will get from 6 to 7s Per day And A farming man will get A dollar Per day whitch Is 4s 4d. And Bread is 4d the 2 Pd loaf Cheese is 1s 6d Per Pound Butter fresh is 2s 6d Per Pound Beef 8d to 10d Per Pound Mutton 6d to 7d Per Pound Sugar And tea is verry Cheap I have known good Sugar at 2d Per Pound And tea at is Per Pound But it is Rather dearer at this time Sugar 4 and tea 1s 6d Per Pound As to the Produse of the Collony It Produces all Sorts of Grain and fruit of Every discription And wool and Oil is the Cheif thing that is sent from the Collony In the Shipping As for the Climate In this Country it is A fine Climate we have but verry little winter And there is not A tree but what may be Propperly Called An Ever Green As they are Green all the year long And what is Termed the Bush Ground that is not Cultivated is Adorned with Beautiful flowering Shrubs of all Sorts and Ground flowers of all sorts as for the Timber In this Country it [grows] verry large and high some trees Called the Gum tree Grows 200 feet high [There] is others Called Stringebark [...] Peppermint tree but the Gum tree is the Best for Use the Howses In this Country Are Cheifly Built of Stone And the Roofs are Covered with wood Called Shingals they Split Allmost in the form of tiles About 14 Inches long and 5 or 6 Inches Broad and Each one fastened with A Nail When you write to [me] you must be [sure And Pay] the Postage of the [le]tter to London or I sha[ll] not have it And you must direct As follows for Richard Dillingham at [Mr] D Lambs Esqr Sanday Bay Hobart Town Vandemans Land And besure and Pay the Postage of the Letter to London or I shall not have it And I hope you wil not delay w[riting] to me As Soon As Possable So I Conclud with my kind love to you all and Still Remain your Unfortunate Son [90]  Richard Dillingham  there Is one thing that I the writer this Letter have to State to I daresay your Great Sattisfaction that Is your Son Richard I can say Is Verry [illegible] Steady for though Liquor Is verry Cheap And he have the means and the opportunity of Geting it he Never gets more than do him Good Rum Is 2s the Pint and that Is the Cheif that Is drank Wine Is verry Cheap It Is 9d the Pint and the Cape Wine Is 7d the Pint the distance from England to Vandemans Land Is 18000 Miles and It Is day here when it Is Night in England  Dec. 28 1836. Early in the morning it was announced that the Buffalo had arrived from Port Lincoln accompanied by the Cygnet which had gone thither to escort the Governor Captain Hindmarsh to Holdfast Bay. This made us all alive and soon after Mr. Thomas received notice to attend at the tent of Mr. Gouger the Colonial Secretary where His Excellency the Governor was expected to be at 3 o'clock to read his Commission and proclaim the colony. [172] Mr. Thomas then went to the Company's store and soon returned with a request that he would procure a ham as Mr. Gilbert was not provided with one which was done and a fine Hampshire Ham was dressed for the occasion. It was also requested that we would prepare ourselves to meet the procession as all who could were expected to attend. We went accordingly and found assembled the largest company we had yet seen in the colony probably two hundred persons.  The Governor's Private Secretary read the Proclamation under a huge gumtree a flag was hoisted a party of marines from the Buffalo fired a feu-de-joie and loud hurrahs succeeded. A cold collation of which we partook followed in the open air.  The Governor was very affable shaking hands with the colonists and congratulating them on having such a fine country. After the repast he mounted on a chair and gave the first toast 'The King' which was received with three times three and followed by the National Anthem led by Mr. Gilles. The old royal appellation of 'George' was so natural to Englishmen after four successive reigns of Kings of that name that it was forgotten at the moment that a 'William' was now on the throne and the first hoe was sung as formerly 'God save great George our King' which excited a smile. Yet I believe that William the Fourth has not more loyal subjects throughout his wide dominions than those who were there assembled to welcome the first Governor of South Australia. The health of His Excellency was then proposed and drunk with loud and universal cheering followed by 'Rule Britannia.' Then 'Mrs. Hindmarsh and the Ladies' was proposed by Mr. Gilbert and also received great applause as did several other toasts.  The Governor then gave the following: - ' May the present unanimity continue as long as South Australia exists' which made the plain ring with acclamations. At about 5 o'clock His Excellency and lady departed to the ship and some officers and others followed in another boat. They all seemed highly delighted with our village as I may call it consisting now of about forty tents and huts though scattered about without any regularity. Everyone fixed his present abode wherever he wished knowing it would not be of long duration. [173]  In March 1837 the remainder of the town land was sold by auction in acres of which Mr. Thomas bought eight in addition to the two preliminary ones he already possessed at from six to eight guineas per acre. All these are in good situation and likely to increase in value. As a proof a few days ago lie sold for two hundred guineas a quarter of one of them the whole of which cost him less than ten.  Adelaide is about six miles from Glenelg or Holdfast Bay as the anchorage there is called and somewhat further from Port Adelaide another part of the coast which place I have never yet seen and perhaps I never shall as I seldom go out especially since I have been without a servant.  We came here on June 1 1837. Mr. Thomas and the boys came up some time before as the printing press was obliged to be set up here and resided in the tents until September while this building was finishing. Since then we have been within these walls which are built of mud and the roof is of boards. We have a stone house in progress and when we remove into it I hope it will be the last remove we shall make till we return to dear old England!  Mr. Thomas who is perfectly infatuated with this country does not seem to anticipate such an event but I do and so do the girls and I feel confident that please God at some time or other such will be the case.  This is certainly a very fine country and capable of the highest improvements. Doubtless those who are born and brought up here will think of it as we do of our native country that there is no other like it in the world; but to those who know what England is and recollect the comfort there enjoyed it never can bear a comparison notwithstanding its luxuriant plains its magnificent trees its ranges of lofty hills and scenery often sublime. The soil too can doubtless be made to reproduce nearly all the fruits and vegetables of the known world. We have a garden in which we have abundance of the latter and some of the former in cultivation but the vegetables have not the sweetness of those in England and generally run to seed before they have attained half their size. This may perhaps be remedied by proper management the plants being like ourselves not yet acclimatised. [174]  All our goods had to be brought from the beach by hand as no such animal as a horse or a bullock was then in the colony. Now there are thousands of both with carts and every convenience for carrying baggage and passengers and lodgings either at inns or private houses; and yet those who have been accustomed to English comforts will find themselves very deficient of them in many respects unless they reckon among them hundreds of rats and mice thousands of fleas and flies millions of ants and mosquitoes and many other such annoyances.  I must now think of bringing this long letter to a close which I have been nearly a week in writing. I have so little time to spare that I could not sit to it long together. Since I began it Mr. Thomas has let a quarter of an acre which cost him ten guineas on a building lease for ten years for forty pounds a year and the tenant is to leave all building thereon at the expiration of the lease.  You were kind enough to offer to do anything you could for us. It is only a childish whim for I fancy I could relish a bit of Hampshire bacon more than anything to be got here and if you can prevail on Mr. Kinggate to pay you for two flitches out of my money from the bank interest I would be glad to have them. They should be well packed in a strong case for the meat there in summer is flyblown before it is cold and next day crawling with maggots.  I forgot to tell you that our population exceeds four thousand and several more ships are expected. Streets are rapidly forming in all directions in regular lines for the city is laid out on a particular plan which cannot be deviated from and in a few years this will be a magnificent place. We have already a church built of stone and of considerable dimensions and a clock has lately been fixed in it. This we find of great use as all our watches are stopped influenced I suppose by the climate. This is a general complaint. Mr. Thomas is making bricks on his country sections. These are in great demand and are now used in preference to mud. When we built our house stone was the only thing to be had. Of course our fuel is wood which I fear will soon become scarce. It is already very dear owing to the great consumption and although we have plenty on our lands the carriage is expensive. [175] No doubt this country contains much coal which will be very profitable to anyone who may discover it. We have abundance of goods of all kinds almost as cheap as in England but provisions are dear. Fresh meat 1s. per pound; fresh butter 3s. 6d.; salt butter 2s. 6d.; and bread 1s. 8d. per loaf; all of which have been munch more. We sometimes get fish. The water is not so good or so plentiful as in England. Neither is the air so bracing or refreshing. Frequently there is a hot and scorching wind which while it lasts is almost past endurance. With all the advantages of this fine country it will never bear comparison with dear old England where I hope to end my days in peace and comfort. This is all I desire for I have no ambition to be rich and though we may wish with the blessing of God to obtain a competence here we must go to England to enjoy.  Dear Father and Mother - You sent me word in your last letter there was a reform in England and I do assure you there is a reform in this country also for instead of working eight hours a day we have to work from 14 to 18 hours sometimes up to our knees in cold water till we are ready to sink with fatigue and if we dare to complain our hard hearted driver places us in a damp dungeon with an iron collar round our bare necks where we are kept for three days and nights on black bread and water and drops of wet continually falling on us.  This caused four of the convicts to refuse to go to work after coming out of the dungeon They complained of being ill the inhuman driver instantly struck one J Smith with a heavy thong which caused the gang to rise and dreadfully beat the drivers by which one of them died the same day.  The soldiers were immediately sent for and 47 of us taken into custody heavily ironed and kept all night under guard. The next day our trials commenced at 9 o'clock in the morning which occupied the whole day.  Nine were sentenced to die and 38 were sentenced to go to the mercury mines to work underground some for life some for 14 years and others for shorter periods.  Dear parents I hope this will be a warning to thousands when they read this awful execution of nine of my fellow-sufferers at one time. I myself am as innocent of the disturbance as a child unborn How dearly shall I prize my liberty if it shall please God to spare me for six more years - three years I had a good master who I prayed to God might be spared until the expiration of my 14 years In the month of November 1831 he died and I was turned over to a complete tyrant who employed 60 of us and used us worse than asses.  The only thing I fear is the mercury mines for most that are sent there die but I still trust in Almighty God to be my guide during the time I have to remain in this dreadful punishment.  Dear parents I often thought very light of transportation like my companions but assure them there is no one can imagine the torture we undergo.  On Saturday July 2nd at 7 in the morning we were all paraded in front of the scaffold. The nine unfortunate men came on with a firm step the chaplain taking leave of them. The executioner commenced tying them up to the beam by which they can hang 16 at a time.  James Smith transported from York for 14 years he commenced addressing his fellow convicts and declared he would rather die than be tormented in the way he was and hoped someone would inform his friends that he died happy - he would have said a deal more but the cap was forced over his face by the executioner.  William Jarvis for life from Nottingham John Nathan George Cox Edward Hall from Old Bailey London; Joseph Cook for seven years from Lincoln; Patrick Glue and Sylvester Mooney for life from Warwick; and William Brown for life from Leicester. The nine men seemed to cry out with one voice "We die happy!"  I would have said a great deal more but time will not permit. I still hope and trust that God will restore me to my native land once more as we are so narrowly watched.  I remain your loving though unfortunate son  WILLIAM THOMPSON.  It gives me very great pleasure to write to you my dear uncle and papa tells me I must send you the little drawing I have just finished this afternoon. Had I known it was to be sent to you I would have taken more pains with it.  We have got a governess now. I like it much better than being at school because I do not require to leave dear papa and mamma. I am learning to play the guitar; I found it very difficult at first. I made my fingers so sore and my arms ache but now my fingers have got quite hard at the points and I am getting on very well with it. I can play the accompaniment to "Ye Banks and Braes" and to "Ah Vous dirais" "Rondo" and a few other little airs. I am reading the history of England and have got the length of James the First who began the reign of the family of the Stuart's in England. I like my studies very much indeed; they are a pleasure to me. Miss Willis explains them as I go on which makes them easy to be understood. I think I like geography better than any of my other lessons. I have gone through the four quarters of the globe with Miss Willis and I begin again on Monday at the map of Europe and through each country beginning at England. My sister gets on very well with her lessons. She writes very well indeed and seems to have a great taste for drawing. She is also learning to play the guitar. I wrote to Grandmamma in December and since then I have written to aunt Jane. They cannot have got my letters yet and very much pleased I shall be if my aunt writes to me.  I am quite glad to have an opportunity of writing to you. I fancy I have got so much to communicate that I scarcely know which subject to commence first. I received your very nice letter when the drays came back from Sydney. I assure you I was very proud of it and Maggie thought herself quite a big lady because she had got a letter from you. She kissed it over and over again and went about showing it to every one.  I am making a basket of cardboard which I intend to present to Mr Ranken; it is nearly finished. I have painted an Indian tare on the one side and that pretty blue flower called native flax on the other. On one end I have put a little purple aster and on the other I have sketched the Dell in the Bush which I intend to paint. I think it will look very pretty. Miss Willis paints all the native flowers we can find for copies for us. If I have time I shall endeavour to take one from nature to send to you. I am getting on very well with the guitar and can play several long pieces besides three pretty waltzes and the accompaniments for three songs. I assure you I never look off the book now when I am playing. [179]  Miss Willis took a great deal of trouble with me at first. I am so glad I can do it now.  I write a long letter every week: it is sometimes three pages and sometimes four. I wish you were here to read them; I think they would amuse you there is something about you in nearly every one of them. In the one for this week I have you lost in the bush with Margaret Miss Willis and me at Hunter's River where we are supposed to be on a visit to Aunt Ogilvie after having spent a month in Sydney with Aunt Mcleod. I have written to her after going to Hunter's river: the letter this week is in answer to one I imagined Nancy to have written to me. [...]  Mamma is very busy getting trees planted out. She hopes you do not forget to collect all the seeds you can find for her. Our garden looks very well at present. There has been a great deal of rain. We have plenty of green peas and all kinds of vegetables. The fowls are not laying so I am little use as a hen-wife.  My Dear Sir  Much to my surprise in December last I received a particularly choice box of seeds and your polite note requesting a return of the native seeds of Augusta. In truth my dear Sir I much fear you have bestowed your liberality on one whose chief pleasure is her Garden but who does not enter the lists as a Florist much less a Botanist. If we were nearer I should much hesitate to accept so magnificent a present of so many long wished for Seeds and as all my former pursuits have necessarily been thrown aside (by the peremptory demand of my personal attention to my children and domestic drudgery) I feel that it will be long ere I can make any adequate return in Australian productions.  We have already collected some seeds as your box just arrived at the proper season. I am not even acquainted with the names of the native plants. I will however enclose a leaf and description of the flower in each paper. I had some dried plants by me from the Vasse a country apparently possessing some exquisite floral beauties which I feel most happy in being able to send and when I obtain a sufficiency to make up a small box I will despatch it and retain the large one until I am blest with more leisure than at present. Another impediment to our being able to procure seeds is our approaching removal to the Vasse where Captain Molloy's larger grant is situated but if you do not hear from me shortly I trust that you will not consider me negligent or unmindful of your humble request. I have put some of my old acquaintances (of whom there are but few in this busy Colony) in requisition and shall feel myself in duty bound to transmit to you their labours. [202] Although my brother George was anxious to employ me as a collector also my time is so much infringed on I have not as yet sent him any specimens.  It is with much regret that I leave dear Augusta. Our climate is so heavenly and the scenery is so superior to other settlements the flowers scentless but minutely beautiful. I am told we possess many unknown in the other parts of this Colony.  My dear Sir  Having at length complied with your desires to obtain Flowers & Seeds from Augusta I send you the result of my labours which at one time I had not the least hope of being able to do in a satisfactory manner.  Under the afflicting but unscrutable decree of an all-wise Providence we have recently been overwhelmed with the most bitter loss of our darling infant and only son of 19 months old by the aggravated death of drowning!! Painful as it is to record distance of time and place compels me.  Captain Molloy myself and his little sisters had been playing with him watching his vigorous and frolicsome mood just after breakfast on 11th November 1837 - We separated each to our necessary duties (that morning I was preparing to bake and churn). I left dear little Johnnie in my only servant girl's charge. She imagined from having seen him with Mary and near his Papa that he was still there. Mary appeared without him which instantly struck us as they were inseparable. Charlotte had put the dear child in his cradle and not finding him where she last saw him she asked Molloy then me. I had not seen him but answered he had his bell on (a little bell he wore round his waist in case of his straying into the bush). I instantly ran out and on her running up and down and not finding him I exclaimed: "Have you been to the well?" and became quite alarmed. Captain Molloy said "Do not frighten yourself he never goes there!" The fatal truth stole over me and on Charlotte going to the well she said: "Here's the Boy" and pulled out that darling precious child lifeless his flaxen curls and dripping his little countenance so placid he looked fast asleep but not dead; and we do not believe he really was so until some minutes later. But the medical man was at the Vasse and we knew not what to do. We tried every means of restoration but to no effect. And that lovely healthy child who had never known pain or sickness and who had been all mirth and joyousness 5 precious hours the last time we beheld him together was now a stiff corpse but beautiful and lovely even in DEATH the well is in full view of the windows about a stone's cast off concealed certainly by the virgillia and Mimosa trees. [203] He had not been absent ten minutes but from being a very fat heavy child and after eating an enormous breakfast I am told this increased his rapid step from life to Death; but had any Medical Man been near I am fully persuaded my little Johnny might have been saved.  Forgive me my dear Sir for thus using towards a Stranger the freedom and minute detail that Friendship warrants and desires. Our children and our necessary occupations fraught as they are with uncontemplated interest engross the sole attention and exertions of myself and my excellent husband; - Acute indeed was the blow and when you reflect how dead we are to the World and completely weaned from that sphere of pursuits actions and modes of life in which we used to move I trust you will pardon and excuse my entering thus egotistically and minutely on our present affliction.  Cattle Chosen  Feb 20th 1836  Yesterday afternoon my dearest Capel the Sally Anne entered our bay and amidst the variety of pursuits and the new faces which her arrival brought amongst us I have only succeeded in mastering the contents of your precious letters within the last two hours.  None of your packages have come down by the Sally Anne but the Fanny is hourly expected with the whole of your valuable cargo. I scarcely know how to thank you for us all as you deserve my own best Capel for all your exertions for us and the beautiful exactitude with which you execute commissions or rather anticipate them. By the Fanny we shall write again and shall then be able to notice everything more satisfactorily.  And now I must notice but briefly the severe afflictions with which it has pleased Providence to visit our beloved friends at Ballard Lodge. They need not me to point out where consolation alone can be found in such an hour of trial. I always feel it is so cruel to dwell upon the losses which however new to us have been softened by the lapse of time and the blessed effects of religion to those on whom the stroke has fallen. [233] To my dear Mother this has been a sudden and unexpected blow and by us who knew but little of him and yet so enough to love his name most tenderly his loss is felt as the loss of an affectionate relative. And poor Uncle Geroge too! it is sad indeed to find one's early friends and connections thus dropping round us. It makes one look almost with impatience to the time when we may too "depart in peace".  Oh Capel it is a fearful thing to glance one's eye down the page of an English letter and to shudder as each dear name meets the eye hardly knowing by what distressing intelligence it may be succeeded. But why do I dwell upon feeling my dear friends which your own hearts have already understood. When there are still so many spared us for a meeting even in this world. I am wrong in encouraging the melancholy which cannot always be suppressed. [...]  You will be pleased to hear that we are all quite well and delighted with Cattle Chosen. It is indeed a sweet place and improvements are daily springing up around us but there is so much to do that to an English eye we still should appear sadly unsettled. The house which we now occupy would strike at a distance as a comfortable substantial looking mansion. It is white and the four upper windows in the upper story [sic] give it a cheerful and finished look which perhaps it does not quite deserve.  As you approach it the garden well fenced in and productive in all English vegetables would almost make you forget that you are in Australia. You would stop to admire Phoebe's cottage which is the first building after the barracks in the precincts of Cattle Chosen. John's house near the garden very comfortably fitted up as a bedroom for himself and Vernon and ornamented with shelves containing his books would almost make you in love with the little hermitage by following the garden fence you approach the cottage shared between Lenox and Alfred. All these buildings have chimneys and as the winter is now approaching a bright fire not infrequently blazes on their hearths.  I have now brought you nearly to our own house which you gain by skirting the stock yard bounded by a fence on two sides and by the river on the others. Our sitting room is a well sized and well proportioned room which we are gradually rendering comfortable and civilized. The walls of wattle and daub have been most beautifully plastered so that not a crack is visible. The floor is of clay and the front door opens upon a pretty cheerful looking pasture land ornamented with some magnificent trees but not heavily timbered like Augusta. [234] Our books are now arranged on shelves extending the whole length of the room indeed by the front door we have manufactured a species of couch covered with your drugget dear Capel.  The piano occupies its place under the window our two sea chests which Vernon has painted white stand in a corner and act as a kind of closet. Our noble chimney occupying nearly one side of the room gives promise of many a brilliant winter blaze. This is as yet our only finished room. The room upstairs forms a dormitory for all the females of the family. My little Mother has her cot and we three girls each her cot her toilet etc.  The windows command a pleasant view of the river up on one side with the country in its unredeemed state which is so completely of the Park like description that you would scarcely believe that a year and ten months only had elapsed since the improving hand of the European was first extended over its glades. This side of the picture is full of beauty and yet I dwell with more interest and delight on the opposite scene which offers to our view the little hamlet our garden our hayrick and our stockyard. It is more esssentially English and it bears the mark of daily improvements.  My dear boys having rested from our labours are standing round the cooking fire which according to Colonial customs is kindled out of doors. Our fowls have been duly fed and are at roost. The geese have returned from their evening stroll the ducks my peculiar charge have quacked their last quack and are settling themselves to sleep. Bessy has penned up her turkeys young and old and the signal for the last meal is expected by everyone. At a short distance the cow bells are faintly heard and almost at the same moment dear Alfred's voice pealing forth some favourite song surely never meant for cowherd's lips. "Wilt thou say farewell love" and "Bushman's Dream" are the rage at present as the sounds approach the gates of the stock yard are thrown open and the business of milking commences.  I wish you could see our beautiful sleek cattle amounting to 15 in number. Our pretty goats too have been long awaiting admittance and after a few graceful antics have thrown themselves beneath our windows or close to the door for the night but often in the summer season suffered to run loose as they are sure to return for water from the pond in our stock yard.  The little filly (Cape!) is really a beauty and a more animated and interesting spectacle than our farmyard in the cool soft evening hour is surely not often to be seen and I turn from it with an emotion of gratitude and happiness which only requires the participation of those we love in England to be rendered complete. [235]  Within the fence all our offices are to be collected the store which is already built the dairy which is to be our next work and the fowl house which at present occupies our two builders John and Lenox and their valuable assistant our little Mother who has regularly converted herself into the builders lad. I think now I have rendered the demesne of Cattle Chosen fairly familiar to your imaginations I will pass on to the inhabitants . [...]  I have in the course of this letter not mentioned Phoebe she is wonderfully well tho the marks of age becoming more apparent as the years advance. Our arrival has made her quite happy. She undertakes the greatest part of the washing but the assistance of one of us is constantly requisite. She makes and bakes our bread and butter at present with the aid of one of us in churning. Besides this she cooks for herself and Ludlow now our only manservant. Everything else devolves upon ourselves and our duties are divided into three departments. Cook Housemaid and Chambermaid which offices we change monthly. Add to this the care of the poultry making and mending for the boys the household and ourselves to say nothing of catching fleas which we are gradually exterminating and you will not call us idle.  The great bell erected just before our windows awakens us from our slumbers at daylight breakfast is prepared as soon as the sitting room is put to readiness our milk boiled and our vegetable soup which we term combustible all in order. My little Mother is never absent. After breakfast the boys separate to their various duties. John and Lenox to their building or carpentering Vernon to the garden Alfred to the cows. Bessie prepares the vegetables for dinner. Mary clears away the breakfast things and arranges the sitting room and Fanny armed with her own little dusting pan (a present from Mr Toby) and brush goes to the different rooms of the boys to make their little dwellings look as comfortable as possible for which she is to be rewarded by a pat of the shoulder in the evenings and the epithet of a most admirable girl.  After arranging our own room a more elaborate business I generally find that Mary and Bessy have finished their avocations and feel only too happy if I can sit down with them but Phoebe's relentless voice often claims my attention to wash to hang out for her which now becomes very fatiguing or to fold the clothes and distribute them to the different houses. At 12 Bessie's great bell summons us from our work and dinner succeeds.  Then comes the feeding of the poultry. The turkeys falling to Bessie's share the ducks to mine and the cocks and hens to Mary's. The dinner is concluded consisting generally of salt pork and every variety of vegetable to which Bessie does ample justice the plates dishes are washed put away and we all retire to take a short siesta or a little rest with a book which often falls from a tired hand whilst the unconscious eye not infrequently closes on complete oblivion. [236]  At three the boys return to their labours the heat of the day has passed away and we again settle ourselves to work for the afternoon. These are long and very pleasant and we work till the setting sun calls in our animals to be fed and settled for the night. The boys also come in and our last meal I cannot call it tea as that beverage is now confined to Mamma is in progress.  The cows are all milked and the horses are praised and petted and then we all sit down to our bread and milk supper. We retire early but generally have service in the evening and conversation without end in which England and her connections claims her part. At present my little Mother is living low on account of her eyes allowing herself a cup of your delicious tea my own Tip and some of Mr Turner's biscuit which is the only description of bread she now patronizes. We younger colonists do not complain of leaven bread in fact we generally prefer it. The baking pan dear Tippo and Fan will be most useful. We left our camp oven with Charlie and I at least have grumbled ever since. The cover for the lamp is indeed ingenious I think we shall not wait till the other is broken before we use it.  And I must conclude this long prosey concern who would read it who did not love me as you do? God bless you my darling it is getting dark and I have written till I am quite stiff. I fear I shall not be able to keep a journal here I have no time for writing excepting Sundays and then I am quite bewildered at the accumulation of events which press upon me...  We are now busy in making up the last gown you sent for Phoebe for her birthday the 5th of next month. We like our merinos of all things. We intend making up our shawl dresses sent by dear Mrs Jones and the Clergy school girls to appear on the arrival of our next batch of visitors but we have so much to do I don't think we shall ever be vain again.  Don't you fail in keeping yourself in readiness as if you had been here with me I should never see a poor day either yourself or myself and I hope that you will use the utmost of your power in trying to have my sentence mitigated as I expect you won't fail in this request before you come out to this country. This is a very fine country not a finer in the world and a very wholesome climate [...] you need not be any way uneasy of the voyage as it will be the outside of it if you are three months on sea I am with the best gentlemen in this colony and the wealthiest. I want for nothing [...] The two Egans are here with me on this farm where I am stationed. The two Egans are doing well. They are both in good health and desire to be remembered to their friends. The climate is purty hot. The Blacks are very numerous in this country and are quite savage. This is a very fruitful country. There is three crops in the year growed here so me wife there is nothing troubling me but for want of your presence which I hope I shortly will have. I hope that you wont delay as soon as you receive this that you will answer it [...] the gentlemen I am with they are I assure you very fond of me that whatever I require from them they give it me. We have got only one clergyman in this country which I am sure there would be ten wanted there the country is so large. As soon as you receive this you wont delay in seeing the gentlemen that will have my sentence mitigated [...] Don't be in anyway dismayed we shall be comfortable yet please God [...]   if I had my liberty I would not go home for three or four years so I request of you to prepare yourself and come out as soon as you can for I can make as much money in three or four years as would support me without working whilst I live [...] I am in a factuary making soap and candles since I came to the Country and as happy as I please. I don't expect that my son John will be let with you so send him in the prison man ship [...] fail not to come for you will be as happy as you were in all your life [...] Dont forget bringing Peggy out [...] Tell my brother John to come if he can.  18 DEC. [1836]. - At half-past nine got under way for the harbour; at six we entered the first reach and came to anchor and the Tom O'Shanter got under way for the harbour; about eleven she struck on the edge of the western sand spit after passing the shallowest part not being sufficiently to windward and the flood tide catching her on the weather bow canted her on the sand from which she might have been hove off in a short time for not half her own length from where she touched there were three fathoms water. The only hawser they had was an old coir one which gave way the first strain. She laid here till the 22nd during which time all hands of both ships were employed in lightening her and pumping. On the 22nd about four p.m. she was hove off and both ships made sail for the higher part of the harbour preceeding both ships in my hatch boat. It was really beautiful to look back and see two British ships for the first time sailing up between the mangroves in fine smooth water in a creek that had never borne the construction of the marine architect and which at some future period might be the channel of import and export of a great commercial capital. We anchored for the night about six p.m the Tam O'Shanter having taken the mud laid till about midnight when the flood tide having floated her off she passed us and brought up till daylight. Having now got both ships up the harbour I shall leave my narrative of the maritime part of this expedition and proceed to my work on shore.  Dec. 24. - Walked over the plain to that part of the river where Mr Kingston had pitched his tent with a small party of the surveying labourers. My first opinions with regard to this place became still more confirmed by this trip having traversed over nearly six miles of a beautiful flat I arrived at the river and saw from this a continuation of the same plain for at least six miles more to the foot of the hills under Mount Lofty which heights trending to the sea in a south-westerly direction were there terminated about four or five miles south of the camp ground at Holdfast Bay affording an immense plain of level and advantageous ground for occupation. Having settled tome matters for future proceedings with Mr Kingston I left him and returned to the brig at six p.m to make arrangements for finally leaving the ship.  Dec. 28. - I left the ship and pitched my tent near Mr Kingston's at the side of the river. I heard of the Governor's arrival but having much to do had not time to go to Holdfast Bay and meet him.  Dec. 29. - Employed nearly all day examining the plain and looking out for the best situation for the capital. I was delighted with the appearance of the country and the supply of fresh water we were certain of possessing; at four p.m I had the pleasure of seeing the Governor and Mr Fisher and we agreed on going the following day to look at the place I had selected for the capital.  Dec. 30. - His Excellency the Governor arrived at half past nine and we walked together that he might see the spot I had selected. His Excellency expressed his sense of the beauty of the place but said it was too far from the harbour and after much reasoning on both sides I agreed to walk with him by the river and see if another spot nearer the harbour could be found more convenient for trade although it might lose much in other points; we determined at last on placing the capital near the river about a mile and a half lower down the bank. During examination Mr Fisher joined us and expressed his gratification at seeing so fine a country. [171] On examining the following day some distance up and down the river I saw evident marks of the river overflowing its banks and this made me resolve on the first site I had chosen my instructions from the Commissioners being peremptory as to the responsibility of this choice devolving upon myself - for although I was allowed to pay respect to the Governor's opinion yet my own judgement on this point was to be paramount and conclusive.  Wilachra Creek Dec 3 - 1837  My dear Brother & Sister  I should have written to you long since but I expected to move farther north & Dan talked of going to Port Lincoln to purchase some sheep but his men mutinied which prevented his going. I was very much obliged to them as I felt very uneasy at his going as the Blacks have killed several people there I fear the daily Employment in the bush wont [sic] interest you much. I lived all last year with the children at the old run we get up at six in summer the children are put in a cold bath by the Irish servant girl every morning all the year then breakfast then I teach them Spelling reading writing figures untill one when we dine then needlework at four when the children go for the Cows at five we have tea and put the calves up feed the fowls and Dimmy reads the Bible and we go to bed this is the way we spend the summer we make our own bread and yeast with hops I have 3 Cows & we scald the milk when it is twelve hours old and scim it when it is 48 hours old which makes the cream very easy to churn in cold weather increases the quantity of butter and keeps the milk quite sweet in the very hot weather for the children to drink when the rain comenced Dan sent down a flock of sheep with the rams which the children were obliged to mind then our troubles began nothing will please a shepherd and we had the yard to shift every day with the servant girl 62 hurdles & sometimes raining all the time as Dan stayed at the new run and our doing so saved 18/ a week for a hut-keeper the first of September Dan and all the sheep shearers drays horses Bullocks & & came packed us all up and sent us off to his lambing station as he wanted to shear in the house as it was built for that purpose in a month the shearing was over and we were ordered to pack up and be ready to start to the new run we sent all the things on the bullock dray and we followed in the horse dray driven by the girl and Dan rode after with the cows as James started a week before with two flocks of sheep and Uncle Robert who came while we were sharing with his son he left his daughter with mother in Adelaide - ... we rested for a forthnight at one of the winter stations and Dan went in search of the Bullock dray. he found it broken down he had to ride 60 miles to borrow one. he came back in a week and took us over finders range [sic] where a white woman or child never went before you may judge of the terrible journey we had when it took two days to go 10 miles walking nearly all the way and draging the luggage up every hill we crossed as the horse could not take it up we stoped 2 months at another winter station where the water lasts untill Ja[nuary] while Dan went to town and got up building materi[al] and built the kitchen wing of a house on the Willachra creek. [97]  My Dear Brother  Time when fully employed flies quick and day after day passes almost imperceptibly but as Coulton says "Wisdom walks before it opportunity with it and repentance behind" had we the gift of prescience we are apt to think we could live to better purpose doing this and omitting the other so had I come out here 5 years ago in all probality I might now be rich but had I stayed at Richmond I might now have been in your much loved society but were you all here I would then give the preference to this place as it is I may not be rich but having health & Gods blessing on my labor shall live with rather less care & anxiety than in England and my children may reap the fruits if they are industrious the want of which is often seen in the victims of the Emigration Society a parcel of useless drones who eat up the food without increasing the resources of the colony coming here with high expectations which when they find not realized they take to drinking & both men & women for the most part are living nuisances - [98] indeed we have quite mechanics enough of the lower order the poor are sent from England to pauperize this Colony and relieve your parishes at the expense of this we have of late had large importations of them and furniture but which furniture does not appear to affect us at present as on Account of the cheapness of cedar we are able to make up furniture at less expence and nearly as good looking being all solid it stands well while the english being veneered it is constantly coming to pieces but to obtain a profit & get sale for his furniture a man must labor himself or he will gain but little a good workman will not work for another under 7/ or 8/ - a day while many indifferent hands work on their own account and do not average so much - I expect you have heard we have a new Governor Sir John Franklin he was received with every testimony of respect much is expected from him and I fear more than is possible to be realized as of course he will act from orders which however detrimental to the Colony must be adhered to as for instance it is much desired to see the present system of land regulations abolished we see occasionally a wealthy propritor making a large purchase or squaring up his property by buying a mile or two of rocky tier to save him fences - but the country beyond is but little explored - under the present system a man may spend some weeks or months in Seeking for land & when put up to sale it is snatched from him by the wealthy or indolent or the land jobbing Jew the thing most desirable appears to be the sale of land at fixed prices varying from 3/ - to 5/ - per acre with personal occupancy and improvements as the indispensable conditions at present there are many estates of from 1 to 5000 acres and some even 12000 acres and do not cultivate corn enough for the consumption of their own Laborers but the whole in a state of nature for sheep runs allowing one acre for one sheep and for the most part boundary fences of rock or rivulet at once defeating the designs of the legislature & making us tributary for corn &c but in many places the land if obliged to be fenced in is not worth having at a gift and therefore requires to be searched for if required for small farms there has been great speculations in Land and in many cases losses have ensued the land has been thought to be invaluable through a sort of mania but which bubble has now burst as better land is found at Port Phillip & other places and then as to Town Allotments the holders have kept them back so long that now these are falling instead of rising except in very good situations those who came out about 10 years ago have enriched themselves by obtaing free grants of land and Town allotments and selling them without any improvements except fencing which has produced them thousands many of whom have returned to England leaving others to fight about titles and quit rents to their ruin a linen draper of the name of Cameron who lately returned to England has sent out 74 packages of chairs and another of the name of Welch sent out Cabinet furniture bought of Siddons to the amount of £950 some of which is selling off by auction another Linen draper of the name of Robertson left about 2 months ago intending to send out goods of all kinds his brother managing the business in his absence as they are partners - there have been many failures here and not to be wondered at as many transact their business in a careless mad headed way and then escape by benefit as they call it of the insolvent act two Carpenters fail'd to the Amt of £7000 they kept from 20 to 30 men and kept no books of course their contracts were lower than others and they took care to draw money in advance & left some of them unfinished - [99]  I go on much as usual in business but there is but little doing just now owing to a stagnation in the money market. I think I keep one man and an assigned servant who is very useful as he polishes & we are very comfortable having all the necessaries & some of the luxuries of life for which I wish to be thankful to the Great Giver of all good we have a nice little garden out of which we had some melons a short time ago apples we have bought at 5/- a bushel potatoes from 5/- to 6/- the Cwt - we all live on very good terms having each others welfare at heart the business is carried on in my name and David has what he can do. James works for him now as a journeyman and has one apprentice I have the trouble of looking after the orders & the money for which he allows me 5 per cent - Mr Cole has plenty of work in the building line he generally attends Mr Price (Independent) D.B. the Scotch church & I Mr D [...] the two first are rather of the modern stamp but Mr Dowling has a very [...] congregation chiefly his own family (about 20 in all) but he Recieves a Stipend [?] as well from Goverment as Catechist or teacher to the convicts of as I have heard £150 per annum he is going to build a chapel Mr Price is building one as large as that in the vineyard without gallery so we shall have plenty of chapels - Since writing the above the Governor has very properly stopped Emigration of the poor for the present that Marshall ought to be hanged for the misery he has entailed on hundreds of poor sent out here and most of the female emigrants are on the Town - it is the rich settlers we want no one ought to come without some little money if it is only to keep them till they get into employ. I will send you a paper in which you will see a letter written by our Cole on emigration which is worth reading - people imajine [sic] there is employ as soon as they arrive & high wages forgetting it is only by strict economy & denial of many things which they may have accustomed themselves to that money is saved for London porter is 1/- per pot and gin 7d a glass butter 2/- per lb cheese 1/6 lb all of which may be dispensed with there are so many of the convicts here equal to the free labor that they get employed first being cheaper & on the whole as little trouble as the greater number of the free in general are both idle & saucy as well as intemperate habits they contract on board of ship in coming out.  SUNDAY October 17. - Leave Mr. Hume's station (the last which is occupied by the colonists) without a guide; travel twelve miles S.60' W. (through a country affording good pasturage for cattle thinly wooded and well watered) [...]  Tuesday October 19 [...] About eleven o'clock having crossed the plains they enter a forest country when having travelled over an almost perfect level of about five miles and a half the face of the country to their surprise became at once changed - broken irregular and precipitous; so that it was a considerable time before they could find a pass for the carts.  At three they found themselves on the banks of the Murrumbidgee River [...]  Saturday October 23. - Immediately on leaving the banks of the Murrumbidgee they commence crossing Obliquely and in a zigzag course (the mean direction of which is S.W.) a moderately steep but high limestone range lying nearly N. and S. (parallel with the river at this spot) thinly wooded but well covered with good grass. From the summit of this range an extensive view of the river is obtained.  Tuesday October 26. - This morning was occupied in forwarding the supplies as well as the carts across the stream - when they again pitched their tent not far from its left bank. Mr. Hovell was now employed in making arrangements for leaving the carts (which from the mountainous character of the country before them it had become impracticable to take further) and in concealing along the banks of the stream such of the supplies as they perceived it would be impossible to convey with them. Meanwhile Mr. Hume with one of the men proceeds in a N.W. direction in quest of a pass through the western barrier of the valley [...]  Friday October 29. - At sunrise Mr. Hume with one of the men ascends a high hill not far from the tent in order to obtain a view of their projected route. From this is seen an opening in the direction S. half W similar apparently to the one through which they had passed on the 25th instant. Thither a distance of nearly two miles they proceed when this opening is discovered to be merely a mountain chasm of not more than ten feet wide. The precipitous sides of this are upwards of a hundred feet in height and the bottom of it forms the bed of a small stream at present about two or three feet deep. [70] Their route up this is of course impracticable. They now therefore retrace their steps about a mile and a half towards the stream and then commence their ascent of a mountain branch from the main (or W. barrier) range. After two or three hours of much fatigue to the cattle by pursuing a zigzag route they arrive at the summit of the most elevated part of the range near them. This proved unexpectedly to be a broad flat table land and this again so thickly wooded that their view to the westward was utterly intercepted while in the direction S.E which was more open the country appeared unusually mountainous and irregular [...]  Saturday October 30. [...] The country to the S. and S.W. becomes somewhat more open than usual and the timber always good continues to improve as they advance.  Sunday October 31. [...] At one or two o'clock they had ascended a considerable eminence; when they unexpectedly found that they were not far from the precipitous and deep descent that forms it seems one of the terminations of the table range along the summits of which they had been travelling the last three days. [...] From the spot at which they commence their descent the bearings of the most remarkable mountains round them were - first a very high pyramidal mountain S. by W. half W distant about five or six miles; secondly a range of mountains terminating not far from them at the river apparently a continuation of that table range on which they had just been travelling; and thirdly continuous ranges of mountains extending to the utmost verge of the horizon in the direction N.W.  Monday November 8. - At half-past seven o'clock they had recommenced their progress proceeding along the stream in a south-westerly direction the stream becoming gradually broader and deeper as they advanced. About five miles from their place of departure it is broken by three several perpendicular falls each from about ten to fifteen feet in height and between twenty and thirty feet distant from each other. Two miles beyond these falls their progress on the banks of this stream is arrested by the mountainous range forming the southern barrier of the valley and which on each side of it rises precipitously out of the stream. [71]  Messrs. Hovell and Hume having ascended close to the stream with some difficulty about half the height of this range in order to be the better enabled to decide as to their future operations were suddenly surprised by a sight to the utmost degree magnificent. Mountains of a conoidal form and of an apparently immense height and some of them covered about one-fourth of their height with snow were now seen extending semicircularly from the S.E. to S.S.W. at the supposed distance of about twenty miles. The sun was bright (it was about ten or eleven in the forenoon) and gave them an appearance the most brilliant.  The mountains which they had hitherto seen compared with these stupendous elevations were no more than hillocks; from which also their form as well as their other general characters rendered them not the less dissimilar.  The men had no sooner heard of this unexpected and interesting scene than catching the enthusiasm they ran to the spot where the travellers were standing and were not less than themselves surprised and delighted at this preeminently grand and beautiful spectacle.  The stream itself where last seen was running S. towards the newly discovered mountains. The space between these mountains (which have been designated the South Australian Alps) and the spot where they stood consists of a mountainous and hilly region which becoming gradually of less and less elevation terminates midway in a thinly wooded undulating surface extending parallel with the mountains on either side of it..  Tuesday November 16. - Soon after sunrise they recommence their journey and having proceeded three miles and a half S. (the land gradually sloping as they advanced) arrive suddenly on the banks of a fine river. This was named "The Hume."  This beautiful stream is found to be not less than eighty yards in breadth apparently of considerable depth; the current about three miles an hour; the water for so considerable a current clear. [72]  The river itself is serpentine the banks clothed with verdure to the water's edge; their general heights various but seldom either more or less than eight or nine feet; inclined or precipitous as they happen by the bendings of the stream to be more or less exposed to the action of the current. On each side of the river is a perpetual succession of lagoons extending generally in length from one to two miles and about a quarter of a mile in breadth. These which are situate alternately on each side of the river within those elbows and projections which are formed by its windings often for miles together preclude any approach to its banks [...]  Unable to devise any means of crossing the river and in hope of discovering some practicable ford they now commence their progress (west) down the stream..  Wednesday November 17. - Messrs. Hovell and Hume take with them two of the men and proceed seven miles further down the stream still in search of some practicable crossing place but without success - the stream becoming as they advance of somewhat increased magnitude; its banks more beautifully regular and perhaps of somewhat increased height [...]  At four o'clock the party had returned to the tent having determined on proceeding on the morrow in the contrary direction (up the river) in quest of the same object.  Friday November 19. - They resume their route (which they commenced the day before yesterday) up the river (E.).  The general appearance of the country together with that of the soil is rich and beautiful. The grass having apparently been burnt early in the season and being now in full seed is fresh and luxuriant frequently as high as their heads and seldom lower than their waists. On both sides of the river the 'bell-birds' are 'ringing merrily' a treat hitherto unusual.  Saturday November 20. - Weather fine; this morning they cross the river: this they effect by means of a temporary boat hastily constructed (of wicker covered with tarpauling) for the occasion and by four in the afternoon every thing including the cattle had been landed on the opposite bank. [73] At five they leave the banks of the stream travel two miles and a half before dark and then halt on a patch of fine forest land [...]  Sunday November 21. [...] they resume their route passing S.W. over the extremities of a range of hills a collateral branch of the great North and South Alpine chain from the southern aspect of which they perceive a fresh series of lagoon and swamp and creek and at the short distance of only four or five miles from the last arrive on the banks of another small river similar in size and other respects to the former [...]  Monday November 22. - Noon warm morning and evening temperate. This morning they crossed the river availing themselves of an immense tree that lay extended from bank to bank and which with a rope stretched along it as a hand-rope formed a tolerably good bridge. The cattle are now so accustomed to the water that they pass without either reluctance or difficulty roped together lengthwise so that as the hindmost is entering the water the headmost coming out of it at the opposite side. By half-past eight they had completed the passage of the river and had soon afterwards again started when they advance about five miles S.W between two ranges of hills [...]  Tuesday November 23. - The bullocks and horses having strayed they start this morning later than usual; when in the short distance of only three miles having had to traverse the ends of several ranges of hills they arrive at a fine forest. The grass good the land excellent and thinly wooded with timber-trees of the most valuable description chiefly the stringy-bark and the box-gum [...]   Wednesday November 24.. The entire space to the eastward up to the very mountains consists of an open forest country indented along its centre by the course of the creek. The grass every where is quite withered the land parched and the creek nearly dry; at ten they halt on its banks. They travel this morning seven miles and a quarter. At four they resume their march through a pleasant level country. The pasturage fine some of it excellent and in a moderately good state. [...] The banks and all the neighbouring country (which is extremely beautiful) consist of the finest possible soil; scantily wooded but with timber trees of the most valuable description. [74] The river comes from the eastern chain of mountains and very probably joins the Hume though perhaps at a considerable distance to the westward. They name this river the 'Ovens' after the deceased Major Ovens the late Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane's Private Secretary.  Thursday November 25. [...] Four miles and a half from the Ovens they reach the summits of a range whence they obtain a view of that river coming from the east by north and evidently deriving its waters from the Alpine chain. One of these snow-capped mountains is now in sight bearing south-east distant about twenty miles; there is also a singularly formed mountain in the same direction but much nearer which from its shape they name 'Mount Buffalo.' [...]  Wednesday December 1. - At daylight the thermometer 41° just previously the weather had been felt uncomfortably cold a circumstance which they had attributed partly to their present exposed and unusually elevated situation partly to the prevalence of a south-west wind. The weather which of late had been threatening rain has now become fine. Before they descend the heights they take advantage of an eminence to obtain a view of the surrounding country. Towards the east was observed a flat forest country apparently divided by a river; three several plains were also seen in this direction the nearest of which seemed to be distant about four miles the most distant about twelve; these plains appeared to be encircled with mountains in which there was a gap or chasm the outlet most probably of some river. From south-east to south the country is extremely rugged and broken and it is only in the direction north-west that it appears favourable for their future progress [...]  Thursday December 2nd. [...] they again observe that gap in the mountains which on Tuesday bore south-east by south now offering them apparently a favourable passage: it had still as when first observed every appearance of being the outlet of some river. Hither therefore they directed their course and having ascended some ranges found the country improved as they advanced. [75] It was however mostly burnt and therefore not seen to much advantage: near sunset they reach a spot of about two acres in extent on which the grass had fortunately escaped the ravages of the flames and here they remain the night not far from a creek.  Friday December 3. - Proceeding south-west along the course of the creek twelve or thirteen miles they arrive as they had expected on the banks of another river. The country on its sides is extremely beautiful clothed with a luxuriant herbage and both hill and lowland thinly wooded. This river they cross as on a former occasion by means of a large tree which lay extended from bank to bank. But access to the water for the cattle is somewhat difficult the banks being at least twelve feet in height and perpendicular. The river has appended to it the usual series of creeks and lagoons and in some places (particularly on the north or right bank) the terminations of some high ranges come down so close to the water that there is no practicable pass at least for cattle. On the banks of this stream they remain the night and prepare for passing it in the morning. Some fish are caught in the course of the evening similar to those in the Lachlan; and they kill a kangaroo. This river has been named "the Hovell."  Saturday December 4.. [...] They now continue their journey in the direction south-west through an agreeable and picturesque country; the soil good and the grass though withered abundant studded with here and there a tree just sufficient to afford shelter for cattle [...]  Tuesday December 7. - Proceed two miles and a half south-west across the ranges and then come to a creek which derives its waters from the mountains to the eastward; the stream strong the bottom pebbly and the waters evidently subject to occasional and very considerable risings. [76] This they name 'the King-parrot Creek' having observed here for the first time during their journey the bird of that name.  Wednesday December 8. [...] Messrs. Hovell and Hume now propose to themselves the following plan: to make a fresh attempt on foot to cross the range in a south-west direction and if successful to return for the cattle and persevere in pursuing that course until next Saturday se'nnight by which time should the country yet appear unfavourable for the further prosecution of their original design as they will then have left flour enough only for five weeks' consumption they purpose returning and completing the outward journey by an examination as far as circumstances may permit of the course of the Hovell.  Thursday December 9. - Agreeably to their proposed plan Messrs. Hovell and Hume start this morning at an early hour furnished with provisions except animal food for four days. Animal food they had none not even kangaroo for although they had seen several of these animals it had not been possible to capture any in consequence of the loss of some of their dogs and the wretched condition of those which remained.  Proceeding in the direction south-west about seven o'clock they commence ascending a mountain (part of the same range they had ascended yesterday) which from the repulse they subsequently experienced they afterwards named 'Mount Disappointment' at ten they arrive at the top and crossing their track of yesterday commence descending its western aspect; two hours they were employed in scrambling literally on their hands and knees over brush and rock when having advanced about two miles they halt at noon near a small spring; they then renew their efforts when to add to their difficulties they had the misfortune to encounter that species of long grass which is known in the colony by the name of the cutting-grass; this was between four and five feet high the blade of it an inch and a half broad and the edges exquisitely sharp and fine enough to inflict a severe wound. It is a similar plant to that of the same name which is found in the Illawarra district. [77] Uncertain of their route fatigued themselves lacerated and their clothes torn at every step it had at length become literally impracticable to proceed they now therefore return towards the tent and remain the night near a small spring after having succeeded in penetrating four miles into this dreadful scrub and fourteen from their station in the morning [...]  Friday December 10. [...] At two the whole party again proceed on their journey and following the course of the King-parrot Creek pass along the plain of which they had taken the bearings the day before yesterday [...]  Saturday December 11. - This morning they continue their progress about W.N.W.  Monday December 13. - They travel to-day sixteen miles; the first seven miles upwards along the creek (when meeting with a practicable ford they cross it). The remainder of the distance in the direction of south by east. The land on the bank of the creek not good the grass scanty and the timber indifferent. In the latter division of their journey they had to traverse several ranges the last of which the Jullian so named after a friend of Mr. Hovel's appeared to be what is termed a dividing range; the waters of which on the north side run to the northward (most probably to join the Hovell). Those on its southern aspect proceed to the southward and very probably discharge themselves into the sea [...]  Tuesday December 14. - Travel twenty miles in a southerly direction - the first part of their journey through a meadow of some miles in circumference thence up a high insulated hill named 'Bland's Mount' from which they obtain a view of several extensive plains reaching from west to south-east separated from each other by patches of forest land. To the southward the country appears level but interspersed here and there with hills of a conical form. The soil in all this tract of country excellent [...]  Thursday December 16. - This morning they cross the river or creek without difficulty the water not taking the cattle more than chest high. Mr. Hume names this stream the 'Arndell' after the late Dr. Arndell the father of Mrs. Hovell. [78] They now proceed S.W. by S. through the plains about six miles when they are struck with an appearance respecting which they cannot decide whether it is that of burning grass or of distant water. They now therefore having altered their course to south at four o'clock have the gratification satisfactorily to determine that the appearance which had just created so much doubt is that of the latter object; and which leaving the river a short distance and directing their march from S.W. to S.S.W they soon ascertain to be part of the sea - the so long and ardently-desired bourn of their labours [...]  Friday December 17. [...] The natives here in their form and features very much resemble those about Sydney their manners and customs appeared very similar and they have the same kind of weapons. Their language however seemed totally different as to words from that of the Sydney natives or those about Jervis' Bay though in sound it is much the same.  They did not seem astonished at the horses or bullocks though evidently much afraid of the latter and even dreadfully alarmed if the bullocks although at a considerable distance were looking towards them.  The harbour or bay consists of an immense sheet of water its greatest length extending east and west with land which had the appearance of an island to the southward lying across its mouth but which in fact is a peninsula with a very low isthmus connecting it to the western shore.  The soil throughout the plains appeared good in some places to a considerable extent and to afford a particularly fine dry sheep pasturage [...]  jany 1st [1837] Sunday  The girls with Mary Davies & myself went to St James Church in the morng. Phoebe walked to church in the aft & returned with Mrs Jones in the omnibus. A thunderstorm in the evening. My dear husband left home the 25th of last month for Bong Bong Goulburn Yass &c.  jany 3  A hot wind & very large fire in the bush on the North Shore. I heard from my dear husband from Mr Throsby's. The heat was so overcoming that the girls & I laid down on our beds after dinner. Walked in the verandah after tea & heard the Band playing at the Basoon. [47]  jany 4th  Mrs James Busby called to take leave. Very hot. Thunder & rain nearly all day. Cleared up towards evening. Mrs Scott Mrs J. Mitchell & Capt. Crozier called. Another thunderstorm between 9 and 10 o'clock. old Green came.  jany 5th  Mrs Jones & Mrs Ferriter called. Also Capt. Hobson. After dinner I went with the 3 girls to call on Mrs Macquoid. Miss Macquoid Louisa & Dickey went for a walk with us down to the point - the two latter drank tea with us. Very cool & pleasant all day.  jany 8th  We went to St. James Church in Mr Macquoid's carriage & walked home. My dear Brother's letters reached me with the melancholy but not unexpected intelligence of my dearest Mother's death on the 23d Augt last. Very thankful am I to Almighty God that she was to the very last free from pain & although I was not permitted to be with her I bow with submission to the will of God & with a grateful heart for all his mercies humbly trusting to meet him my dear Father & all we love on earth in a better world.  jany 9th  Mary Davies went to Sydney with Mr Macquoid who kindly offered to assist me getting our mourning for us. Several friends called but I could not see them.  jany 11th  I wrote to my dear husband to inform him of my dear Mother's death. John Davies dined with his sister & went to Parramatta after dinner. Mr. Cowper kindly called on me after dinner & I had a long chat with him about my dear Mother. I also saw Mrs & Miss Macquoid. Dear Julia's birthday 12 years old.  jany 13th  Mr & Mrs Mackey called. Hot wind all day which lasted till 8 o'clock when we had a Brickfielder [the wind which came from the area of the brickfields]. Got another letter from my dear husband from Capt. Ross's he having been detained there by illness & was prevented going on to Yass.  jany 15th  Harry got our mourning we went for the service to St James's Church in Jones's carriage Boyd went home to see his wife was taken ill & was not able to return to us. Young also very poorly. [48]  jany 18th  I received a most comforting and kind letter from my husband in answer to the one I wrote to announce my dear Mother's death assuring me he was quite recovered. It rained very hard all day.  jany 20th  I wrote to my dear husband at Liverpool not expecting to see him till tomorrow when to my great joy he arrived home safe & well thank God though wet through just as we had finished tea having come all the way from Mr. C. Cowper's in pouring rain.  jany 22nd  We all went to St James Church in the morng in Mr Jones's carriage. The Bishop preached. Did not go in the afternoon it was so wet but it held up for a short time after dinner when we all walked on the Verandah for some time. A little thunder in the evening & rained again very hard.  jany 24  Fine day. Mr Riddell called before breakfast. The Bishop went to a meeting at St James's Church when he returned brought the news of the Governor's resignation.  jany 25th  Mr Macquoid Mr Biscoe Mr Bell Mr C. Cowper Mr Eyre & Mr Aspinall called.  jany 26th  The 49th Anniversary of the Foundation of the Colony. The Bishop went to see the Governor. Mr Cowper Mr M. Cowper Mr Campbell & Sarah Col. & Mrs Shadforth Mr Riddell & Mr & Mrs MacLeay called.  I am happy to inform you that I am master of sixteen head of cattle which I have bought at difrent times with money earned after doing my Government work and had you been with me I could have had thrice as many so that you may very clearly see what an opportunity there is for well conducted persons  SYDNEY N.S.W.  23rd July 1838  My Dear Edmund  Robert will have told you that in my letter to him of 4th instant I communicated the disagreeable intelligence that I shall not be able to leave this country for another year. Nothing has since occurred either to alter that determination or to make it more tasteful but what a man cannot accomplish it is vain to repine at. Be sure that if it please God to allow me to follow my own choice it is to be with you; but I must not do so against principle and it would appear to me at the present to be so if I were to leave either in debt or without a reasonable supposition that I am in the performance of my duty in leaving.  Whilst I am here if an opportunity should offer of putting me into a very eligible situation I do not doubt you will avail yourself of it. I was ......... apprehension that my being supposed to be on my way home may have the effect of impelling the exertions of my friends but do not let this be the case - else I shall be doubly injured by the last wrongful act of the Whig ministry towards me. I am exerting myself for the public good and as much as ever I did having again taken up my labours after Sir R......... departure - and I do not doubt that Sir Geo. Gipps report of me and the public estimation of my services when I do leave will make those who have kept me back from the post I have a fair and acknowledged right to. I have proposed an Insolvent Law which I think you would consider a great improvement upon the two English systems Bankruptcy and Insolvency and it will not be amiss that I should stay a little time to set it working and not to let others who have had nothing to do with it reap the laurels a Newspaper sent herewith will show that I am doing all I can to support the church against her opponents. There are some stupid mistakes in the report which I cannot take the trouble to correct - thus the word "few" is substituted for the actual number of churches which I quoted from Sir R......... despatch - but if you feel interest in matter you will find the original despatch alluded to in the appendix to the Report of the Transportation Committee.  I am sorry to say that Arthur has got through all his money and having one so chiefly by intemperance and profligacy is the less fitted to give any more. My situation is a disagreeable one respecting him - he is upwards of two hundred pounds in debt to various trades men about the town (not larger than ......) so that everything is known - and as he is of course known to be my relation and supposed to be nearer than he is - his disgrace reflects itself upon me. I have done all I could in every way to save him but he has gone his own way and I am not in the remotest degree responsible for it. The mode in which he invested his money and the mode in which he has lost it were neither upon my advice I have assisted him with a little money from time to time when he wanted it from actual distress but have never had through my hands a shilling of his. I must never the less be the sufferer by his profligacy. I had hoped to be out of the country before the crisis ..... I had not cared so much for it for having done all I could to keep him in the right way and failed I thought only for my own reputation. I shall be dunned for his debts and my name will be about Sydney linked with my nephew as he is called; It is laid upon me whom as neither his nearest relation nor as the occasions of bringing him here. Could you if you think it proper apply to his Aunt Mrs. Marshall who is rich enough to give him a little money to pay his debts or for me to invest ....... etc for his support in some measure. She is his nearest relation and if any ought at least his discredit ought not to fall upon me. If she will give him anything I will faithfully apply it. It not why all I can do is to pay his passage to England where he may apply to her himself.   I every day defer writing but the day must come when it must be done but oh! no pen can express with truth the pain and agony of the heart that dictates. We sailed from Plymouth with a fair wind on Tuesday 13th November. My throat after applying leeches was better and so I thought our dear children were but hopes were vain; in a day or so they gradually began to decline and on Wednesday 21st at ten minutes past seven in the morning our dear boy breathed his last on my lap. Oh how can I proceed! My heart is almost ready to burst. Soon after four o'clock his body was consigned to the deep about 90 miles from Oporto. Our dear girl still was left us; for her we prayed that she might be saved. But no God in his good time thought fit to take her also to Himself. About half-past twelve her dear spirit flew to that mansion from which no traveller returns so you see in less than 24 hours our darlings were both in the bosom of their God. [60] Poor Mrs. Richman's third child is going to be buried this afternoon but they still have three left. Eight children have died since we left London. Mrs. Richman's first suffered the same as our dear boy the other two from sore throats with which almost everyone has been attacked and had it not been for the leeches I should have gone also. My tongue began to swell and I could scarcely speak or breathe but now both George and myself are well with the exception of weakness.  The warm weather here brings out swarms of small flies cockroaches and bugs the last mentioned on comparison are trifling inconveniences [...]  There is another child dead to-day making in all 17 and I believe all could have been saved with care and proper medical attention.  We have had three children born on board. One was dead and the others with their mothers are doing well. The ship is like a little town so much scandal and ill-nature and prying into each other's affairs you would hardly believe. We have found the preserved meat the last eleven weeks so bad that we cannot eat it and that is served to us three times a week. What a treat a little fresh meat will be to us but this voyage will reconcile us to many things on shore we should have thought very hardly of had we gone from England to Australia without it.  I shall most anxiously look for letters from Britain bearing glad tidings of your welfare. The distance between us is indeed depressingly great and to reflect on the probabilities and possibilities of the non-arrival of our letters is discouraging I allow - but that must not deter us from writing to each other; on the contrary let us take every opportunity. Our general opportunities of sending letters are via Van Diemen's Land for it is not once in six months that a vessel leaves this for England direct. [79]  If we could get you here without having to undergo the discomforts of a voyage I feel sure you would all be delighted with the country - a migration of capitalists is exceedingly wanted. Provisions are exceptionally dear and money as scarce  We are still sleeping in tents and marquees. Our new house will be very commodious - we are having our domain walled in and a well dug. Our present thatched mud cottage is very pleasantly situated fronting the River Torrens. I shall try and send a plan of our intended future residence and a sketch of our present.  The land here is very dry and the grass parched but in the Mount Lofty Range all agree that it is magnificent. My husband and Mr. Hall rode to the top of Mount Lofty the other day and returned quite delighted. They say we can judge nothing of the beauty either of country and scenery here - that about us is just like a nobleman's park nicely wooded and there is nothing in the scene to remind one that we are so far from our native land - we shall have some cows as our ground is railed in - at present we pay 8d. per quart for milk.  The Captain of the Lloyds made me a present of a couple of ducks and a couple of fowls - valuable here - the former £1 a piece and the latter 11/- eggs 4d. each. Tell dear Mrs. Henry with my love that I hope she will send me a dress and bonnet and cap each year such as she thinks suitable for a Governor's wife - the sun is very powerful and she must consider that in her choice of colours and let either Miss Cox or Mrs. Beeland be employed to make them...  I have not any brown sewing silk to mend my brown silk dress. I wish therefore my friends would recollect one in the way of different coloured sewing silks and beg our friends to muster some old clothing for the Aborigines. The most common print here is 1/- per yard. Send also some gauze cap ribbons. Only think that we are scorched with heat while perhaps you are freezing with cold. This climate is not one which pleases me. The air is mild and balmy and we are told most healthy. It is not to be depended on - hot and cold - hot winds and dust smother oneself furniture and victuals in an instant. The hot winds are as though putting your face to the mouth of a baker's oven. .  I have long wished for a letter from you but I know that your ill-health prevents you. I hope however that you have been better since we left next month it will be two years since we saw you all the time has passed very quickly with me for we have been in four different dwelling houses in this country the one which we are in will be ours for four years and a half before that perhaps the most of us may be in the Hades. We have not had a servant maid for 7 or 8 months and of necessity there is much to be done. I dare say you think the good people do not care for dress here but I can assure they are as fashionable and more so than they are at home the ladies walk every day in black and the lightest colored satins thro' the streets and in Church their dresses are superb neither Mamma or I will be so extravagant as to wear satin for a dress costs about 20 pounds and the making £4 10 but that is included in the above muslin and calicoe are proportionably dear as for linen you cannot get any fit to be used and that enormously expensive. Mamma Papa and I were at the Government house the other evening at a nice party the most respectable people in this side of the Island were there I danced merrily all the evening all the Officers were there theirs is a very nice regiment and they are our constant and almost only visitors (for Mamma does not admire the Colonists at all) one of their officers Captain O'Hara is nephew to the Governor of Gibralter he was there at the time Papa was and the best Military friend he ever had. Papa was very glad to meet the relation of his old friend General O'Hara another Lieutenant Stapleton is nearly connected with Lord Stanley I am very sorry to say they expect to be moved in a few months. They are shortly going to give a party they asked me to assist in making pastry custards and things of the kind but I am afraid I shall not be able as I am no cook. [164] I shall now tell you every thing about myself as Maria and Anne Jane complained of my remissness on that subject in their last kind letter which I hope you will thank them for my dear Charlotte is still at school I suppose yet bye the bye I must not think of her as the little girl I left but a fine grown up woman she must write to me in the next vacations as Maria said she was not allowed to communicate with any but her immediate family. I am as happy as the day is long I love my dear Mamma more and she is everything my heart could wish I know you would like her if you were better acquainted tho' we have all the cleaning to do we do a great deal of work both plain and fancy Mamma's chief delight is in having the house nice we are always thinking of some new ornament for the drawing room which every one says is almost the nicest in the island. Maria and Anne Jane & Susanna are very handy will you ask them when they next write to describe some things of the kind which they have seen lately they are always inventing new things in England. I hope poor Susanna is better the last accounts were not very good which gave me sincere regret but I hope that change of air may do her good as I suppose you have moved before this. I am sure you will be sorry to hear of the scandalous behaviour of Walter we have long since given up the acquaintance of him and his infamous companion for we can hardly suppose him to be married to one like her but any thing would be mean or fallen enough for him to do when they first came out Papa would not have asked them to our house but Mamma persuaded him to invite them which he did no sooner did they come after having the greatest work at Mr. Gages who declares if he hears what he suspects about Mr Synnot to be true he will come all the way from Hobart Town to fight him. Would you believe it he and Mrs. S. did all in their power and Walter you know had some influence with me I used to be very fond of him to make a disturbance between Mamma and I and to make me dislike even Papa. Mamma bore all this and stopped Papa several times from turning them out besides she treated them with the greatest civility when they did go they tried to take away Mamma's character in the most dreadful manner to all their acquaintances who are all among the lowest of the low. I do not suppose more than one or two gentlemen speak to him and no ladies. However when this came to our ears Papa as his father would not say any thing to him but Mamma wrote to him which letter he said he would send home [if he] did so you may be sure he did not tell the provocation which would make it seem very violent. I would never have told you this if I was not afraid that you might see it and not knowing the circumstances you might think it odd we were here for 7 or 8 months before he came to see us and then only once because he heard Papa was very ill it was before what I have told you happened he never inquires whether we are dead or alive tho' living about two miles from him have not seen him except in church for this year nearly if I did I would not open my lips to him Mrs Synnot I cannot bear to call her by that name but I do not know any other for her has met several gentlemen in this country who knew her well at home every one here and at Hobart know about her much better than we do as you may be sure we never ask as we know quite enough but I have written enough on such a subject... [165]  Papa hopes to be able soon to send home wool as the sheep at Port Phillip are increasing wonderfully and to commission you to get us some articles of clothing. I know you have a good taste in that respect if you send us any more papers I would be very much obliged if you would send those in preference which have the fashions in them. They are greatly altered since we left England.  Mary Anne Catharine & Nugent are greatly improved George & Monkton are at home the latter attends a day school in Launceston. Marcus and Albert have been at Port Phillip since June last. Mrs Trappes is quite well but has never come to see us the expense of travelling is too great. I will drop a few seeds in the letter in hopes that they may reach you if you have a green house at the place you go or are gone to.  This is a country where Self is the premium Mobile the main spring upon which all the actions of it's inhabitants depend. If a man finds it to his advantage to be honest he is honest but let his own interest be interferred with and character friendship gratitude avail nothing - all are sacrificed and made subservient to the advancement of his own fortunes [...] It is indeed a strange land. The aristocracy of wealth is looked up to with veneration which the most sanguine Parvenue could hardly hope for in other countries. Parties whose birth parentage and education wd. for ever preclude their being admitted into any society but of the lowest caste at service thro its all powerful influence rank here among the Magistrates and thanks to the liberal sentiments of Genl. Bourke and his Whigish clique have jostled themselves into even being recd. at Govt. House. This was not the case in Genl. Darling's time and as you may suppose the change that has been wrought in the tone of society here in consequence of his successors mistaken notions of equalization has in no wise improved it or added to its respectability - [34] Party spirit rages also most violently as it must naturally do in a small community. I need hardly tell you that the Tories rank among their number only the respectable class of people here and as a matter of course are far outnumbered. But they nevertheless maintain their position against the united forces of liberals and emancipists and did maintain it with firmness and consistency even when these two bodies were headed and supported by Sir Richd. Bourke and all his patronage; a patronage that was never exercised in favour of any one who differed with him in politics but was lavished with an unsparing hand upon such as wd. support his measures and sacrifice their own principles at the shrine of the Irish System of Education and other oppressive measures that he wished to force upon the Colonists. He is however gone and I sincerely hope Sir Geo. Gipps will not follow in his footsteps or imitate the mistaken line of politics he persevered in against the best interests of the Colony. I of course was made to feel the evil consequence of adopting the priviledge of thinking for myself and was visited with the neglect that awaited all those who exercised such a prerogative under a despotic Government. But as long as I remained in the Service I did my duty conscientiously [...]   3 Canterbury Villas Edgware Road London Sept.8th.  My dear Sir  I must apologise for my long silence in not replying sooner to your very kind letter of the 18th. ultimo but really my mind has been so ill at ease the last three weeks in consequence of my premature decision in placing my sons at a school in London where I am sorry to find no probability of their making that improvement I at first contemplated; the school being more adapted for very young boys half their time is lost by not having the benefit of the society and conversation of the school master who spends the whole of his evenings from home - I have therefore been compelled to determine upon sending them to Devonshire at the end of this Quarter to be placed under the care and tuition of a Revd. Mr Barnes who is by my son (in-law) Mr Arthur and all his relations spoken very highly of & who has a family of accomplished sisters. [116] My sons are received as members of his family and his number is limited to six all highly respectable. I have been much pleased with a letter I received from him his terms are one hundred and twenty guineas each per annum and have consequently arranged to send them off as near the first of October as possible. Mrs Reibey (Richarda) will accompany them to Plymouth to join Mr & Mrs Arthur who feel great reluctance to part with their relations there - I am unfortunately hampered with a cottage which I engaged for 6 months but have written off to the proprietor who is now spending a short time at Harrogate to request he will allow me to give it up at the end of the quarter which I am in hopes he will do and immediately I can rid myself of it I purpose paying you a visit to spend a short time before I join my family at Plymouth. I should have been glad could I have managed to have been with you by the 27th of this month but that is impossible - Mr Redfern called about a fortnight after he had been in London. I was not at home but called upon him the following day and for so short an acquaintance was much pleased with him. I invited him to dinner but he had made some engagement to visit Kent having given up his original intention of going to the Continent when you see his mother will you remember me very kindly  I am in daily expectation of receiving accounts from Van Diemens Land which I am very anxious about as I left my brother James in a very precarious state of health. I am also in hopes soon to hear from my mother and sisters  Your brother William & his wife together with Mr Mrs. & Miss Atkinson dined with us on Wednesday last - Mrs Hope with her daughter Celia is now spending a few days with us - I am very anxious to see you and hope soon to have that pleasure but in the mean time I would only say your letters are very acceptable. pray write often I pay postage for your letters with great delight - My sons have this moment stopped home being half holiday to dine with us they beg together with Mrs. Reibey to be very kindly remembered to you - Believe me  My dear Cousin your's very sincerely Thomas Reibey  If you should see Mr J Denny say that I have not forgotten my promise and will in the course of a few days send him letters to Van Diemens Land which I trust will be of service to him. I believe he does not sail till the first of the month.  Adelaide 14 October 1838  MY DEAR BROTHER  I will now tell you some of the reasons which induced us to leave England. In the first place the lease of our house had nearly expired. It was greatly out of repair partly owing to the next house above having been pulled down and rebuilt a short time before. This caused ours to give way though I could not make Mr Thomas believe it was in so bad a state as it really was. I knew if we stayed to the end of the lease we should have heavy dilapidations to pay for. I also knew this would put him in a terrible rage as I estimated them to be at least £200 and to prove that I was right in my conjecture Mr Baugh has since informed us that the repairs took £300. Added to this Robert wished to go abroad and William was not likely to be placed to any business. Mr Baugh wished very much to have him as an apprentice and I did not like to see him idle away his time at home. The scheme of this new colony happened to be started just at the time. We first heard of it from Dr Inman of Portsmouth who came up to London to purchase some land in it for one of his sons who is now here. It was thought to be an excellent opportunity for young men of talent to try their fortunes especially as the plan on which this colony is founded is considered to be superior to all others; and as neither of my boys is deficient in genius or education I flattered myself that with attention and industry they might become at some time or other possessed of considerable property. Besides this Frances's health which was never good in London t hoped might be improved by a sea voyage and change of climate. These were the principal reasons which made me encourage rather than otherwise Mr Thomas's inclination to become a landholder in this new Province. Accordingly he purchased 134 acres each at twelve shillings per acre which also entitled him to two in the principal town and these were purchased several months before we left England. In my latter object I have not succeeded so well as I could have wished for Frances is the same here as in London never well long together but with regard to the boys they are both likely to do well.  By his drawings and some maps which were exhibited at the committee-rooms Robert obtained a situation under the principal surveyor and came over in the Cygnet three months before we did on March 21 and is now in partnership with Colonel Light and three others as land agents and surveyors under the name of 'Light Finnis & Co'. [175] They are likely to realize a very good income being the principal firm in the town. Robert is acknowledged to be equal to any draughts. man in the colony though we have some very clever men here and in mapping and ornamental writing superior. Perhaps you may have seen engravings from some of his maps with his name attached to them. Several went to England for that purpose but I do not know if they are yet published. William is overseer of the printing office and is very useful and industrious.  We have a stone house in progress and when we remove into it I hope it will be the last remove we shall make till we return to dear old England! Mr Thomas who is perfectly infatuated with this country does not seem to anticipate such an event but I do and so do the girls and I feel confident that please God at some time or other such will be the case.  This is certainly a very fine country and capable of the highest improvements. Doubtless those who are born and brought up here will think of it as we do of our native country that there is no other like it in the world; but to those who know what England is and recollect the comfort there enjoyed it never can bear a comparison notwithstanding its luxuriant plains its magnificent trees its ranges of lofty hills and scenery often sublime. The soil too can doubtless be made to reproduce nearly all the fruits and vegetables of the known world. We have a garden in which we have abundance of the latter and some of the former in cultivation but the vegetables have not the sweetness of those in England and generally run to seed before they have attained half their size. This may perhaps be remedied by proper management the plants being like ourselves not yet acclimatized.  And now having spoken of the climate I cannot say that it is by any means so agreeable as I expected according to the accounts which were given of it and in this respect I am much disappointed. The heat which was said to be seldom greater than it is in England is sometimes so intense as to be scarcely endurable. I have seen the thermometer at 105 degrees four days following in this room where I am now writing. The mud houses are by far the coolest. One day I placed the thermometer out in the sun to see the effect. In a few minutes it rose to 155 degrees. Sometimes the weather is very cold; the wind is often extremely boisterous carrying up whirlwinds of dust and the rains are so heavy that they literally come down in torrents. Moreover the atmosphere is subject to great and sudden changes from heat to cold cold to heat much more than is the case with the climate of England so long proverbial for its changeableness. The mornings and evenings here are often cold enough for a good fire while in the middle of the day the heat is almost insupportable.  As a proof of this the morning after we landed which was November 14 I arose between 5 and 6 o'clock and to my astonishment found ice the thickness of a shilling in a tin dish which had been left outside the tent with water in it. I did not expect to see such a thing in this country. And yet the same day the thermometer rose to 110 degrees in the sun. [176]  As for the seasons we being the opposite side of the globe to you of course our summer in your winter and while you are sitting round a comfortable Christmas fire you must imagine us under a burning sun.  This as I have said before is a very beautiful country and for those who wish to better their condition they cannot do amiss in coming here provided they be sober and industrious and can make up their minds to endure many things which in England would be considered unreasonable and yet nothing in comparison to what we underwent when there was not a house to be seen or a thing that could be done except by manual labour. All our goods had to be brought from the beach by hand as no such animal as a horse or a bullock was then in the colony. Now there are thousands of both with carts and every convenience for carrying baggage and passengers and lodgings either at inns or private houses; and yet those who have been accustomed to English comforts will find themselves very deficient of them in many respects unless they reckon among them hundreds of rats and mice thousands of fleas and flies millions of ants and mosquitoes and many other such annoyances Therefore I would advise all those who are doing well in England to remain there but I would by no means discourage any mail who wishes to try his fortune in South Australia especially if he has a family as there is plenty of scope for industry ingenuity and talents of every kind.  MY DEAR SIR GEORGE  The first scene of the first act of the drama is over. The welcome which the good people of this portion of your territories gave me was as the papers would say enthusiastic: that is to say the grave amongst them got up grave addresses & received grave answers - the gay made bonfires put lights in their casements & fired off fowling pieces: - & the lower class got jovially drunk & were fined - all in my honor.  The second scene has now commenced. The newspapers (I understand for I have not had time to read them) begin to give me a great deal of very excellent advice - every man in the street thinks (as I must now have rested sufficiently from the fatigues of the voyage) that it would be both improper & impolitic to pass the door of my temporary office without stopping to do business with 'His Honor'. One steps in to ask after my health & how I like Australia Felix - another to request I would give him a government appointment: a third to inoculate me with his opinion on some subject of public interest. Official men have all some arrears of one kind or another to fetch up: having modestly kept them in the back ground till 'His Honor' should arrive: so that I am led to suppose that every body within the District (the Hentys' from Portland Bay even have been at me) thinks that he does the state good service in assailing me: & all this at a time when I have neither a roof over my head nor a single shelf upon which I may arrange my papers. However I do not complain on the contrary I take it as a matter of course that I must pass through this ordeal in common with other honorable men. They will soon find that the lemon has been squeezed so often that there is no longer any juice in it & then I hope to have a quiet life. A quiet life it may be but I have no idea that it will be an idle one. I am sure you will give me time to recollect myself & to get to understand my business & then I will send you a full report of what is doing & what is to be done in this part of the Colony. I have found Capt. Lonsdale a truly excellent worthy intelligent man & one to whose opinion I am bound to listen with respect & deference. From no other official here were I so necessitated dare I seek for perfectly unbiassed opinions as to many matters connected with this District; for all as might be expected have entered more or less into the speculations of the time with the exception of Lonsdale whose self denial & regard to the moral ascendency which one filling his station in the community ought to be possessed of rather than to his worldly advantage I consider worthy of the highest respect & praise: I am sure you will appreciate it. [34]  As to my own private arrangts. - they are soon stated. Upon my arrival here I fixed upon a suitable spot in the Government paddock next to that in which Capn L resides & took measures to put up my portable cottage & whatever offices were indispensably necessary. I know that I am there on sufferance & not of right & that whenever circumstances may oblige you to tell me to remove I must do so at all risks. Nevertheless I have been obliged to spend so much even in putting up these temporary erections (for such they must be called) from the exorbitant price of labour (10/- to 14/- per diem) & materials that this alone would make me unwilling to move for some time unless it were necessary. But other considerations impel me to ask you to sanction my remaining where I am proposing to live till the public good or other circumstances require my removal & that is my utter inability to cope with the speculators of this town in buying land within any reasonable distance and my determination to seek from you no advantage or indulgence in selecting & purchasing what might suit me beyond what you might accord to any other. Were there no land fever in the District & were land selling in a natural way: plentiful as it is there might have been no impropriety in my asking you to sanction my purchasing a given plot of ground conveniently situated at an evaluation: or to allow it to be put up to auction at one of the land sales that I might become the purchaser - & none in your yielding [NN] to my request. But as matters are I can do neither with propriety and so little hope have I of procuring land at present within a few miles of the town at any reasonable rate that I have taken measures to dispose of my permanent House which I expect daily from England even before it arrives as to keep it warehoused here is out of the question - I believe the position I have chosen is not likely to interfere with any one. The paddock is railed in & is part of that reserve which was set apart by Sir Richard Bourke's orders for the use of Govt cattle & horses. The mounted police have their barrack in one corner of it & I have modestly placed my cottage &c near another.  Mrs. La Trobe is well thank God in the midst of all our discomfort & confusion for we have not yet been able to get in to our quarters. She requests me to present her kind regards to Lady Gipps to whom I beg to offer my respects.  I have written to you my dear Sir George sans façon as I believe I have your permission & as your uniform friendly & open intercourse with me in Sydney encourages me to do - I do not wish to inflict a correspondence a la Robinson upon you (he has opened a terrible file fire upon me of which more another opportunity) but shall have great pleasure in writing to you occasionally  & AM EVER / MY DEAR SIR GEORGE / YOUR VERY FAITHFULLY / CHARLES Jos. LA TROBE  February 7 1839. At present I must content myself with giving you some account of the natives which may not be uninteresting. They are for the most part a harmless inoffensive people but extremely ignorant and rank among the lowest of the human people. They seem to have but little intellect for improvement or imitation which is proved by their never attempting to build themselves substantial houses notwithstanding the example which we have set before them and the assistance with an abundant supply of tools and material which would be afforded them if they had either the ingenuity or the industry to avail themselves of them. But they (the men) are naturally indolent and averse to labour of every kind. They leave what little work there is to do such as carrying burdens their young children and such-like entirely to their women and will encumber themselves with nothing but their warlike weapons which you may be sure are rude enough consisting of long spears pointed at one end and since the arrival of the whites studded about two or three inches from the point with broken glass. They have no tools whatever nor so far as I have ever heard any kind of domestic utensil. Consequently they cook their provisions consisting chiefly of kangaroos opossums iguanas lizards snakes etc on the bare coals without divesting them I believe of either skin or entrails - at least the small animals. [176] Birds are deprived only of their feathers. They likewise eat several kinds of roots and herbs. The omen are generally tall and well made but most of the women are the most abject-looking beings you can imagine. The latter are diminutive of stature sod are always stooping from their habit of carrying everything at their back. Soon they have all the appearance of old age.  There is one thing more which I must mention and that is the correctness with which they pronounce our language though at first when we came among them it was only by repeating what we said. For instance I said to a woman "What is your name? "to which she replied with great accuracy "What is your name?"  I made answer "My name is Mary Thomas" and she again replied  "My name is Mary Thomas."  But now they are rather more enlightened (I speak of the tribe about Adelaide) and some of them have learned what is said to them tolerably well and to give in some instances rational answers. There are some white persons who have likewise studied their dialect so far as to make themselves understood by them.  February 17. I believe I did not tell you that we had been at Glenelg about a month before we saw any of them. Then a man and a boy were discovered by a person of the name of Williams a fellow-passenger with us while out shooting about five miles distant. They did not observe him. He therefore reloaded his gun and then called to them at the same time advancing. They immediately started up (as they were in the act of making a fire) and seized their spears. Mr. Williams held out his hand with a biscuit whereupon they cautiously came forward to meet him and signs of a-mutual friendship having been exchanged he induced them to accompany him to the tents at Glenelg. He went round the village as we may call it with them. It did not appear that they had ever seen white people before judging by the astonishment they expressed at all they beheld. [177] They peeped into the tents and examined everything that came in their way with perfect good humour and highly delighted. They shook hands with everyone male and female without being at all abashed. They were both stark naked but we thought it most prudent not to appear shy especially in the first interview. They were afterwards taken to the Commissioner's stores and clothed with a pair of trousers a flannel shirt and a woollen cap each as a great many of such articles were sent out expressly for the natives. No monarch in his robes could be prouder than they were of their dress. This man and boy remained with Mr. Williams three days sleeping at night by his fire on the bare ground and before he left he again brought the boy to our tent. I endeavoured to excite his wonder by showing him such things as I thought he had not seen. He was greatly astonished at the opening and shutting of an umbrella the effect of a lucifer box and seeing the water run out of a filtering machine. But what most of all surprised him was a large telescope drawn out to its full length which he at first took to be a gun. He said "Boof!" meaning that it would make a noise. But I shook my head and said "No boof!" Then with some difficulty I persuaded him to look through it when he expressed his astonishment by lifting up his hands and exclaiming "Mawny! Mawny!" which is their word for anything wonderful.  Those who have learned a little English generally make use of that phrase "very good" to whatever is said to them and consequently one of them who it was supposed had killed a white man on being told that he would be hanged for it replied as usual "Very good."  They have committed some depredations such as spearing a few sheep and such-like. Otherwise their conduct has hitherto been peaceful and orderly and they very logically exculpate their own misdemeanours by saying "White man come kill black man kangaroo. Black man kill white man sheep. Very good."  But the greatest mischief they have as yet done the settlers is not from any design on their part to injure us but from a custom they have of burning the grass during the hot weather in order to drive the kangaroos where they may be caught and to force the snakes which are part of their subsistence out of their holes. [178] Frequently they set large trees on fire in order to catch the opossums in the hollows of which these animals generally live. Many trees are found still standing with cavities burnt out in this way large enough to contain eight or ten persons. Their fires on the hills are quite awful. We have frequently seen fires this summer which have reached for twenty or thirty miles in circumference for they light them at distances so that they shall enclose a large space sod the grass being so exceedingly dry it may be truly said to burn like wildfire. We have seen three or four such fires as these on the hills which are about five miles sway at the same time so that Adelaide has been nearly ambushed with flames. Some of these fires have done much damage to the stock stations by destroying the grass on which the bullocks and sheep were pastured sod which as we bad a very dry summer and nearly five months of hot weather is rather scarce. Consequently the stock-keepers have been put to great inconvenience.  I have now given you a long account of the native inhabitants whose appearance though disgusting in the extreme to an [sic] European calls for our pity and compassion and whose condition though not us yet greatly amended by their intercourse with white men yet I trust will be undoubtedly so in time. They are considered as British subjects and have all protection from injury quite equally with any person in the colony. They are provided with anything they may require by applying to the Protector of the Aborigines either for their comfort or advancement and it is intended to impress on their minds that they must not do an injury to white men as none will be allowed to hurt them. But there is some difficulty in making them understand the principle of justice as distinguished from retaliation which they consider as indispensable. When two black men in one of the neighbouring colonies were hanged for murdering a white man the other natives could not be brought to comprehend why two men should suffer for one though both were concerned in the matter.  We shall have another newspaper to print 'The Port Lincoln Herald' as you will see advertised in last week's 'Gazette and Colonial Register.' Port Lincoln is now all the talk as being one of the finest harbours in the world. [179] Several gentlemen have already gone there to form a settlement and a great deal of land has been sold which already bears a high premium. The first number is to appear on the 27th of this month and in consequence of our having it to print we shall want more hands.  Mr. Thomas desires me to say that if you know of any good compositors who are desirous of emigrating steady and sober men they will be sure here of good wages and constant employment. If they have families so much the better as their children whether boys or girls will get employment likewise as soon as they are able to earn anything. Indeed for mechanics and labourers of every kind a new field is here opened for their exertions which if well directed cannot fail with the industrious and persevering to realize an independence. But to those who have been accustomed to something superior to a life of labour it offers little encouragement in the way of comfort though prosperity may be equally within their reach.  I cannot say that I much relish working so hard as I do now at my time of life especially as I see little prospect at present of its being otherwise for the climate is such that cleanliness and comfort according to English ideas are entirely out of the question and incompatible with the country altogether. For I cannot call any place comfortable where the clouds of dust cover all your furniture three or four times a day driving through every crevice; where you are incessantly hunting fleas and bugs and are overrun with ants spiders of an enormous size and flies or some other teasing insect and where the water which in England is generally plentiful and delicious to drink is here both scarce comparatively speaking and never palatable as a beverage without an infusion of some kind. In short I am determined if ever I have it in my power to quit this country and return to my native land and I trust that Heaven will grant me this petition if it be only that I may lay my ashes with my native dust.  On March 31st 1839 at daylight made the island of Timor Laut. My object in going to this island was to attempt to rescue a poor European who I was informed had belonged to a vessel which was cut off by the natives many years ago and who was still living there. The plan which I proposed to myself in the affair was this - to get some one of their Chiefs or principal men on board and if he says there is a white man on shore to detain him until he is given up to us.  At 11 A.M when about 5 or 6 miles distant from the shore we observed three canoes under sail making for us. As they neared us we were able to make out the Dutch Colours hoisted upon each. At about 2 P.M. hove to for the canoes to come alongside; found them to contain 12 to 15 men each. When asked if there was any white man on shore they all answered "Certo Engrise Louron" implying as we understood that there was an Englishman at a village called Louron just abreast of us.  Presently several other canoes came alongside each containing about the same number of men. One of these brought off an Orang Kaire who was immediately allowed to come on board. We found that be could talk a little English which led us to hope that he would be able to give us all the information required. Our hopes in this respect were fully realised for he told us that there was an Englishman at Louron and was particularly solicitous for us to run into the bay and drop an anchor. Now was my time for carrying my plans into effect.  I accordingly told the Orang Kaire that if he would bring him to me I would give him a quantity of trade which was shown him. To this the Orang Kaire immediately agreed but as we had no great faith in his assertions we thought it expedient to detain him on board until the white man was brought off. We explained to him that we wished him to send away his canoes for the Englishman and if they did not bring him that he the Orang Kaire would either be shot or hung by the neck to the yard arm and that we should fire all our great guns on the village.  By this time two other canoes had come up but orders were given not to admit any of the people on board. It was found however that there was another Orang Kaire or Chief in one and he was admitted on board. This man immediately pulled from his bosom a small basket containing papers which we conjectured were letters from the Englishman on shore.  A perusal of them however soon convinced us of our error for we found them to be loose scraps written evidently by some of the crew of the Charles Eaton which was cast away in Torres Strait in 1834 and who had by some means found their way to this Island. Besides these scraps the basket contained a letter written by Lieut. Stanley of H.M. brig Britomart stating that he had called here on the 23rd. inst and had perused the scraps and had taken copies. [205]  As night was now quickly closing in it was thought proper to dismiss the canoes and all the natives except the one detained as our hostage. But on this being intimated the Orang Kaire who had last arrived was anxious to remain on board all night; his wishes not being regarded he was obliged to leave the vessel. Everyone being now in their canoes and about to push off the Orang Kaire became apparently much disconcerted and at last made a resolute attempt to join his companions but was prevented by the crew who were all under arms from our first arrival. The canoes at length pushed off and as their distance from the vessel became greater the stronger appeared the symptoms of disconcertion in our prisoner. He kept wandering about to and fro with evident impatience and apparently with a view to effect his escape by swimming for he threw off the few garments with which he had been covered but a good watch being kept on him he was unable to accomplish his object.  Through the night we stood off from the land plying to windward under easy sail. In the morning we run in again and at daylight were abreast Louron distant about 4 miles. Not a canoe was to be seen showing that they are not very anxious for the safety of the Orang Kaire we have on board. At 9 A.M. two canoes came alongside one of which belonged to our prisoner; it contained about 15 men who were very wishful to take him away but on our positively refusing to part with him until we received the Englishman they went to fetch him. The other canoe brought the Orang Kaire who had shown us the letters on the night previous and as soon as he was on board the schooner he dismissed his canoe to assist in bringing off the white man.  There appeared to be very little doubt that we should succeed in our purpose and more especially when we considered we had in our power two of their Orang Kaires whom it was natural to imagine were more valuable than one Englishman could be. Our supposition proved correct for about 2.30 P.M two canoes were observed making towards us and in one of them by means of a glass we were able to distinguish the features of a European equipped as a native.  At 3 P.M. they had come alongside and the white man who proved to be an Englishman although for some time one might have doubted it was immediately received on board in a very lame and miserable condition. During the bustle and confusion of receiving him on board the old Orang Kaire had spied his opportunity and without being observed had made his way over the stern into his canoe and without waiting to receive the promised rewards had pushed off. We could not account for his conduct since he had been treated with every kindness and attention while on board except on the supposition that he had been one of the principal instruments in cutting off the vessel to which the youth had belonged and massacring the crew and was therefore afraid that he should be betrayed to us and meet with the just deserts of his atrocious deeds.  The other Orang Kaire was also evidently agitated in mind and would gladly have retreated to his canoe but we assured him of our friendship and our intention to act honourably towards them and upon this he became tranquilised and made signs for our late prisoner to come on board again. At length he ventured to come under the stern in his canoe. [206]  The appearance of this Englishman at the time we received him on board was in the highest degree remarkable and such as was calculated to draw forth the strongest sympathies from the bosom of any human being whose composition was not entirely void of compassionate feelings. He appeared as far as one can judge from his looks as well as from the length of time he must have been upon the island to be about 26 years of age; of a remarkably fair complexion notwithstanding the effects of a tropical climate. There was also a delicacy of frame about him seldom to be met with in a person of his years.  His hair which was of a lightest yellow colour had been allowed to grow long and was triced up after the native custom with a comb made of Bamboo. The length of the hair was from 18 to 20 inches and its texture very much resembled the finest silk in its raw state. His only garments were a sort of waist coat without sleeves and a blue and white dungaree girdle round his loins. There was a peculiar vacancy in his countenance which I am at a loss to describe but I can compare it to nothing more aptly than to that aspect observable in deaf and dumb people besides there was an expression of agony in his which from long continued suffering no doubt had become habitual. His body was much emaciated and covered with numberless scars the evidence of the savage tortures he had endured; and his legs were studded with ulcers and the sinews about his knee joints were so much contracted as to prevent him extending his legs and consequently rendering him unable to walk.  His ears had been perforated after the custom of the natives and the hole in the lobe of each is large enough to admit of his wearing a piece of Bamboo at least one inch in diameter; indeed he did wear such a piece at the time he was brought off. As might have been expected from having been on the island 16 years he had almost forgotten his native language. He could with some difficulty make himself intelligible and gave the following account: - His name was Joseph Forbes; he belonged to the schooner Stedcombe which had gone from Melville Island to Timor Laut to procure livestock. Captain Barnes had remained at Melville Island and had sent Mr. Bastell (mate) in charge of the schooner. The vessel being moored off the village of Louron Mr. Bastell and the crew proceeded on shore leaving on board the Steward a boy named John Edwards and himself in charge of the ship and from some cause when they were on shore the natives murdered them all.  As Mr. Bastell and the crew did not return he (Forbes) took the glass and saw the bodies stretched out on the beach the head being severed from each. He then states that a canoe was seen coming towards the schooner and expecting that the natives would deal with those on board as they had dealt with those on shore he proposed to the steward and John Edwards to arm them selves with muskets and to fire in case the people in the canoe attempted to board; but to this the Steward would pay no attention.  He then proposed that as he and John Edwards knew the compass and the Steward knew little of navigation they should punch one of the bolts out of the cable liberate the schooner from her moorings and stand out to sea. This was agreed to and they were in the act of carrying it into effect when the canoe came alongside and the natives (among whom was the Orang Kaire who had been our prisoner) boarded the vessel. They immediately surrounded the Steward and on seizing an axe lying on deck cut off his head on the spot. two boys expecting to share the same fate betook themselves to the rigging and were only induced to descend upon repeated promises that they would not be injured. The natives then plundered the vessel of her stores and removed them together with the boys to the shore. After they had got everything they considered worth having they set fire to the schooner.  From this time the two boys were kept in the capacity of ordinary slaves until about 4 years ago when John Edwards died and since that time Forbes has been unable to do any thing owing to the state of his legs. [207] He attributed his forgetfulness of his native tongue to the death of his companion for he remarks that since John died he had no one to talk to. How far he is correct as to the time when John died I cannot say but I may observe that his ideas of time appear to be very erroneous for he says he has been on the island only ten years whereas the Stedcombe was cut off in 1823 which proves him to have been 16.  The treatment which he received during the period of bondage appears to have been barbarous for one of the commonest modes of punishment when he had incurred displeasure was taking hot embers and placing them upon some part of his body until it was severely burnt. When questioned as to the way in which different Orang Kaires behaved to him his general answer is Trada Bergouse implying very bad: although there are one or two to whom he applies the term Bergouse i.e very good among whom he numbers the Orang Kaire who showed us the papers and letter and he says that it was through that person that his liberty was restored. Speaking of the Orang Kaire of Louron he says that Louron cuts me down to the ground which we construe to mean that he flogged him or knocked him down. He also says he used to bind him hand and foot whenever a vessel hove in sight and keep him bound so long as the vessel remained in sight.  We asked him what he thought when he first saw the schooner with English Colours hoisted. His answer was very simple but at the same time very expressive.  He said "Joe see schooner. Joe no eat. Joe's belly full."  Evidently implying that the sight of the schooner filled him with delight and prevented him eating. He told us that he had a box belonging to him which contained a quantity of clothes and money in dollars half-crowns sixpences and copper pieces but the Orang Kaire would not allow him to bring them away. Some of the crew of the Charles Eaton had been at Timor Laut and when about to leave had wished to take this young man with them but the Orang Kaire would not allow his departure and he says that it would not have been permitted with us had they not been afraid we should kill our prisoner their chief.  A Chinaman who had been trading with the island had expressed a wish to purchase him and had offered several gown pieces as the price but this was declined. He relates that two Dutch men of war had been there but would have nothing to do with him nor assist him to escape from his miserable situation.  He gave accounts of several vessels being cut off and plundered by the natives but he only gives a good account of two instances - one a China Junk which they boarded murdered the crew plundered the vessel and burned it - the other a schooner manned with black men which they only plundered and liberated. He also gave some imperfect hints that some vessel (a whaler) had been cast away 7 moons (months) ago and that two whale boats and one jolly boat with five people arrived at Timor Laut which appears incredible that three boats should contain but five people. At a future time he may give a clearer account and I have no doubt when he has picked up his native language he shall be able to elicit many interesting and important facts.  They are so young as not to feel her loss and they are in every respect treated like our own. We have in consequence to this addition to our family been obliged to add to our house. We have built a back wing containing a large nursery and sleeping room with an enclosed verandah all around. They have just got into it and it looks so comfortable and nice. I do not know how many children we had when we last wrote to you. We have now nine of our own and it is God's will in January I shall add another to our already numerous party. Our four youngest are boys nice little fellows some fair some dark some quiet other pickles but all good dispositions. We have only two girls out of all our number. The eldest 13 last June is a pretty fair little girl genteel and gentle in manner. Louisa as I have always described her is a merry little romp and her brothers think her very pretty. They both go to school at the Hunter but now we are settled here we find it inconvenient their being so far away and as there is now a very excellent school in Sydney kept by two young ladies lately come out and who have been accustomed to the education of young ladies we are thinking of sending them there at any rate Christiana as their terms are high £42 each a year and we cannot at present afford both. Our eldest boy Tom is at present studying with a Mr. Clarke lately come out as headmaster of the King's School. He is a clever man and we wish Tom to have the advantage of his instruction for some months. He is unsettled in his disposition having a strong inclination to a military life. His papa always tells him it is of no use thinking of such things in these times as he has no interest to get him a commission. He sometimes asks me if his uncle Edwin has none and declares if war breaks out he will volunteer. We wish him to turn his attention to a settler's life and assist his father in managing his flock and herds. He is not ill-disposed but giddy and thoughtless much liked by his companions of a generous and courageous disposition and a great lover of horses while he is a famous rider.  Richard and John are both steady boys and will we hope soon take an active part in the management of our up-country establishments. Our sheep and cattle stations are nearly 300 miles from here. We have an overseer and convicts and free men. There is great expense attending these distant stations in clothing and feeding the men the shearing and forming stockyards men's huts and in the payment of free labor which takes away considerably from our profits. [104] Our income arises principally from the sale of our wool which we send to England the sale of sheep for the butchers and cattle also. We ought also to receive £200 a year from the rent of Dagworth farm at the Hunter but we have not been fortunate in our servants and our rent is considerably in arrears at present. The colony has been visited by a severe drought the last year. The crops were a total failure. Out of 70 acres we only reaped about 40 bushels and we were not singular so that we have been obliged to purchase flour for the establishment as well as our up country stations  The shearing time has commenced in most parts of the country; some places they have finished but at Maneroo where our stations are it is colder and we do not commence so soon. Tom will go up to superintend the shearing; as I do not like your brother to leave me during my confinement which happens at rather an inconvenient time when all our young folks will be at home for the holidays but he will go up after I am about again to muster our cattle and as our herd is now about 1500 in number he will select some for sale as it is difficult to get pasture for so many. We are obliged to rent land from the Government both for our sheep cattle and horses; that is to say we pay for a squatting license.  They now tax our sheep cattle and horses at so much a head; it is but a small sum on each annually but I think we pay about £50 a year; and they talk of other taxes so that we may expect in a year or two that the English Government will make the colony pay its own expenses. There is at present a great debate in our little council about these matters and the colonials are becoming dissatisfied at the whole expenses of the police and gaol establishments being thrown upon the colony which composed as the colony is of the outcasts of England must of necessity be very expensive and we think all the expense ought not to be put upon us particularly as convict labor has ceased. They will not now assign any more and the emigrants do not come out in sufficient numbers to supply their place. Those that do come are a lazy useless set expecting very high wages a large ration of meat flour tea sugar tobacco and many of them having large families of young children which they expect also to be fed. We prefer hiring the convicts who have become free or have obtained ticket of leave for good conduct. They are used to the ways of the colony and rogues as they are are more useful than the lazy set sent out. There are some exceptions certainly but we suppose they are generally the sweepings from the parishes at home. They should send us unmarried men and women from the agricultural counties. They would easily obtain work and we should be glad to employ them. [105] We give our farming men ten shillings a week and a ration of 10lbs. flour 10lb. meat 1 1/2lb. sugar 3oz. tea; and our female servants from £12 to £15 a year; £12 I should say was the average wage for females.  Sydney is becoming a large mercantile town. It is well supplied with English goods of every description. The shops are numerous and full of goods and the people in Sydney - that is the merchants Government officers - all live in good style. Everyone keeps a carriage as do many of the shopkeepers and some of the handsomest equipages belong to persons who have once been convicts but who have become rich men in a few years not being overscrupulous in their dealings...  We have not much confidence in our new Governor. He is a Whig and he is considered a time-server and has not the interest of the colony at heart.  We have arrived safely at this important point of our journey and I must commemmorate the event by dating a fresh sheet to you from it. Our last stage of 14 or 15 miles from Joe Slack's station was performed in about 5 hours our progress having been somewhat interrupted by numerous creeks and the descent from steep and awkward banks into the reedy and occasionally inundated flats.  The first few miles run along the lower declivities of some lightly wooded banks projecting from a range of hills which obtained a higher elevation on our right as we proceeded but were only partially seen through the foliage of the intervening plain. .[...]   The river here makes a deep bow the bight of which is towards the E. and a little below it is the crossing-place or ford. The banks were not lofty but were rather steep. They descended however in the present state of the river not into the water but upon a flat beach of shingles which was a great advantage to me in crossing. The water in the deepest part did not come above the horses girths and the current was not sufficiently strong to render it a matter of any difficulty to stem it. The water here may be 80 yards across and the stream tho' thus easy of passage was much more rapid than any we had hitherto seen. In times of flood it is dangerous on account of this rapidity as well as on account of the steepness of its banks. We were told that parson Docker's drays had been overturned in it and one bullock drowned on the occasion. Accidents to human life have also occurred at this passage since it has become the high way between the old colony and the El dorado of Port Phillip. [135] On the right bank of the Murray are two inhabited dwellings and a smaller unfinished one the latter belongs to a Mr Lewis whose cattle station we had passed 2 miles on the other side of the river. Of the former one is the spacious hut of a Mr Brown erected for a store and standing on the forest plain near the water and the other is the station of the mounted Police perched upon the steep declivity (which a few hundred yards below Mr Brown's rises from the edge of the water) of the lofty and undulating bank. On a flat enclosed paddock between these two dwellings and meant as a reserve pasture for the horses of the mounted police we pitched our encampment rejoicing to have passed that formidable river which had hitherto been represented to us as the greatest obstacle we had to fear and at the same time to have accomplished half of our journey to Yass or 200 miles exactly in a fortnight...  Pray tell him I am much pleased and obliged by it. He answers almost every point on which I wrote and particularly as regards the Regatta extension meeting (upon which he greatly regrets my absence) the Horticultural Society the Colonial Infant School schoolmasters in which he says he has encouragement from you that something will be done on an extended scale. He promises to use his influence at the Colonial office for Dr Hobson whenever you have found a situation as Naturalist or in any other department for him saying it is of no use to ask for general assistance. It seems by this that Mr F. does not understand that what is wanted at the Colonial Office is the making of the office of Naturalist or does Mr F. mean that if you and the Legislative council created such an office then would be the time to apply for the salary? Some public expression in the Council perhaps of the desirableness of such an appointment would be useful. The more I see of Dr Hobson the more anxious I am that the Colony should not lose the benefit of his services. He does not wish to live in any other part of the Colony but Hobarton he could not carry on his researches to advantage elsewhere nor would he care to practice elsewhere. Private practice in Hobarton joined to the Naturalist situation is that which he prefers to all work. He has already pared a considerable number of things for the embryo Museum and told me he had expended £200 of his own in skeletons and other things which he has given to a Museum in England. He wishes the Museum at Hobarton to be in a miniature way on the plan of the Universal Hunterian Museum at the College of Surgeons the comparative anatomy being of the first importance. [136]  There seems from what Mr F. tells me every probability of your relation with the Attorney General coming to an end. I do hope it may be so for it is impossible the credit of your Government can be supported without such a step.  Saturday 29th February  Passed a very uncomfortable night at Wollongong suffocated with spirits & tobacco & eaten up by bugs. On Sunday called at Dr John Osborne's rather a Gentlemanlike man but not as sterling as Henry & Mrs John the most unladylike lady I had seen for a long time - the children Bah! want civilization sadly.  Proceeded in the afternoon to Marshall Mount 15 miles Mr H. Osbornes & met a very hearty welcome. Mrs Osborne a very gentle nice woman hope to know her better & Mr O one who I think will be a valuable neighbour to dear Bob - they wished us to remain but I felt anxious to finish my journey and we left next morning calling at O'Mere's on the way where I had my first meal in a log hut & enjoyed it very much - arrived at Kiama about 5 afternoon 3rd March heartily glad my journey was at an end but surprised the Alexander MacLeay had not reached this harbour before us we remained in great anxiety respecting it until the Monday following when she arrived & our cargo living & lifeless in safety but the former quite sick of the sea - that evening & the next day the 12th March got all our goods on shore & took possession of our 3 rooms which we rent from Smith at £2 per week. Robert had been to the Farm the 2d day after our arrival here & saw our huts commenced - he & Charles have been going every second day since but Connor the carpenter being given to drink gets on very slowly & keeps us anxious about being settled there before winter sets in - Robert is very much pleased with his property which we have named Minamurra from the violet which bounds it in part & every one says he has been very fortunate. Were we only there which I trust we will be soon I have no doubt we should with the blessing of God get on very well - Charles went to Sydney a fortnight since & hired a Farm servant who arrived here last Saturday and on Monday he & Charles went to Minamurra & commenced erecting a hut for themselves which they took possession of last night & intend being busy erecting our houses & putting in some garden seeds &c &c. John Cusack is a strong & seems willing man an Irishman hope he will turn out better than Garrit Lynch our first servant who was sent to Wollongong to bring back the horse I rode - got drunk - was put in the watch house & did not return till a day after his time - he was dismissed instantly for his conduct most happy I was to get him off having disliked him from the beginning. [171]  Robert went to Wollongong yesterday. I expect he will return tomorrow evening - feel lonely when he is absent having little variety of work to amuse me - Kiama is a very pretty place to be sold in town allotments & will be most convenient for our sending our crops to Sydney the harbour being such as to admit of small vessels. The coast is very indented [?] to numerous pretty bays & diversified [?] rocks indeed had we only ruinous castles & valiant knights there could not be a more romantic country - you may lose yourself amidst the vines & creepers of an interminable forest & in five minutes if you be like minded throw yourself from a precipice into the Pacific Ocean.  There is no society here & I sometimes feel that we have left a great deal behind us there is some chance of our becoming savages but while dear Rob is happy I ought to be so too & certainly the great improvement of his health more than makes up for many comforts enjoyed in Scotland which we cannot expect here - intercourse with well bred people "one" Mrs H. Osborne is the only Lady near me I expect to enjoy - went with Robert one day to Mr [Michael] Hindmarshs Alne Bank. Mrs H a regular dowdy & a currency - Kind & well enough but quite a money making couple seemingly now although money is all very well & certainly the great cause of our coming to N S Wales it ought not to be the sole aim of creatures born for nobler purposes & I trust neither R C J or I will ever so far debase ourselves as to make that the chief aim of our existence which should only be sought in so far as it may increase our own comforts & the means of doing good to our fellow creatures in need - had a walk this afternoon took Morwen & Tay with me when shall I be on the Banks of the sweet winding Tay again I do not like to be so long alone it only makes me think of & long after home & its dear minister & all to no purpose I wish I had a letter from Minnie or some one else how many changes may have taken place since last September. [172]  Friday 19th April  Some weeks since 3 emigrant families arrived in the harbour to take a clearing lease on Mr Robbs farm - they are from the north of Scotland & only 2 of them can talk English - poor creatures they have been badly off since coming here living in the bush & before they got a hut erected suffering from the rain which commenced about that time as well as from hunger having brought no provisions expecting to receive them from their employer & finding they could exist no longer in that way they have procured places elsewhere - one man goes to Mr Stevenson - the Mackenzies to Mr Osborne & the Smiths as yet undecided whether to go to Mr Osborne Capt [J. G.1 Collins or come to us - we took one of their boys James who is just beginning to understand what he has to do & his Father takes him to Marshall Mount which I am sorry for we are uncertain about taking his Brother who is a smarter boy but of inferior disposition being pert & not given to tell the truth I fear however if he comes I will try to drive that out of him.   Thursday 25th April  Robert and I set off to Marshall Mount remained at Minamurra 2 hours while the rain lasted & reached Mr Osbornes by 6 oclock was more pleased with the hut at the Farm than I expected - wish it was finished Charles & John Cusack living in primitive simplicity working hard - Robert left Marshall Mount on Saturday taking a Timor Poney with him which he exchanged with Mr Osborne for old Charlie & very glad R was to get rid of the lazy beast - on Saturday Dr Alick Osborne & Family dined at Mr H 0's & on Wednesday Mrs B & I went there to dinner - they seem a nice Family much more agreeable than Dr John Osborne's at Wollongong - Mr H O went on Tuesday to the Kangaroo ground with Mr Brown.  When we arrived in the Colony the country was in a dreadful state for want of water and from that time 2d January till about the beginning of April we had scarcely a drop of rain excepting occasional thunder showers which did not at all benefit the ground - complaints were loud from all quarters of the want of water for man & beast & even in this district which is truly a Paradise when compared to other parts was parched & the grass withered up - every thing rose tremendously in price & dreading there would be no wheat crop next year ships were to be sent to foreign parts for supplies - first flour is now 46/- per cwt & second do 43/- an immense price & actually ruinous to those who like ourselves are newly arrived and have to lay out money for every thing - we ought to be thankful for having the needful and trust next year may be better - [173] the rain came on about the 1st April we had several days of continued & heavy rain which has done an [NN] deal of good - it is truly wonderful the change that has taken place I could imagine I saw the grass growing & although we have had some very dry days since what before was a field of black earth is now covered with green grass & although short affords a good picking for the horses - Winter commences next month & I trust we may have yet abundance of that most necessary article rain which would quite change the present aspect of things & make us all look cheerful.  Monday 6th May  The first dray load of things went to the Farm; house nearly finished on Friday 10th Mr Tait (Rev. John Tait) Presbyterian Minister at Wollongong dined with us on his way to Shoalhaven & on Sunday Dr EG. U.I Alley - Mr Brown & Mr Annesley came about 11 oclock the two latter gentlemen to see the district - they lunched with us & returned same afternoon - Monday saw Mr Tait again Robert went to Minamurra in the afternoon was called to see a man at Shoalhaven who was said to be dying - he set off [?] with the messenger had some tea here in passing & did not reach Shoalhaven till 6 oclock; found the man not so ill & came home next day very much knocked up - hope he will not be called away again is a great nuisance & he is not fit for exertion - before he returned on Tuesday evening a whole cavalcade had arrived here from Wollongong consisting of Lady Franklin the Governor's Lady of Van Diemen's Land & companions.  May 18th  Left Kiama May 18th Robert came to Minamurra 2 days before & is much engaged with a man at the Mills who had his hand dreadfully lacerated so that when Jessie & I arrived here we found no one to welcome us & the hut in sad confusion - set about making tidy & by the time Bob came from his Patient had tea ready - only 2 rooms finished then one serves as kitchen & Jessie's sleeping place & the other as our bed room sitting room &c &c - Charles slept in a place off the store erected by himself & John Cusack - very busy afterwards inspecting china &c & soon managed to make ourselves comfortable in the one room where we remained for 4 weeks - had 2 visits of Dr B Brien 1 of Dr Alley & 2 from Mr Tait during our stay there & could not have believed some time ago that we could have put up with so little accommodation & at the same time had things tidy about us - found one sofa most convenient for sleeping on it was made down every night & up in the morning & was really useful - Mr Tait remained a night with a Mr Reid from Greenock & fortunately our second bed room was so far finished as to admit of his sleeping in it - funny that a Minister should sleep the first night in it - we are now 24th June fairly settled & confortable in a nice sitting room 22 feet long containing a side board - Piano-----Book Case Sofa - large table & 8 chairs & a snug bed room off it where we have many mercies & comfort to be thankful for - getting a Porch made at the door - weather excessively cold - 5 assigned men assisted on the 23d much to Bob's joy who will now get on with his opperations... [174]  Wednesday 17th [July]  ... white cow died Tuesday obliged to buy milk again much good we have derived from Mr Osborne's cows truly - we know what we know - during Bob's absence had Gardener here putting flower borders in order and sowing vegetable seeds in small kitchen garden behind the house vines planted round the walls & 4 fruit trees. Dr Alley fixed on coming to Farm in our neighbourhood - hope they may prove pleasant neighbours - Jessie put her wages in the Saving Bank - Tay had 5 pups one died...  Friday 26th July  Dr Alix Osborne Mr Henry Osborne Holden called here former invited us to a dancing party on the following Monday - got loan of a horse from Mr Osborne & went very tired & passed a wearisome night disappointed of half the Party - left about 5 this Morning - went to Marshall Mount & slept for a few hours intending to return home in the afternoon but prevented by rain - came home Wednesday Morning & think I shall not leave for some time again - saw no place like home -   On Sunday 11th August James Ainsworth & Allen were Pleased to take to the Bush - Charles saw Allen in bed at 9 oclock & James was in at Players at half past 8; next morning both were missing - they were caught at Appin on the following Thursday. Robert goes tomorrow to see them tried at Wollongong been very busy had a bullock killed last week & another this week have now plenty of Beef in the store -   Thursday August 18th  Robert went as intended to appear against our runaways on Friday 19th they were sentenced to twelvemonths work in an iron gang & to be returned here at the end of that time. R returned on Saturday afternoon. [175]  Minamurra 4th September  Took a walk on Sunday with B & Charles and saw some beautiful creepers one a scarlet or crimson flower very splendid & another little simple thing as graceful wish the folks at home could see them! -   I only waited the arrival of the box to write to you as you very kindly expressed a wish that I should do so. I am happy to say it came safely and the things were not in the least injured by salt water. I am extremely obliged to you for your share of its contents. The dress we much admire and the books. The sermons Henry is much pleased with as well as the numerous other presents which we both dearly appreciate as coming from you and fancying to have been made by yourself...  I have a sister with me so do not feel the loneliness of the bush much although you may imagine I am a close housekeeper when I tell you that till last week I had not been out of the valley for more than two years but the fact is there is little inducement to go beyond it the Mountain is so steep. While I was up I visited all the ladies in the neighbourhood who are not very numerous they are very agreeable persons. I remained two or three days and although the distance was only 16 miles I was so fatigued that I was glad to get home. I rode up and down the mountain and drove in a gig the rest of the way I saw no part of the country anything to equal our own beautiful valley and persons do not seem to attend to the cultivation of their gardens or else the climate is not so favourable. Ours is very pleasantly situated the verandah opens into it which affords the opportunity of amusing our-selves when we feel inclined to garden. Little Laura is already becoming a most useful assistant to her Papa although I fear she destroys more flowers than she cultivates. Our peach trees grapes strawberries and raspberries promise well.  You wished to know how I amused myself I can assure you what with visitors calling as they often do three or four together people living in this country being obliged to keep sort of open house for travellers particularly at this distance where there are no Inns and my dear little ones and work I find any time fully occupied. Henry takes us for a ramble occasionally between the Mountain ranges where at this season of the year most beautiful wild flowers grow the rock lily is a splendid flower. [177] You would be astonished to see it growing on a solid block of granite without the slightest appearance of earth about.  EXPEDITION To The RIVER DARLING IN the YEAR 1835  CHAPTER 1 [...]  ON returning to Sydney from the banks of the Karaula my attention was immediately drawn to other duties and especially to those of the department of roads and bridges which had also been placed under my direction.  I did however entertain hopes that I should be permitted at a subsequent period to continue my journey towards the north-west.  In May 1833 the local authorities were informed that His Majesty's Government judged it expedient an expedition should be undertaken to explore the course of the River Darling and that this service should be performed by the survey department. [148]   Until that time I had understood the supposed course of the Darling to have been sufficiently evident but from the necessity for this survey and circumstances which I had not until then fully considered I began to entertain doubts on that subject. It seemed probable from the divergent courses of the Macquarie and Lachlan that these rivers might belong to separate basins and that the dividing ridge might be the "very elevated range" which Mr. Oxley had seen extending westward between them. It was obvious that this range if continuous must separate the basin of the Darling from that of the river Murray.  As a preliminary step towards the exploration of the Darling Mr. Dixon was sent in October 1833 with instructions to trace the ranges between the rivers Lachlan and Macquarie by proceeding westward from Wellington Valley. Instead however of doing this Mr. Dixon first followed the Macquarie downwards from Wellington Valley and then crossing to the Bogan which flowed at that time bank-high he followed the course of this river for 67 miles and finally returned without having seen any of the high land between the Macquarie and the Lachlan which he had been sent to investigate. A season so favourable for exploring that high land did not occur for four years afterwards but it was within that period and during a long continued drought that the two succeeding expeditions were sent to ascertain the course of the Darling.  Preparations had been made for the departure of the expedition in the month of March following but my duties as a commissioner to investigate claims to grants of land having been then urgent the undertaking was deferred until the next season. [149]   In the mean time two light whale boats were built by Mr. Eager of the dock-yard at Sydney; and wood was cut for the felloes of wheels which would be required for a boat-carriage and carts and it was laid up to season in the lumber yard at Paramatta.  In completing the equipment for the journey in the following year at the same place I was much indebted to the zealous assistance of Mr. Simpson of the department of roads.  The boat-carriage was constructed according to a model made by my friend Mr. Dunlop King's Astronomer at Paramatta and the plan of it will be easily understood by the accompanying figure. One boat was made to fit within the other the thawrts of the larger or outer one being taken out. The double boat thus formed was suspended on belts of canvass which supported it buoyant and clear of the frame work. Those parts of the canvass of the carriage most liable to friction were guarded with sheepskin and greased hide. The smaller boat was suspended within the larger also on canvass so as to swing clear of the outer boat's sides; and the whole was covered by a tarpaulin thrown over a ridge poll.  Besides Mr. Richard Cunningham who was attached to the expedition as botanist Mr. Larrner a very young assistant surveyor was appointed to accompany me; the services of the other officers of the department being required for duties within the settled districts. [150]  The following men composed the party. [...]  Nine of these men (distinguished by italics) had been under my command on my former expedition and were consequently well acquainted with the service. Their subsequent steady conduct also satisfied me as to their eligibility for the contemplated journey.  At noon on the 9th March 1835 I had at length the satisfaction of seeing this party leave Paramatta with an equipment fit for the undertaking. The boats appeared to swim very well in their carriage which was followed by seven carts and as many pack-horses affording the means of carrying provisions for five months. Two mountain barometers were borne by two men the only service required of them while travelling. The whole party in motion towards the unknown interior and prepared for sea or land was to me a most gratifying spectacle. The cares of preparation were at an end and I could still count on three weeks of comparative leisure at Sydney during which time I could arrange the business of my office. [151] The cattle station at Buree where I intended to commence operations was distant 170 miles from Sydney and as it was necessary that the party should travel slowly in crossing the mountains with the boat-carriage; and equally indispensable that the cattle should rest some days after arriving at Buree; I calculated that the expedition could not be ready to advance from that point in less than three weeks from the time at which it left Paramatta.  On the 31st of March I quitted Sydney on the important errand of geographical discovery. My horse which had been in training by Brown for some weeks seemed impatient of roads and full of spirit a pleasant sensation at all times to the rider and very congenial to the high excitement of such an enterprise.  We soon arrived at Paramatta where I obtained the loan of a good chronometer from Mr. Dunlop at the observatory. Having noted various important memoranda and suggestions and partaken of an early dinner I bade my scientific and obliging friend farewell and pursued my journey along the western road.  I arrived in a few hours at Emu ferry on the river Hawkesbury the boundary there of the county of Cumberland. I had traversed the county in its greatest width by this western route; and thus crossed by far the best portion. Unlike the northern sandstone district where the road towards Wiseman's ferry could be made only by following one continuous ridge the surface being intersected by deep and precipitous ravines we were enabled here the surface rock being trap to travel along a perfectly straight road over a gently undulating surface. The soil in this district is good consisting chiefly of decomposed trap. The land is wholly in the hands of individuals and in a climate sufficiently moist. would answer well for cultivation. The road passes near Prospect Hill which is the most conspicuous eminence in the county and is cultivated to the summit. [152] The rich red soil derived from the subjacent trap-rock produces crops as abundantly now as when it was first tilled upwards of thirty years ago.  Nearly the whole of the western portion of this county consists of soil equally good; but it remains for the most part occupied by the original wood. It is however very generally enclosed by substantial fencing and affords good pasturage. There is some rich alluvial land on both banks of the Hawkesbury and some of it near this road is let for as much as 20s. per acre.  The mansion of Sir John Jamieson situated several miles above Emu commands an extensive view over that noble stream the rich margins of which are hemmed in on the west by the abrupt precipices of the Blue mountains. The intermediate space beyond the ford is called Emu plains. At the inn near this ford I passed the night being desirous to cross the Blue mountains next day.  April 1. - At day-break we crossed the river in the punt. The Hawkesbury is 130 yards broad at this ferry being the broadest fresh-water stream known in Australia before the discovery of the Murray.  We now entered the county of Cook so named by me in considering that its lofty summits must have been the first land that met the eye of the celebrated navigator on his first approach to the eastern coast. Here again we meet with that precipitous inaccessible kind of country which distinguishes the sandstone formation so extensive in Australia. This arenaceous deposit for a long time confined the colonists within the line of the Hawkesbury and until the want of fresh pastures during dry seasons compelled them to explore these rocky regions. One party succeeded in penetrating the country to the westward by following the continuous line of high land which separates the ravines of the valley of the river Cox on one side from those which belong to the valley of the Grose on the other. [153] In this direction the road to the interior country was accordingly opened by Governor Macquarie; and the ravines on each side are too deep and precipitous to admit of any extensive alteration of the line although it has recently been much improved especially in the ascent to these mountains above Emu and in the descent from them to the interior country. These were the chief difficulties in making the original road across this mountain mass as the old passes of Lapstone Hill and Mount York still testify. The upper region being once gained it presents considerable uniformity of feature at least along the connecting ridge. The rise is gradual from a height of about 1000 feet above Emu plains to 3400 feet its maximum near King's Table-land 25 miles further westward. This mass of sandstone is intersected by ravines deep in proportion to the height of the surface until the profound depth of the vallies adjacent to the Weatherboard Inn and Blackheath inclosed by rocky precipices imparts a wild grandeur to the scenery of a very uncommon character.* The whole mass consists of a coarse ferruginous sandstone composed of angular or slightly worn grains of quartz cemented by oxide of iron. There is scarcely a patch of land along the line of road fit for cultivation. One solitary spot rather better than the rest has been wisely appropriated for an inn and at a point very convenient for travellers being about half way across these mountains. This inn is about 2800 feet above the sea and the clouds and temperature give it the climate of England. Potatoes of an excellent quality grow there also gooseberries; and a fire is as frequently agreeable as in the latitude of 52° N.  The only summits which meet the traveller's eye above the common horizon are Mounts Hay and Tomah situated about twelve miles northward of the road - the river Grose passing between them. These heights consist of trap-rock and grey porphyry and like Warrawolong are crowned with lofty trees. [154]  Some idea may be formed of the intricate character of the mountain ravines in that neighbourhood from the difficulties experienced by the surveyors in endeavouring to obtain access to Mount Hay. Mr. Dixon in an unsuccessful attempt penetrated to the valley of the Grose until then unvisited by any European; and when he at length emerged from ravines in which he had been bewildered four days without reaching Mount Hay he thanked God (to use his own words in an official letter) that he had found his way out of them. - (See the accompanying View of the Grose; also a general view of the sandstone territory in Vol. 2. Pl. 38.)  Mr. Govett was afterwards employed by me to make a detailed survey of the various ramifications of these ravines by tracing each in succession from the general line of road; and thus by a patient survey of the whole he ascertained at length the ridge connected with Mount Hay and was the first to ascend it. Guided by Mr. Govett I was thus enabled to place my theodolite on that summit. I found the scenery immediately around it very wild consisting of stupendous perpendicular cliffs 3000 feet deep at the foot of which the silvery line of the Grose meanders through a green valley into which neither the colonists nor their cattle have yet penetrated. Having looked into this valley from the summit of Tomah also in 1827 I was tempted soon after to endeavour to explore it by ascending the river from its junction with the Hawkesbury near Richmond; but I had not proceeded far in this attempt accompanied by Major Lockyer and Mr. Dixon when we were compelled to leave our horses and soon after to scramble on our hands and feet until at length even our quadrumanous progress was arrested in the bed of the river by round boulders which were as large as houses and over or between which we found it impossible to proceed. The object which I had then in view with the concurrence of the Governor was to carry the western road along the valley of the Grose and by cutting a tunnel of about a mile through a ridge at the head of it to reach the vale of Clywd and so avoid the mountains altogether. [155] The ascent to them from Emu and the descent from them at Mount York were both then extremely bad; so much so indeed at the latter pass especially that a grant of land was publicly offered by the Government to whoever could point out a better. Both these obstacles have since been overcome. The pass of Mount Victoria named by me after the youthful Princess and opened by Governor Bourke in 1832 descends at an inclination of 1 in 15 (where steepest) and avoids the abrupt descent by Mount York.  The new road from Emu plains which is still less inclined has been made during the government of Sir Richard Bourke and relieves the Bathurst teams from the difficulties of Lapstone hill the ascent of which cost them a whole day. The value of convict labour to a young colony is apparent in these new passes cut in many places out of the solid rock; and this advantage will be permanently recorded in these works and others now going forward in different parts of this mountain road which must finally make it one of the best in the colony.  The difference between the lower country on the Hawkesbury and the region which I have endeavoured to describe is very striking. The rocks are also different for on the side of Cumberland they consist of trap and on the other or that of the mountains of sandstone. The course of the Hawkesbury above Emu plains presents a singular feature in forcing its way through a very steep-sided ravine and thus cutting off a portion of the mountain mass after its channel has previously bordered on the lower country of Cumberland where no such obstruction is opposed to its waters which might there pursue a more direct course to the sea. The river takes this remarkable turn near the junction of the Nepean and there we find in the bed of the stream (at Cox's Basin") a dark coloured trap-rock apparently containing steatitic matter and doubtless connected with one of the disturbing operations to which this fractured country has been exposed. [156]  Beyond the ferry the road crosses Emu plains a level tract here about a mile in width and intervening between the river and the base of the mountains. This flat consists chiefly of gravel - composed of large pebbles for the greater part quartzose; and in sinking a well a bed of them was found in which many were nearly spherical.  A township has been marked out at the ascent of the new road the question as to the most eligible situation for a town on Emu plains having led to the construction of the new pass. The growth of towns depends very much on the direction of great roads and must be more certain and the allotments consequently more valuable when the most eligible line of thoroughfare is ascertained and opened in the first instance. Such Works of public convenience should precede as much as possible the progress of colonization. The plan at least should be well considered before the capital or the labour which is the same thing is applied. Buildings and other improvements can then be commenced with greater certainty of permanent value. " Les depenses utiles sont economie" said Guibert but in new countries the economy will much depend on the permanent utility of works for which in most cases the necessity should be foreseen. With the example of so many old countries for our guidance obstructions to the spread of population in a new one should be removed according to plans of general arrangement keeping in view the best distribution of towns with respect to local advantages and the best sites for all public buildings requisite for the towns still in embryo. The most advantageous general lines of direction should be ascertained for the roads - that the public means may be applied with certainty to their substantial improvement by removing obstructions and building bridges. On good roads there is greater inducement to individuals to erect inns ; and in well arranged streets to build good houses - than where uncertainty as to the permanent direction of the one or irregularity in time plan or line of the other discourage all such undertakings. [157]  It has been my duty to keep these objects in view as sole commissioner for the division and appropriation of the territory of New South Wales; and as head also of the department of roads and bridges I have as far as lay in my power applied the means at my disposal only to works of a permanently useful character guided as I have been in my judgment respecting them by a general survey of the country.  My ride along the mountain road presented no object worth describing; but I have frequently found that the most dreary road ceases to appear monotonous or long after we have acquired a knowledge of the adjacent country. The ideas of locality are no longer limited like our view by the trees on each side. The least turn reminds us that we are passing some "antre vast" or lateral ridge occupying a place in the map which thus determines our position. In crossing these mountains an extensive knowledge of the localities relieved the monotony of the road to me and being inseparable from it in my mind the digressions in this part of my journal will after this explanation perhaps appear less objectionable.  Twilight overtook me as I was giving directions to Sub-inspector Binning for the completion of the pass at Mount Victoria; and I halted for the night at a small inn at its foot.  April 2. - Although some heavy rain had fallen at Sydney and yesterday during my ride across the mountains yet the grass in this valley which at other times had appeared green and abundant was now parched and scanty. A swampy hollow across which a long bridge had been erected was quite dry and the whole surface bore a brown and dusty aspect.  This lower country to which we had descended from Mount Victoria was named by Governor Macquarie "the Vale of Clywd" from its supposed resemblance to the valley of that name in Wales. [158] It is enclosed by other heights named Mount York and Mount Clarence and is watered by a small stream called the river Lett. A wooden bridge has been erected across this stream and the site of a village marked out on the bank opposite to it. When such a spot has once been determined on for the establishment of a town or village and divided into small allotments available to blacksmiths wheelwrights coopers innkeepers &c. the land is no longer liable to be sold in a section of a square mile according to the land regulations. Much attention is necessary during the progress of colonization to prevent the monopoly of the land in thoroughfares where water is to be had. The convenience of the public and the encouragement of the mechanic who is indeed the pioneer of colonists cannot be sufficiently studied in affording facilities for the establishment of inns and the growth of population along great roads.  The aspect of this valley is very different from that of the mountain region and equally so from that of the lower country on the Hawkesbury. This change is obviously owing to the difference in the rock. Granite appears here for the first time on this road; and we accordingly find those bold undulations and that thinly wooded surface which usually distinguish the formation in Australia. It is at this point in general finely grained but the felspar partly decomposed with distinct crystals of felspar unchanged.  From the pass of Mount Victoria I travelled to Bathurst by an entirely new road opened in a direction first recommended by me in 1827.  At fourteen miles from Mount Victoria is Farmer's Creek so named after a useful horse which fell there and broke his neck when I was surveying and marking out the line of road. The formation of the descent to this mountain stream was a work of considerable labour and at that time several gangs of prisoners in irons were employed upon it. Crossing Farmer's creek near its junction with Cox's river the road is continued for one mile along the right bank to the site chosen for throwing a bridge over this river. [159] The ascent on the opposite side has been cut with unnecessary labour through a point of the hill and upon this the gangs were then at work. The gangs of prisoners in irons were lodged in a stockade which had been erected here and was guarded by a detachment of the 17th regiment. The river Cox is at this point 2172 feet above the level of the sea. It pursues its course through a wild inaccessible mountain country and joins the Warragamba about twenty miles to the southward of Emu plains. This course of the Cox could be traced by the surveyors only by scrambling on foot or by following out the several extremities of the mountain ranges which abut upon its rocky channel.  Mount Walker overlooks that part of the Cox which is crossed by the new line of road. The summit of this hill consists of a dark grey felspar. At its base and in the bed of the river is trap which appears to be the principal rock of the country to some distance beyond the river. The road reaches at three miles from the Cox a small brook named Solitary Creek which waters a valley where an inn was then building. This is the first rivulet falling towards the interior country all the other streams previously crossed by this road flowing to the eastern coast; consequently the apparently low ridge between Solitary creek and Cox's river is there part of what is termed the Coast Range which extends from Cape Howe to Cape York across 33 degrees of latitude.  The road beyond Solitary creek winds around the side of Honeysuckle-hill a summit of considerable elevation consisting of trap-rock. The country beyond that bill is more open and favourable for road making. An inn has been built on a small flat distant about twenty-three miles from Mount Victoria and about half way between that pass and Bathurst. The only remarkable feature on the remainder of this line is Stony Range distant from Bathurst fourteen miles. [160] It is a ridge of high ground which traverses the country from north to south and terminates on the Fish river. The road crosses it at the very lowest part and where the rock consists of a dark grey felspar with grains of quartz. Time soil is red and rich and bears trees of uncommon magnitude. The timber is found useful by the inhabitants of the Bathurst district who keep the sawyers constantly at work there.   From Stony Range the plains of Bathurst appear in the distance to great advantage; the eye of the traveller from Sydney having long sought in vain for some relief from the prospect of so much waste mountainous country.  We reach the open plains of Bathurst six miles from the settlement. I arrived early at Mrs. Dillon's inn where I took up my quarters in order that I might complete with less interruption a report which I was instructed to make to the Governor from this place respecting the state of the works along time road.  April 3. - My friend Rankin called and insisted on my accompanying him to his residence at Saltram which I accordingly did. The houses of the inhabitants here are scattered over the extensive open country and give a most cheerful appearance to the plains of Bathurst. These fine downs only a few years before must have been as desolate as those of a similar character still are on the banks of the Nammoy and Karaula. Peace and plenty now smile on the banks of "Wambool" and British enterprise and industry may produce in time a similar change on the desolate banks of the Nammoy Gwydir and Karaula and throughout those extensive regions behind the Coast range still further northward - all as yet unpeopled save by the wandering aborigines who may then as at Bathurst now enjoy that security and protection to which they have so just a claim.  The inconvenience of a want of plan for roads and streets is strikingly obvious at Bathurst. A vast tract had indeed been reserved as a township but then no streets having been laid out allotments for building could neither he obtained by grant nor purchase. [161] The site for the town was therefore only distinguished by a government house jail court house post-office and barracks; while the population had collected in 60 or 80 houses built in an irregular manner on the Sydney side of the river and at the distance of a mile from the intended site of the town. The consequence of a want of arrangement became equally apparent in the line of approach to the township for the only road in use being very indirect and passing through a muddy hollow named "The Bay of Biscay" could not be altered because the adjacent land had been granted to individuals. Thus when the good people of Bathurst prayed in petitions for delivery from their "Bay of Biscay" and a dry and more direct line for the road had been easily found and marked out the irregular buildings and private property lay in the way of the desired improvement. All these inconveniences might have been obviated by due attention to such arrangements in the first instance when any plan was practicable; whereas subsequently it has been found possible to remedy them only in a limited degree. The streets having now been laid out a church and many houses are in course of erection and a new road leading over firm ground to the site of the intended bridge has been opened with the consent of the owner of the property. Part of the reserved land of the township has been given to small farmers - a class very essential to the increase of population but by no means numerous in New South Wales - and least of all at Bathurst where the land is laid out chiefly in large sheep farms.  A bridge across the Macquarie has long been a desideratum. This river although in common seasons fordable and in dry seasons scarcely fluent is liable after heavy falls of rain in the mountains to rise suddenly to a great height and cut off the communication between the public buildings on the one side and the peopled suburbs and great road from Sydney on the other. [162] The country beyond the Macquarie affords excellent sheep-pasturage the hills consisting chiefly of granite. A number of respectable colonists are domiciled on the surrounding plains and the society of' their hospitable circle presents a very pleasing picture of pastoral happiness and independence.  April 4. - It was not until two o'clock that I could conclude my correspondence with the road-making land-measuring world and join a very agreeable party assembled by my friend Rankin to partake of an early dinner and witness my departure.  Mr. Rankin accompanied me in my ride that afternoon and we reached at a late hour the house of Charley Booth distant about 25 miles from Bathurst. Some years had elapsed since I first passed a night at Charley's hut or cattle station then a resting-place for whoever might occasionally pass; and inhabited by grim-looking stockmen of whom Charley as my friend called him seemed one. Now the march of improvement had told wonderfully on the place. The hut was converted into a house in which the curtained neatness and good arrangement were remarkable for such an out-station. Mr. Booth himself looked younger by some years and we at length discovered the source of the increased comforts of his home in a wife whom be had wisely selected from among the recently arrived emigrants.  April 5. - Here I at length took leave of my friend to pursue a long and dreary ride along the track which led to Buree. The wood consisted chiefly of those kinds of eucalyptus termed box and apple-tree - forming a very open kind of forest the hollows being in general quite clear of trees. The farther I proceeded westward the more the country exhibited the withering effects of long drought.  The mountain mass of the Canobolas lay to the southward of my route; and on crossing the lofty range which here divides the counties of Bathurst and Wellington the summit was distant only four miles. [163] The country in the neighbourhood of that mass consists of trap and limestone and is upon the whole very favourable for sheep-farming. The region to the westward of the Canobolas is still unsurveyed being beyond the limits of the county divisions. Before sunset I joined my men "in the merry greene wood" and in my tent which I found already pitched on the sweet-scented turf I could at length indulge in exploratory schemes free from all the cares of office.  Woodlands  Novr. 18 1839  Dear Brown  I was much pleased on receiving yours of the 15th of March. Since that time you must have had several of mine having written five since leaving Old England stating how we were getting on in Australia. I hear letters are very apt to miscarry I am led to think so many friends not acknowledging the receipt of mine I find. Mrs. B. and yourself have made up your minds to emigrate here there is no doubt of your succeeding well if you can put up with the inconveniences - Land is increasing much in value. Mr. Hardey sold a small farm for 3.10.0 an acre inferior land but a short distance from Perth. Yanjedin which cost us 1600 pounds could have been got for one or two hundred some time ago and our agent says he can get for the same 2000 Robert thinks more. A [settler] purchased a lot of land for from 4 pence or 5 pence an acre and sold half for 1700 pounds 5 shillings per acre. Some land at the Toojay 12000 acres that we should have had for 1500 pounds was sold for 16 or 1800 pounds.  In former letters I told you the prices of sheep cows and horses they are now about the same most likely the latter and the former will fall in value should there not be an increase in emigration also they are sending sheep from Sydney and Launceston. If you bring stock a stallion of the Suffolk Punch breed two or three good mares will answer. We purchased a mare and colt for 150 pounds that in England may be got for about 20 pounds each we sold the filly for 100 pounds and can get if we please 140 pounds for the mare which will pay us well. A good strong stallion would answer. Mr. Smith and several others recommend a few yearling calves the former the Dunham [NN] breed. a bull if Simeon can get one of Mr. George Brown of Arcbury [NN] . Sheep I do not think will answer your purpose without you wish to have any particular sort such as the Saxony or Leicester or Marino. Mr Smith does not like the pigs here and thinks a boar or sow or two of the Berkshire breed would be best.  I have many making enquiries about land for you but cannot get any quite near us that is suitable. There is an Estate about 12000 acres named Avondale about 6 miles from us can be got at 5 shillings per acre the market price is about 3/6 there is also joining I think about 3000 acres at 3 shillings the only objection to the latter is want of water it is uncertain whom the Pool belongs otherwise it would be a good investment. I will not purchase land for you without I think it good particularly expecting you so early. [3]  It will be indispensable to bring servants men and women let them agree with you for a term say two or three years. I think there will be no difficulty procuring them. Shepherds can have here 40 pounds or upwards common Labourers 5 shillings per day Carpenters. Masons and Blacksmiths from ten to fifteen shillings for the same term - should you see two men that will suit us bring them we care not if they are married if they pay their own passage money. We give 20 pounds a year for two or three years and keep them they find their own clothes also in the agreement specify that they are at our disposal at any hour or day not as in England leave off work at five or six oclock. Should you procure them they can assist you on Board if needful.  I have made every inquiry via Red Sea and India but think you will find it not answer your purpose the correspondence betwixt this Colony and India is very uncertain if you go that way send your servants direct to us and we will endeavour to take care of them until your arrival. We are 70 or 80 miles from Freemantle but as soon as I hear of the ship's entering Harbour I will hasten to you. I am told the best accomodation will be found at Mrs. Paces Hotel but should I miss you by any means I would have you bring Mrs. Brown direct to us in Yorkshire the address you will see at the back of the letter although we should be easily found out. I will now leave Mrs. Viveash to give Mrs. Brown what information she can. Robert also talks of writing. Remember me to your better half the Bussey's and all friends. I remain  Dear Brown  Yours truly  S.W. Viveash  There is a man at Mr. Smith's who wished to come with us if of the same mind bring him. One of our people says there is a man and woman at Maldon named Henry Masdon without children would be glad to come here. There is also a man named Quartermaine wife and one child I know will and indeed almost fixed to come with me if they will bring them for us. Should you bring more men than you require they will find plenty employment and be glad to get of for higher wages. I have written this scrawl in such an hurried manner I fear you will scarce make it out.  Be sure to have a written agreement with the Captain.  As you are coming if opportunity offer I will purchase a few sheep for you and put them with our flock at the usual terms.  Swan River  18 Decr. 1839  My Dear Sir   Hearing from Viveash that you either positively are or are likely to come out I think it my duty to write to you.  I hear they are likely to write you also and any thing that I may say which may be contradicted in any letter emanating from Mr. Smith if relating to practical experience is no doubt incorrect. I have but a few minutes to write so excuse haste.  Horses are very high here and it will answer to bring them from England S. America or the Cape - mares I mean of course not thoroughbred blood nor cart horses but something lighter and more active than the former say stout hunters or carriage horses. I doubt if it will answer to bring cows or sheep from England from the latter places it will especially sheep ewes whether coarse or fine. Bring as many servants as you want say carpenter shepherd and 1 to 3 other farm servts if you bring more females than you want plenty will jump at them arrangements are thus constantly made by which the importer receives from the new master monthly payments toward defraying the exps. of passage etc.  Sheep farms are now offering at 3/- or 3/6 (I forget which) p. acre. When we arrived they had hardly touched 2/6. Lands on the Swan are at from £30.0.0 down to 2/- p. acre according to quality and vicinity to Capital but are never sold p. acre but p. estate. Girls from 11 yrs old are made useful so great is the scarcity. I need scarcely tell you that here at first except for a man of large property Cape and other inferior only are used.  If you determine on going to the sheep district say 50 miles over land the less furniture the better a few slight chairs do. table a chest or 2 of drawers ast. crockery I would buy a crate of common willow pattern of all sorts of things for breakfast dinner and chamber no small teacups. Glass the commonest. If you settle on this side the hills you may bring more furniture but I would not bring too much it can be sent for.  Sheep are culls and for broken mouthed coarse up to 5.5.0 for merino ewes for mutt. the butcher gives ab. 1/- ewe lambs to wean say 45/- to 50/-. If you settle on this side you put your sheep to a farmer at 25£ p. 100 head p. acre or on fourths. They threaten to ask 33£ or thirds. My wool goes by this vessel to T. Simpson and Co. Kings cross Yard City it is of medium quality but No 6 and 7 are last yrs and I suspect bad it was our dry season.  Your bills will be taken here unless some great change take place at 3.125 p. cent discount or in other words when you draw you will sell your bill for a good 3 mo. bill at par. [5] Bank discount is 12 p. cent p. ann. at which rate of course you can negotiate a bill. Your being known to Viveash and self will be sufficient.  Bring for your own use Scotch ploughs (iron) and carts 2 of ea. say ring tire not streaks. Spades shovels axes hoes scythes. Rp. hoops shears a few cheeses keg of butter few chests tea white sugar if you require it say 3 cwt. and obtain drum back. Irish pork 20 brls. lard keg or 2. Suet as for navy I cask. Harness not too heavy. Rope for tethering a few coils. A fine property to reside on is now offered adjoining mine on Swan I think 4000 a. for 1000£ I wish you or some other friend would buy it. I never reckon by acres but think this worth the money 8 or 9 miles from Perth by land. A very good farm was lately offered at 150£ p. acr. or £1600 with brick house and good buildings and enclosures say 12 or 14 m. from Perth.  Government land is as you are probably aware put up to auction at 5/- ac. and as you can buy remission certificates (which are govern. paper taken by them in paymt. for land) at 1/2 price it follows that if you are not opposed at auction you can get the land at 2/6. The difficulties however thrown in the way I think purposely by the Governor are so great as to render it more advisable to purchase land already granted if you can find any available.  I forgot to observe that when you put sheep out to keep the owner gets all the wool and does not pay for the lambs till they are 3 mo. old. Persons take in horses to run at large for 1/6 p. head p. week.  I have not now time (I am writing now at Perth stealing a few minutes from the night) to give you a list but if you could tell what to bring you would do well to lay out half your money in goods to sell here at a profit. Powder shot crates of common crockery cheap saddlery nails bar iron Irish pork suet lard butter cheese calicoes cotton prints slop clothing shoes currants hams from England and from the Cape - wine beef dried fruits coffee sugar and tea if low. All the above would pay well.  As I am going into the bush in the morng. early land hunting I must conclude wishing you and Mrs. Brown a pleasant voyage and hoping that we may soon see you on this side of the world.  Believe me my dear Sir  Yours truly  W Tanner  My dear FRIENDS  This is a duty I ought to have performed months ago and you will think harshly of me for this neglect. I have no excuse to plead save that I was unwilling to sadden your hearts with a tale of misery. I waited from day to day and from month to month hoping to be able to give a cheering account of this country but it is a sad one I write at last. I have been disappointed in all my expectations of Australia except as to its wickedness; for it is far more wicked than I had conceived it possible for any place to be or than it is possible for me to describe to you in England. We came to anchor in Sydney harbour on the morning of the 25th July 1839 my dear wife having become the mother of a little girl on the 23rd when we were a few hours' sailing clear of Bass's Strait. Our little blue-eyed ocean child gets on very well and is now of course more than nine months old. I thank God for this blessing.  "He moves in a mysterious way  His wonders to perform"  or this sweet one of ours could never have out-lived the many ills which every day of its short life hath brought. I had but two or three shillings when we got to Sydney and the first news that came on board was that the 4lb. loaf was selling at half-a-crown! and everything proportionately dear. There was no place for the emigrants to go to till such time as they could engage with masters or otherwise provide for themselves. When they left the ship they had to do as best they could. Poor Clarinda in her weak state had no one to do the least thing for her not even dress her baby or make her bed; and in a few days she was obliged to go on shore with her new-born infant in her arms and to walk a mile across the town of Sydney to the miserable place I had been able to provide for her as a home which was a little low dirty unfurnished room without a fire place at five shillings per week rent. When she sat down within these wretched walls overwhelmed with fatigue on a box which I had brought with us from the ship I had but threepence in the world and no employment. For more than two weeks I kept beating about Sydney for work during which time I sold one thing and another from our little stock for Support. At length being completely starved out I engaged as a common labourer with Sir John Jamison Kt M.C to go about thirty-six miles up the country. Sir John agreed to give me £25 for the year. with a ration and half of food. This amounted to weekly - [36]  10 1/2 lbs. beef - sometimes unfit to eat.  10 1/2 lbs. rice - of the worst imaginable quality.  6 3/4 lbs. flour - half made up of ground rice.  2 lbs. sugar - good-tasted brown.  1/4 lb. tea - inferior  1/4 lb. soap - not enough to wash our hands.  2 figs of tobacco - useless to me.  This was what we had to live upon and not a leaf of a vegetable or a drop of milk beyond this. For the first four months we had no other bed than a sheet of bark off a box tree and an old door laid on two cross pieces of wood covered over with a few articles of clothing. The hut appointed for us to live in was a very poor one. The morning sunshine the noon-tide shower and the white moonlight of midnight gushed in upon us alike. You will perhaps think had you been with us you would have had a few vegetables at any rate for you would have made a bit of garden and cultivated them for yourselves; but you would have done no such thing! The slave-masters of New South Wales require their servants to work for them from sunrise till sunset and will not allow them to have gardens lest they should steal a half-hour's time to work in them. I should mention that our boxes coming up from Sydney on Sir John's dray were broken open and almost everything worth carrying away was stolen. I made this at first a very grave complaint but only got laughed at for my pains and told that was nothing. During the time I was at Sir John's I was employed mostly in a vineyard consisting of sixteen acres of land. I was there during the vintage season and left just as we had done wine-making in the middle of last February having been in his service six months. This estate of Sir John's is named 'Regentville' and is situated about three miles from the small town of Penrith on the bank of the Nepean River and about the same distance from the first range of the Blue Mountains. I have been in Sydney now better than two months part of which time I worked in a large ironmongery store in George-street which was founded by Macdonald who now resides I believe at Birmingham. I am at the present time at work for Messrs. Russell Bros engineers and brassfounders Queen's Place George-street. I get five shillings per day finishing brass work; good brassfounders get 7s. 6d. and 8s. a day I think I could get plenty of light turning to do and a good price for it if I had a lathe which I will try to get before long. I am very unsettled at present on account of ill-health. This brass business does not suit me at all - have not been able to do any work for the last week. I think I shall be obliged to go into the country again. As soon as I get settled I will write and arrange with you how you may forward a few things which I should like to get from England as soon as I can remit the money. In the meantime be pleased to write immediately and let us know how all our dear friends have fared since we left home I hope well. Address Mr. Henry Parkes ivory turner at the General Post Office Sydney New South Wales. You must pay the land postage or the letters will not be sent with the mails on board ship. Send me some newspapers and write on the wrappers of them 'newspaper only.' Send me all the news you can. [37] I have seen but one person since I have been in this colony whom I had any knowledge of in England; that was  who was transported about two years ago from Moseley-street. I saw him once - met him in Sydney - he was then staying in the hands of Government at the new prison at Woolloomooloo. For the encouragement of any at home who think of emigrating I ought to add that I have not seen one single individual who came out with me in the Strathfieldsaye but most heartily wishes himself back at home. Mr. Isaac Aaron who lived in Deritend is practising in this colony as a surgeon at Raymond Terrace on the River Hunter.  WITH MY HEART'S PRAYERS FOR YOU ALL / I REMAIN / H. PARKES  P.S. - Wages in Sydney at the present time are about as follow - good workmen [...]  You might get as good a house in Birmingham for 2s. 6d. per week when I left as you can get in Sydney for 15s. per week.  Clarinda sends her love and best wishes to her dear parents with which I unite my own. Tell my own dear father and mother if - as I trust - they are both alive that they are seldom absent from my thoughts. Give my love to my dear nephews Thomas and William. Tell James I am not sorry he did not come out here with us though I think he might have done as well as most. I will give you some general account of this country in my next which you may expect in a month or two after the receipt of this and I hope my next account of my own progress will be more satisfactory. Tell John Varney I would advise him by no means to come to this colony. Tell him to write.  August 11 1840. If you have received the parcel I mentioned you have got a view of our two houses. On the top of the larger one there is a lofty flagstaff to signalize the vessels as they arrive in the Bay about six miles distant and clearly seen with a glass so that every ship as soon as it comes in sight is announced by a ball either red white or black according to what she is supposed to be. [180] This has so delighted the colonists that they come to us far and near for explanation when any signals are flying and it is seldom a day passes withuut one ur more the flagstaff being sometimes decorated with three or four different colours at the same time. Although another belonging to the Government is stationed at a short distance ours generally gives the first and must accurate information.  We still have wet weather and the streets are so muddy it is almost impossible to wade through them. As much of the soil here consists of clay and sand without any gravel to bind them together the streets in the rainy season are rendered almost impassable. As we are now going to have a Mayor and Corporation I hope that some of the deficiencies at present complained of will be remedied for the town is now fast rising into importance.  Adelaide Gouger Street 28th January 1840  My dear Parents I have very melancholy accounts to give which I cannot do without great excitement to my feelings.  We landed at Holdfast Bay about 7 miles from Adelaide (the ship being too large to go into port) on the 10th of December 1839 having been just four months to a day on the Great Deep. We had a safe and many would say a delightful voyage; but as regards myself for the first five weeks I was scarcely able to move my head from my pillow with Sea-sickness which brought me so low that I could render but very little assistance to the dear children as I was obliged to be helped on deck by two persons Edward and another Edward and the children suffered but little from sickness. But as we entered on a warmer climate the dear children became relaxed (with the exception of Emily) gradually getting weaker and for want of proper nourishment became at last sorrowful spectacles to behold. They could eat none of the ship's provisions and our vessel was not like many that are sent out provided with one or more cows for the accommodation of the sick; and had I the voyage to take again I would make that a first consideration as I firmly believe that the dear children would have lived and much - sickness been spared had we experienced proper attention from our Doctor and been provided with a little natural nourishment. -  Poor little Alfred was the first that died on the 30th of Oct and on the 8th of Nov dear Fanny went and three days after on the 11th the dear babe was taken from me. I scarcely know how I sustained the shack though I was certain they could not recover yet when poor Fanny went it over-powered me and from the weakness of my frame reduced me to such a low nervous state that for many weeks I was not expected to survive. It seems I gave much trouble but knew nothing about it and though I was quite conscious that the dear baby and Fanny were thrown overboard I would still persist that the water could not retain them and that they were with me in the berth. I took strange fancies into my head and thought that Mother had said I should have her nice easy chair to sit up in and if they would- only lift me into it I would soon get well. I had that chair of Mother's in my 'mind's eye' for many weeks and -was continually talking about it. [35]  I was bled and blistered or rather plastered and continued in that weak state until within a week of landing. I think I never should have recovered at Sea - you can have no idea of the effect the sea has upon some constitutions. Mine for instance. It was a sort of Sea Consumption. Our Captain took great notice of our children when he saw them gradually wasting away and would send for them into his Cabin and give them port-wine almost daily. In fact wine and water was the only nourishment they took for weeks and that was given them too late. I would advise everyone who came out for Australia to bring nourishing things with them and take in turn with what is allowed on board for the change is so great and so sudden to what we have been accustomed that the constitution unless very strong sickens under it.  My dear Emily now seems more precious to us than ever and I feel very thankful I did not leave her in England. Her health is not as good as formerly having something Scurvy the effects of Salt diet. She is also troubled with weak eyes a complaint exceedingly common in this town from the great degree of heat light and dust.  It is now time to say a little about the country after so much said of my frail self. I have given you but a poor description of our voyage from the fact that little transpired worthy of comment for it was I assure you one continued scene of confusion. r will however give you a faint description of one day and you will then be able to judge of the rest.  The bell calls 'the watch' off at six o'clock in the morning when down comes the Steward to give out the rations for the day 'Ho Mess!' (six persons comprise a Mess) for rice biscuits flour suet and raisins or such as it may be reiterated through the ship till one is stunned with the sound. Then comes such a rush of meagre looking visages till all are served. Then immediately follows the cry of 'boiling water'. Then there is such a scamper with piles of soap biscuits and slices of pork to roast at the Galley fire which many having to wait full half an hour to accomplish return metamorphosed into Blackamoors with smut and smoke. When the great treat was over those who were able to go were ordered on deck to break-fast and there kept the whole of the day. Great was the difficulty to keep the emigrants above not withstanding there was an awning to shelter them from the scorching sun. -  The Doctor was a young and very austere man and during the first half of the passage very careless and inattentive to the health of the passengers till there were many alarming deaths when he became more solicitous respecting them. [36]  During my last illness he appeared quite an altered man towards me allowing me more brandy arrowroot or whatever I could take. In turn and as a recompense on my part it seems I invited him (whilst in a state of delirium) to my wedding dinner of roast pig and turkey. I was in an odd way as you may suppose to take such fancies into my head.  We had thirty deaths during the voyage besides a young gent a cabin passenger who was missing one morning at breakfast time when it was discovered that he must have thrown himself from the porthole in his cabin. He was a man of very quiet and reserved habits and no cause could be assigned why he did the direful act.  But to return to my description of the transactions of the day. Ere the sumptuous repast of biscuits and pork or biscuits and butter is over down comes our Commander the Dr ordering all beds on deck after which the ordinary deck cleaners commence their operations by throwing chlorides of lime and scouring out which you may suppose is quite necessary and with all they were in a sad state of filth frequently finding vermin but could not tell from whence they came. I spared no trouble to get fresh and clean changes of clothes for the dear children whilst alive but to no purpose. They were soon remarked as being the four nicest children on the Ship and this you can imagine caused no little jealousy amongst some of the mothers and there are not a few queer ones amongst them I assure you.  Pardon this digression my dear parents for whilst I write many thoughts of scenes and past trials enter my mind and frequently I feel as though I must throw away my pen though I have much very much I would tell you nay more than my poor weak spirits will enable me to recite. However as I am enabled strength of body (I trust I shall of mind also) I experience more resignation to my circumstances. I have been under a Doctor Nash's attendance since we landed for a month and he ordered me strengthening medicine and port wine which have wonderfully restored me. Edward was also laid by for more than a week since landing but I am happy to say he is now regaining his strength. I fear I am covering my paper in my old style sooner than I expected. I will therefore proceed to tell you many things in few words.  There were seasons on board when I could have wished and did wish that you were with me to contemplate the beauty of the setting sun - its splendour was beyond description and in a few moments you turn to behold the moon rising in silent majesty and shedding her glorious rays over the vast and mighty world of wonders. [37] Whilst gazing on the beautiful scene you are perhaps interrupted by the sad tolling of a bell informing you some poor victim to sickness and privation was about to be launched into a watery grave. Such events are not uncommon but the mind I assure you soon becomes hardened and callous on board a ship.  No doubt you are anxious to know how we like the country and what we are doing and I also am solicitous to inform you. At the same time I am at a loss what to say as there are two ways to represent the same case. One very flattering or the reverse but I wish you to know from me the plain truth as I would ought extenuate or ought set down malice but as far as my little knowledge will authorize without embellishment make a fair statement. To say I like the country would be false for I do not. And I believe the English are greatly deceived with the many flattering accounts respecting the beauty of the country and fine salubrious air of South Australia. It is true we came in the heat of summer but I write as I find it. The heat has been most intense and when attended by what is called the 'hot winds' and whirlpools of dust which are like clouds of smoke extending as far as the eye can reach it causes an overpowering lassitude which I am unable to describe. When the rain comes it descends in torrents we have not had much. Winter here is considered the growing season. At the present time everything is scorched up or I should say bears the appearance of barreness for I have not yet seen anything to scorch. I asked Mr Brandis the other day where the beautiful geraniums grew that he sent such a fine account of to England as having 'trampled under foot'. His reply was that they grew a few miles off in the country where he said everything bore a different aspect.  Bugs and fleas we have by thousands everywhere. Some nights I can get no rest for them. When we came first I was in that horrid place the Square and caught from 100 to 200 of a night and still they were swarming. Ants and mosquitoes are also very tiresome these are a few of the comforts of 'Australia'.   Station on the Yarra Yarra 26th December 1840  My dear Grandfather & Grandma We are very comfortably settled about twenty five miles from Melbourne on a station not in partnership with but on the same place with Mr & Mrs Dawson. George has now 45 head of cattle which he expects in ten years will have increased to 880 head which at the present worth will be - about £6000. Meanwhile we hope soon to pay all our expenses by our dairy; the expense of living here being very small ten pounds a year for a licence being all the rent and taxes. We have as much firing as we like to cut we have a garden with plenty of vegetables and poultry and pigs. Persons in the country have been getting six shillings a dozen for their eggs but I do not expect they will be so high when I have any to sell. Provisions are very fluctuating in price when we arrived the 4. lb loaf was three shillings now it is only one so you may be sure we have laid in a good stock of flour.  This is generally called a very fine climate but give me home as yet. To be sure you have a great deal of bad weather that we are spared but it is very hot here now and very changeable the thermometer at this time is 104 in the shade I leave you to judge what it must be in the sun. As for insects they are more numerous than you can imagine the flies bite terribly and being a new corner have feasted on me.  The children have not had a day's illness since their arrival they do not mind the heat you may be sure they are not- burdened with many clothes. Prid is becoming an expert judge of cattle and grows very fast so like his father. As for Willie if ever there was a brag he is one and it would fill a volume to tell you what he is going to do when he grows up a man. Amongst other things they are both going to take me to London Bridge in a ship to see you all. -  Mary wrote me an account of your removal and robbery. I trust you have no more frights and that you now find your new abode more comforable than the old one; more airy I am sure it must be. I do not think I could live in London now the air is so fresh here we have plenty of wind and when it rains it comes down in torrents. [156] I [will] tell you in a few words what I think of this place. Any one like ourselves willing to work (for I could not get a woman servant to come here for any wages) and put up with a few inconveniences and discomforts let them come; but to the poor industrious mechanic or labourer and his wife and family the advantage is beyond description and I would not hesitate to say none would regret leaving England. Unfortunately there are too many here that will always be poor for they will perhaps only work two or three days in the week and spend all they get in drink. A person in want of food is a thing not known. I saw no beggar while I was in Melbourne and Captain Howey who has lived there these nine months was only asked for alms once and that was a tipsy woman who wanted a shilling to get something to drink.  Now my dear Grandfather and Grandma that I have come to the end of my paper I must wish you a happy new year and though so far separated from you be sure I do not think of you the less. It was ordained for the best that we came here. I have no doubt it [will] turn out so. We are sure of making a comfortable independence for ourselves and being able to put our children in the way of doing so too. How much better it is than staying at home with no prospect but that of Bankruptcy and poverty - staring us in the face.  Your affectionate Grandaughter  P. Selby  We sailed on the 6th of July and landed on the 29th of January eighteen hundred and forty and Dr. Catherine if you can in the world get one pound for yourself and the children and come to the immigrant office in Dublin and come to this country and if you can bring my brother John with you and he will get out for the same this is the best country under the sun for any well behaved person labourer man will get from thirty to forty pounds per year and a servant maid will get twenty pounds p. year and get your certificate bring it to the Rev. Doctor McCabe and he will sign it for you and then there can be nothing to prevent you [...] Thomas Healy Margt. Healy's brother the pensioner he is cheif over the Police in Sidney Town and he does not know his riches he enquired for me the second day after I landed and he treated me very decently. I am very thankful to my prosecutors for sending me here to the land of liberty and freedom [...] you may let my friends know that in course of six months I expect to have as much as any of my friends at home and if you bring your sister with you [...] she will be paid for service [...]   As for doing anything with the women here in the factory it seems next to impossible huddled as they all are together and such impudent creatures almost all of them there in order that they may lie in and then go to service again.  I think the whole system of female transportation - and particularly of female assignment in service - so faulty and vicious that to attempt to deal with the women who are the subjects of it seems waste time and labour.  I wish in my present letter to explain to you (and to confine myself to this one point) that the circumstances in which female prisoners are placed in this Colony and the influence to which they are subject are not in general favourable to reformation but rather have a directly contrary effect.  You are aware that this Assignment of Men has (c)eased or is in the course of being abolished. It has been pronounced 'Domestic Slavery' and the odium of the name has strangled the victim that bore it. You must not suppose however by my saying this that I am ready to advocate the cause of Assignment. In my opinion whatever may be said in its favor (and something may be said) it is an unrighteous cause and I rejoice in its abolition. But is it really abolished? What becomes then of the fact that all the women convicts who come out here are still sent into Assignments. And not a single voice that I know of has been raised in England to save them from this tyranny and this degradation. Are the women wholly forgotten in England? or is Assignment stripped of its horrors and cleansed from its iniquity when applied to them? Alas! the fact is otherwise. The Assignment of women is an infinitely worse thing than the assignment of men. It has all the evils of men's assignment both as respects the 'slave' and the master or mistress and still more. The women not only receive but produce more mischief. I will instance this in one point of view only.  Landed from the ship after a voyage which is itself a cause of increased demoralization they are thrown at once on the bosom of society to be diffused over every part of it - no corner of the island so remote in which their presence is not to be found. Few families so mean that they cannot afford to maintain a single female prisoner servant. But chiefly they are congregated in the Towns in the midst of every temptation to the lowest licentiousness and vice. These women in all but the highest families and not infrequently in them also are the nurses and nursery maids of our Colonial households the earliest teachers consequently of the infant generation the waiting maids probably of the grown up daughters. [25] And of whom is this affirmed? of whose least crime perhaps it is that they are thieves of women whose 'trade' in England I have blushed to see recorded in letters of shame in the Surgeon Superintendant's name-book. [This state of things] - . - is fostered by the association of male and female prisoners in the same family by the temptations to which they are mutually exposed and the very few coercive restrictions to which they are subjected in assigned service. . - It always happens when a female convict ship arrives that as many people as there are prisoners on board and more besides are candidates for their services. These candidates are not bound to shew any qualifications of their fitness to be the employers of convict servants; such a thing would be impossible. Their fitness lies in their want of the prisoners services and in their sense of having as much right to them as others. The best of the prisoners or those supposed to be the best are reserved for the best masters or mistresses (an arrangement which falls under the control of the Chief Superint. of Convicts) that is to say those who are in the most respectable classes of society. The refuse fall to the lot of the lower ranks. Such tho' I have never heard it so stated is undoubedly the principle of distribution and there perhaps could not be a better as respects the best but what can be said of the other? What should we say if in an hospital the most severely afflicted patients the most difficult cases were always made over to the worst physician? and that many of these employers of convict servants are indifferent enough may be concluded from the fact just alluded to that there is rarely a petty tradesman in the town where a great proportion of the tradesmen are emancipated convicts themselves who has not one female prisoner in his employ. This system is as ancient as the origin of this penal colony and it is pursued from something very like necessity. There are no other women (the number of originally free female servants is quite insignificant) and until a very extensive system of female emigration is entered into it would be considered and would in fact be the most intolerable of hardships to put a stop to it - . . Besides this there are no receptacles for women but the homes of the colonists. The whole arrangements of the convict system till now have been based on the principle that the colonists are to be the prisoners' jailers and that their dwelling-houses adapted as many of them are only to the rude and somewhat gross habits of colonial or hard working life their only prisoners [sic]. The Factory is only a large Receiving house for the women whether on their first arrival or in their transition from place of servitude to another and it is also a house of correction for faults committed in Domestic service but it has no pretension to be a place of reformatory discipline.. . [F]ew women remain long enough to be materially acted upon by any reformatory process even did such exist. . - There is no classification which is worth the name. The separate cells are few in number and used only by award of a police magistrate for special offences. Silence is not only not enforced but the utmost confusion of tongues prevails in every yard and every room and in short without entering into more particulars its character may be ascertainted [sic] from the fact that even as a place of punishment it fails in its object. [26] The women return to it again and again. When they wish to change their place of servitude they are known to commit offences on purpose to be sent back to it preparatory to their re-assignment elsewhere.  August 9th [1841] 'On Monday Miss Newcomb Jane & I took up our residence at Boronggoop. We found Armstrong & Owens digging the garden which is fenced. This is Thursday night & every thing is now nearly arranged in the house; we have also got a number of garden & flower seeds put in the ground.  Miss Newcomb who is my partner I hope for life is the best & most clever person I have ever met with; there seems to be magic in her touch every thing she does is done so well & so quickly. Our arrangement for the day is as follows: rise at 7 O'clock break fast at 8 (previously to which we have prayers at which Miss N. presides & prays extempore very beautifully) dinner at 2 (& excellent dinners we have as Vere Armstrong's wife turns out to be a good cook) at 1/2 past 6 tea prayers at 8 & to bed at 10. [36]  Saturday 14th [August]...  We have got a good number of live stock to begin with. Miss Newcomb bought a mare some years since which had 2 fillies - the eldest probably in foal the youngest 7 months. I have 2 mares Constance & Venus both we hope in foal: the names of Miss N's Diana Silvia & Bessy. She has fine cows Patch & Logie with heifer calves & is to have a 3d in a few months. We have a pair of turkeys the cock from Mrs Thomson the hen from Mrs Fisher; a pair of geese from Mrs Thomson; a flock of pigs which Miss N. brought up by hand: we have besides nearly 2 Dozn of fine fowls. the pigs here graze like horses & do no mischief: the horses cost nothing for keeping except tether ropes for those wanted to ride; the others roam at thier pleasure.  The hut or rather cottage is now very comfortable & nice. It consists of a parlour bed room & dressing & a small bed room for strangers; a kitchen & bed room behind & a store room; also a little passage between the kitchen & parlour. We have got a tolerably good Piano 9 American chairs & the floors covered with Indian matting; the walls are all covered with bagging white washed & the wood painted. All this with the zink cottage windows looks very nice & I think with the blessing of God we have every prospect of being very happy.  Saturday Augt 27th...  Today the storm continued but Dr Thomson came down to take Jane home - he brought a schedule for me to fill up in which there must be an exact account given of the number of stock people employed stations & quantity of land &c. The return given in would amuse the commissioners: 1400 sheep - the majority of these have lambs by their side but being not weaned are not mentioned; 10 head of cattle 5 mares; for this small number of stock the names of labourers amounted to 12 including the six children of Armstrong; 10000 acres occupied & 1 acre in cultivation! Capt Pollock a friend of Dr Thomson's a settler about 40 miles up the country called; he has brought me a pair of Emu's eggs & a shell. Miss N. has been very unwell all this day.  Saturday 18th Sept  At 2 O'clock yesterdy morng we were awoke by a loud coo-ey (the sound always employed here to be heard at a distance): on listening we perceived the bleating of the lambs was no longer to be heard; they had knocked down the hurdles & got out. All the men ran nearly without cloaths & in about an hour they were all safe again ... [37]  Wednesday 22d...  ... on Monday about 4 O'clock the ploughing began. The place we fixed on is in the Marsh close to the river. The potatoes are put into the ground every 3d turn of the plough. No previous working! no dung! we shall see the result. This day about 2 O'clock the ploughing was finished; it looks about 11/2 Acres. The rest of this day Mr Read's Blks & our own were employed drawing wood for a brush fence.  8th Octr Friday:  Yesterday the wool shed was finished. It looks very well 30 feet in length by 14 wide; a skilling or verandah along one side under which some sheep are to be placed all night that they may be ready to shear in the morning otherwise they would be so wet with dew that men could not begin till 9 or 10. We yesterday hired 4 shearers; they are to have £1 Per Hand & 5/- Per day to assist in washing & making a washing place; the men are drawing logs for this & the shearers come on Monday.  We yesterday transplanted 30 young almond trees. After dinner today Miss N. rode to Corio. We are all well & quite happy. We find the days two [sic] short for all we have to do which is proof we do not weary.  Tuesday 12th Octr  All the shearers arrived in the morning & were engaged the whole day making a washing place which consists of long logs or spars put out in the river between 2 trees; the spars form 2 pens into the first of which the sheep are flung & allowed to swim awhile; they are then pushed by a forked stick under the middle spar & men with flat sticks rub off the dirt after which they swim out by an approach & go dripping & exhausted to join their companions...  Monday Novr 11  ... all last week the shearing has been going on nicely. . . the sheep are found to be quite clean & free from a single spot of scab a rare occurrance in this colony...  This is indeed a very happy quiet life & I have nothing left to wish for. How much cause have I to be grateful to God for having placed me in such a situation & for having given me such an excellent pious & kind friend. Sir George Gipps the Governor of New S. Wales paid a visit to Geelong some days since but as he only remained 3 and 1/2 hours he could not see much of the place; but he was much pleased with what he saw.  Thursday 18th [November]  Yesterday the 17th at day break Miss N. went to see Venus & brought me the intelligence that she had a foal. I went out & saw it a colt; [38] but a fine large boned fellow bay with a star on the forehead. To day while we were at dinner Jamima [Jemima Scott Armstrong] announced that Di Miss N.'s mare had a foal; we all left our dinner & ran out - a beautiful bay filly. We expect Constance to follow in a few days...  Thursday Decm 2d  On Saturday night the wind blew so violently that we could not sleep: the sheep yards were blown down & both the flocks which are at home got out; but all the men were got out & soon put all right again. On Sunday it was so stormy we did not attempt to go to church.  ...On Teusday [sic] we marked some of the bales of wool & yesterday Armstrong took the first load five to Corio: he brought a box from Kirkcaldy with Marmalade all run out leaving at the bottom of each jar only the orange skins; but there are some cases of preserved meat & a little lambs' wool & worsted for knitting which is a great pleasure.  We have had a good deal of rain last night & to day which was much wanted as the grass begins to look brown. We transplanted a number of lettuces cabbages & cauliflowers. We have now plenty of peas & cabbages &c.  Wednesday 17th March 1841. Barque Parkfield  Under feelings of the most intense interest and excitement I take up my pen to write the account of this day; we are laying to within sight of the Australian shores. How can I describe the emotions of this moment?  About 1/2 past 5 the soul-reviving sound 'land in sight' rang from the mast-head; and then how every heart leapt for joy. I soon after went and joined all the party on deck and there in the far horizon in the grey colouring of coming twilight loomed the faint outline of our adopted land. At a distance of 30 or 40 miles it rose high. The moment any eyes first rested on that 'dim discovered scene' was one the remembrance of which the longest life can never obliterate; none who have not known what it is to sigh to long with sickening longing for land after a voyage of more than 3 months can fully understand with what ecstasy of feeling the first view and scent of land greets the weary senses. [44]  A native fire has been distinguished on the shore tho' we are still distant and we are almost laying to and standing off the land till daylight dawns. The motion has been very distressful all day and I have done very little and felt wretchedly uncomfortable. Mrs Gaudin went into hysterics on first seeing the coast; it is time she should display some feeling for she has not hitherto manifested much.  Thursday 18th March 1841. Parkfield  A boat was soon descried coming off from the shore and between 2 and 3 o'clock it reached us. It proved to be Capt Coffin an American settler who acts as pilot to ships coming in. The moment I felt was an anxious one to hear of the surveyors. Mrs Gaudin said not a word. Papa enquired after them and heard of their safety but that poor Mr Gaudin was out of his mind and had been so from first sailing. Papa immediately broke it to poor Mrs Gaudin whose distress was of course extreme. This sad intelligence produced a general feeling of gloom and sympathy. I had always dreaded and expected it but the shock upset me for the more we heard of him the more affecting appears the whole case.  About 6 in the evening we found ourselves in Leschenault Bay within 1/2 mile of the shore the sea perfectly smooth the temperature more warm and balmy than can be described. We were all struck by the pretty aspect of the country at the mouth of the inlet and in parts along the shore. Masses of beautiful foliage grow down to the water's edge and in an opening of it we descried Mr Eliot's and Mr Stirling's little dwelling. Papa Bob and two of the young men went ashore and found Mr Austen; then called upon Mr Stirling and Mr Eliot; heard that Australind is beautifully laid out. Everything here promises prosperity and all excessively cut up at the change of site which as neither the Stirling nor the Henry have arrived was before unknown to them. The excitement of this evening may be imagined.  Friday 19th March 1841. Parkfield  Papa with Pearce Mrs Gaudin George Smith and Charles Bedingfeld went up to Australind at 7 in the morning and returned about 1/2 past 7. The description of Mr Gaudin's state is the most heartrending and affecting I ever heard. [45] [46] He was lying nearly naked dirty beyond everything on a mattress in the corner of his tent. After some persuasion they induced him to wash and dress and see his wife. He appeared pleased to see her and talked but a strange apathy and indifference seems to mark his aberration of mind. He said it was not fit for her to remain so she came back overcome with the awfulness of her position.  The evening was passed in hearing a glowing description of this lovely Australind and its vicinity. The meeting and disgraceful conduct of the surveying party under Mr Austen his and his wife's sufferings on the voyage poor Mr G. 's pitiable condition and then summed up in regret on all sides that this is not to be our resting place. Mr Stirling Lieutenant Nory Mr Eliot Mr Ommaney Mr Onslow called in the morning and expatiated on the advantages of this colony the impossibility of settling at Port Grey; they have all speculated on our arrival and there is a general gloom at the disappointment in their expectations. Papa decides to go tomorrow to Perth to the Governor.  Saturday 20th March 1841. Parkfield. Port Leschenault  A grey day; till these two days not a cloud has been seen for 6 months. A heavy rain drove us down from the poop very early and the weather looks threatening and windy. It is lightning vividly. How exquisite is the being at rest. I feel intuitively in high spirits.  2 of the natives dressed up for the occasion visited the ship this morning. They were both covered but I was more shocked than I can express at their appearance. I never witnessed so affecting a sight as this display of the degradation of humanity. They do not look like human beings so thin so hideous so filthy; oiled and painted red faces and hair and pieces of rush passed through their hair. They danced and distressed us still more; in fact I feel distressed at the idea of living among such a people so low so degraded a race. -  Sunday 21st March 1841. Parkfield. Leschenault  It blew too hard to enable the Capt to read the service on deck and we all therefore separated. The morning till 1/2 past 11 was very much interrupted by a visit from Dr Carpenter and one of the young surveyors a Mr Harrison; the former I like or at any rate feel disposed to like for dearest Priscy's sake who met him on one of our Wednesday's parties and had a great deal of conversation and was pleased with him. Christina was not prepossessed in his favour. How clearly was the past brought to my recollection by seeing one whom I had met in our dear English home. [47] Mr H. is not pleasing nor gentlemanly.  The evening was passed in conversation on the natives and local interests; nevertheless I felt in a serious frame of mind and my spirit seemed to yearn for a corresponding disposition in circumstances around.  Monday 22nd March 1841. Parkfield  I passed great part of the morning in making my noviciate in washing an employment I expect often to be engaged in. I feel no desire to spare my self-indulgent nature; on the contrary I am only eager to humble it and to come down to the occupation most repugnant to it. There is too much selfishness I fear in my desire for refinement of every kind; it is a web that must be broken for it partakes perhaps too largely of that which is only worldy and producing dissatisfaction and vanity.  My mind has run spontaneously today upon Stanstead and its inmates; Anwell and Cat's Hill and those past days of pleasure I believe; but they come up with heavy tread upon my memory and leave too deep a trace behind. A desolation of feeling has crept over me as I walked the deck this evening and surveyed the land before us. Dearest Priscy's society would at this moment have been of exquisite solace for to her alone can I pour out all the weak the foolish perhaps the morbid feelings of the moment. But I will not encourage melancholy for all is right and best. It is Providence who has brought us here and for our happiness too I do not doubt and I therefore submit.  Tuesday 23rd March 1841. Barque Parkfield  We breakfasted at 8 to start at 9 for Australind. The weather was most lovely and a fair Irish breeze carried us up quickly to the encampment. The scenery of the estuary gratified us extremely; the banks on each side beautifully wooded down to the water's edge with foliage of varied tints even at this season of the year. Mama was charmed.  On arriving at the tents we were most warmly received by Mrs Austen and were astonished at the comfort and neatness of her tent. Fruit wine home-made bread and cakes were laid for us and most refreshing and delicious we found that which we had so long desired to taste - good bread. The appearance of the camp struck us much; the tents distributed under large spreading trees a hill covered with wood and bush rising behind. I never saw a more picturesque scene. [48]  Thursday 25th March 1841. Parkfield  According to appointment Mr Eliot and Mr Stirling came off to take us on shore about 1/2 past 10. Nothing could induce Mama to go ashore so we three Ellen Mary and myself were obliged to go under Mr Gibson's escort for he accompanied us. We landed at Bunbury walked to the Giants' Causeway a basalt formation at the point over which the sea was breaking but it is not above 6 feet high so that there is nothing majestic or striking. Mr Northey and Onslow accompanied us.  We walked over the site for the town of Bunbury a pretty situation for such a purpose. We then mounted the hills to the left of Mr Eliot's house and were charmed with the exquisite view of the estuary the hills beyond dips and dells and knolls beautifully studded with large and picturesque trees forming the nearest landscape.  At length we arrived at Government House situated on the summit of one of these high round knolls commanding a lovely prospect and tho' rude and rough in its construction gave an idea of cheerfulness. A sofa table chairs a small bookcase with books and writing materials in one corner was all the furniture. A chimney-piece and fire-place for burning wood astonished us; the sides of the room whitewashed the roof of thatch and high the ceiling not having been built. Mr Northey showed me his collection of dried plants and very kindly gave me a specimen of each kind.  After resting for some time we again set out. I again walked with Mr Eliot Ellen with Mr Gibson and Mr Stirling with Mary. We wandered through some sweet woods and were pleased with all we saw. We again returned to Mr E.'s and had some delicious bread and butter which I did indeed enjoy and then came off to dinner; all four gentlemen; the Capt and his wife Bob and his had not returned from Australind. We sat down to a dinner so scanty and so bad that we were all made really uncomfortable and did not conceal our indignation. The gentlemen were very agreeable and did not go off till after tea; their attention and kindness to us was most gentlemanlike and considerate.  I am destined to collect seeds and flowers. Mr E. gave me 62 packets of native seeds collected by some famous botanist a valuable present. I really enjoyed the excursion and felt quite at home with our new male friends though I did not quite like our going alone.  Friday 26th March 1841. Parkfield  Mr E. and Stirling having insisted on again coming off to take us for a walk we could not resist the temptation of another agreeable excursion. [49] Again Mama would not leave the ship so we again were obliged to go sans chaperone. Mr Gibson was of our party which was the same as the day before. The weather was still more lovely than yesterday and I cannot forget the exquisite beauty of the colony.  We gently sailed up to the landing place walked (I with Mr Eliot) to Scott's farm then to Capt Coffin's where we rested a few minutes and then wandered on along the banks of the picturesque Preston into the bush. We sat down by the edge of the ford while the gentlemen gathered the tea tree bark and then made calabashes from which we drank as the water poured out from the bottoms. Having had a charming ramble we returned to Capt Coffin's where we found a delicious cold dinner laid out. He himself was piloting a ship and could not be there to entertain us but which Mr Eliot did most kindly. I wished dear Priscy could have seen us and been with us; we three dining in an American settler cottage with 4 comparatively strange friends.  Saturday 27th March 1841. Parkfield  Many of our young men went ashore at 3 in the morning to join Mr Stirling in a kangaroo hunt. Mr Eliot however true to his appointment came off about 11 and Mama Christina Ellen Mary and myself went off. We landed up the creek and walked to his house. The heat was too intense to walk out so we made Mr Eliot give us some work pocket-handkerchiefs to hem. Mary and I attempted to sketch the lovely view from the verandah. We enjoyed the repose of the day; had a delicious bread and butter luncheon.  The hunting party arrived in detachments all the evening. Mr Stirling and Mr Onslow have just left us having brought the fruits of their labour in the shape of a small kangaroo as a present to Mama.  Sunday 28th March 1841. Barque Parkfield  We had no reading; the sun being too hot to have it on deck. Meeting and reading with Mama as usual. Speculations all day as to Papa's return. A day of annoyance (a petty one) about the kangaroo and Mr Stirling not being invited to partake of it. About 5 o'clock a sail came in sight from the north which proved to be a cutter. We of course immediately concluded that it was a government vessel conveying Mr Hutt and Papa hitherto. Soon after Bob with Mr S pence and many of the young men sailed off to meet her. [50]  Sunset came on a glorious one it was the sky painted with every tint and hue of the most radiant rainbow; dark followed; a boat was heard alongside and in a moment Papa Pearce and Mr Ommaney stepped on board. Our desire to remain here instead of going on to Port Grey has become irresistible. After the first feelings of joy at the safe termination of their hazardous Irish expedition had subsided our anxiety to know the result of it became intense; all assembled in the cuddy and tried to read in their countenances the decision. In half an hour hopes were crowned by hearing that the governor so entirely disapproved of the settlement being made on the inhospitable barren unknown coast contemplated that Papa had taken upon himself the responsibility of remaining.  I cannot describe the joy I in common with all our circle felt. Two hours passed quickly in hearing the adventures of the travellers the intercourse with the Governor Perth and the only drawback was Bob's absence and the anxiety about him. I retired to rest with a grateful heart I trust for this great favour. This place offers a home we never could have felt on an uncivilized uninhabited territory. Robert returned safely at 2 in the morning having received despatches from the Champion and rowed 4 and a 1/2 hours and almost failed in finding the Parkfield.   Monday 29th March 1841. Parkfield  I passed an excited night without much rest; how did my spirit sink within me when at 6 this morning I heard Papa and Capt Whiteside in conversation the latter expressing his opinion as to the safety of the anchorage at Port Grey and Papa's reply that [he] should proceed thither in accordance with his instructions. I felt calm but discouraged indeed. After breakfast a thorough consultation held with the Capt and all; charts examined; Mr Hutt's letter read &c; and then it was decided by almost universal consent that Papa would take upon himself greater responsibility by going than by remaining and that we are to remain here. What a renewal of hope and comfort to our tried and harassed feelings. Poor Papa has suffered sadly in the difficult position in which he has been placed by Capt Grey's abominable misrepresentations.  A very busy day washing and ironing. Mr Eliot Stirling Mr Northey and Major Irwin who came down in the Champion called. Mama explained the matter of the kangaroo and told them that the butcher had thrown it overboard today without anyone's knowledge. [51]  Tuesday 30th March 1841. Barque Parkfield  I have passed a day of considerable industry activity and fatigue having been engaged from 10 till our dinner at 4 in unpacking and repacking all my chests in preparation for our disembarkation and camping in a day or two. With the occupation of the muscular frame how much the mind partakes in the energy of action; and to one who watches the process of the mind and feelings it is singular to observe the variations the totally different phases which characterise them at different times. This morning I felt bouyant; this evening thoughtful associating myself with nothing round me.  On opening my desk today I met with a note of dearest Waller's written in the April of last year the outpouring of a broken heart and as I read it what a host of sad thoughts and recollections clouded my spirit. The faded flowers I gathered the last time I saw Wandle House wore on that ever to be remembered Wednesday evening the latter fell also into my hands; how strange that such apparently trifling relics of the past should possess so magical a power as to give a tone a colouring to every idea and thought during a succession of hours. From these two incidents my present mood may be traced.  I met also with a note (which I had not before read) from dear Aunt M. Turner to dear Frank congratulating him on his marriage and requesting his choice of a present and then added that 'a similar event to prevent Dear Louisa from quitting England would gladden my old heart'. Dear creature the grave by this time has made her his prey and that probably was her last written note. I was affected by it and a train of thoughts I cannot express arose. I believe that Was a wish entertained by many but heaven decreed otherwise.  My feelings have been strangely buffeted the last two years; who can tell how deeply? I would not have had it otherwise for with it all I possess a crowd of interesting and sweet associations and recollections that I would not part with for anything. As for marriage I have always clearly seen there is a fatality which is insurmountable as to myself. In early life I had a strong prejudice against it being persuaded that it is an unhappy state for a woman; as years have rolled on and I have increasingly needed a prop and support a kindred heart I have at times thought that it is a state in which I might have found the dependent happiness I have longed for. Now I am I think content with what is my apparent lot and in drawing all my enjoyment from my own dear family circle I am resolved (for I have no inclination or power) to make no new friendship or interest. [52] I am so often happy in the knowledge that I cannot again suffer as I have done in the severing of the ties of the affections. It cannot come again and I should be a fool indeed did I ever again place myself in a position of enduring what I have done.  Papa Pearce and some of the young men went up to Australind this morning to place some of the tents and the wind is blowing so hard that they have not yet returned and I trust will not attempt it tonight. The Napoleon laden with stock the speculation of Mr Stirling and Mr Eliot has arrived here this afternoon and another whaler so that there are 4 vessels in company with us.  Wednesday 31st March 1841. Parkfield  Passed the morning in setting to rights work &c. A stupid day. I very stupid not very well. It was not the Napoleon which came in yesterday but the Helen with horses and stock from the Cape.  Friday 2nd April 1841. Parkfield  Mrs Austen and Mrs Gaudin came down from Australind at 3 and dined with us. Mrs Austen returned in the evening leaving Mrs G. to sleep here. Mrs A. attired in the same dress as she wore at one of our soirees; and at the déjeuner and white bonnet of flowers looked more than usually unladylike. The scenes in which she appeared in town were bought vividly before my mind.  Major Irwin Mr Eliot and Mr Northey dined here; the two latter were my neighbours at the dinner table and made themselves very agreeable. With the former I had a great deal of conversation. There is something about him which amuses me excessively. From laughter however we came down to gravity and almost melancholy as we talked of England friends separation colonial life &c. He expressed many feelings which reminded me much of dear Waller and the more I see of young men the greater similarity I find in their sentiments on one point that of sighing for an object ties of affection home interests &c.  His two little native boys came off in the evening; they were brought into the cuddy and tho' rather frightened at the large motley company behaved extremely well. Guanga hung round Mr Eliot with a sweet confiding manner and then read the English alphabet clearly and boldly. Christina sang; they look astonished beyond measure and listened most attentively but said little. It appeared too much for them. [53] [54]  Dr Carpenter in the midst of all this confusion and bustle began to write his home letters; one of which to his brother at Trinidad contained about 5 lines; he is the most heartless conceited man I have ever met with.  Saturday 3rd April 1841. Parkfield  Although I have not been at all well this day has been a pleasant one. I enjoyed a quiet reading in my own room for an hour or two; the more delightful in proportion to the rarity of such an employment. I then went on deck alone to try and sketch the coast but failed.  A very small party at dinner. Robert Papa Capt Whiteside and Dr Carpenter are dining at Government House. We have been sitting on deck watching the fires on shore near Shenton's store. The scene has been most beautiful worthy the pencil of a Claude Lorraine; the moon and sky dazzlingly bright; the sea glistening and perfectly smooth; the outline of the shore dark and clear; the lurid flash and the curling grey and vermilion smoke of the fires throwing a bright redness over the scene investing with a wildness congenial to the spot and exciting to the imagination.  Poor Mrs Gaudin's cup of sorrow is almost overflowing. Her maid Maria turns out to be thoroughly worthless and she is obliged to discharge her; thus depriving her of the last comfort she could look to that of having a confidential comfortable attendant. She left us in very low spirits.  Sunday 4th April 1841. Parkfield A day of exquisite warmth and beauty. A very small party at the reading on deck; being the last day on board I wished to take a sketch of the coast and attempted but had no pleasure or success in it feeling it to be an undesirable occupation for the day.  Monday 5th April 1841. Australind  Papa was so discomposed at our decision not to accompany him to the encampment this morning that at the expense of a great deal of exertion we resolved to go up at 1 o'clock and about 34 past 1 we took leave of our kind friends the Whitesides and the barque Parkfield. Although exulting in the joy of getting ashore my spirits forsook me at last; the remembrance of the first time I saw the ship with whom and with what feelings with the train of thoughts accompanying a review of the past ran through my mind. I felt an oppression of spirit which I could not throw off during our calm and scorching row and sail up the estuary. I made an effort to be chatty but was silent; the last view of the Parkfield awakened too much thought and feeling. [55]    I here transcribe a letter I wrote to dear Waller this night: Tent Australind  5th April 1841 I must attempt before I lie down for the first time in the bush to give you some description of the picturesque romantic scenes in which we are now engaged. We have just made our beds on the ground arranged our tent for the night and with the moon shining brightly through the canvas over head solemn stillness reigning around except when broken by the merry laugh of gentlemen encamped round a log fire the chirping of the grasshoppers and now and then the breaking of a wave upon the distant shore. You may fancy Mary and myself kneeling at a table we have rigged up in the centre of our abode alternately writing and talking over this strange page in our history. Papa with a party of young men came hither this morning and left Mary and me to follow with a boat load of goods &c later in the day. Mr Eliot and Mr Stirling went on board the Parkfield just as we were going and insisted upon taking us up in their boat a proposition we readily agreed to rather than commit ourselves to the care of Dr Carpenter. We sailed almost all the way up this beautiful estuary under a sky of surpassing beauty the heat intense and scarcely a breath of wind. On arriving we found our tent erected and two or 3 others scattered about on the slope of a deep declivity a few hundred yards from the waterside commanding a lovely view surrounded by beautiful trees but in a state of charming confusion the sand ankle deep almost the only floor.  Our kind friends Mr E. and S. insisted upon getting everything to rights. We all went to work under a scorching sun to cut rushes for the carpet turned everything out; they then spread them arranged this table which with a nice English cover gives an air of comfort to the apartment; put up books; in fact in the course of an hour or two we found ourselves in order. Mrs Austen then kindly came from her settlement with a loaf of bread and cold meat a most acceptable present after the labours of the day.  An immense fire of branches was soon lighted on the level ground a little distance below our tent water boiled and tea made and having fortunately got up our plate chest containing knives and forks teacups &c we sat down to a welcome repast and with more comfort than we could have imagined possible. I wish you could have seen the interior of our new abode some sitting on the ground others on our mattresses rolled up; I making tea upon a gun case seated on a hassock in the midst. By degrees all the young men collected to this centre of comfort and sociability. I forgot to describe in due order a scene which amused us vastly. While we were engaged within we found the Government Resident the magistrate of the district Mr Eliot and Mr Gibson hard at work without kneading dough to make damper in other words unleavened bread which has since been baked in wood ashes and promises to do justice to the skill of the manufacturers. I cannot describe half of the amusing and curious incidents of the day nor convey to your mind an adequate idea of the picturesque appearance of a bush encampment in such a climate and with such scenery on all sides. [56] Papa and Mr Plowes have a tent; Mr Eliot and Stirling and many others are by this time reposing on the bare ground wrapped in blankets by the side of a large fire. We have just made our beds and are so completely tired that we are longing to lie down in them. The nights are extremely cold and we are beginning to feel very chilly and the sand underneath strikes damp and cold. Mama Ellen and all the party are to come up on Wednesday.  I find myself involuntarily providing against the motion of the sea altho' we have been almost entirely at rest for the last fortnight. The delight of feeling still relieved of the burden of preparation against pitching and rolling and a thousand other charms in being on terra firma again compensates most fully for the personal exertions which will be required for some months to come; and then the indescribable blessing of not going to Port Grey. I feel a sensation of 'home' in this place; civilization is partly known. There are only 3 or 4 settlers but there is the truest hospitality and kindness and instead of being out of the reach of any human beings we here at once meet with a hearty welcome and with ready assistance and cooperation. I cannot tell you how truly kind Mr E. and S. have been. The former is a very agreeable gentlemanly man and the latter is most pleasing and tho' a colonist not less the gentleman. All is hushed and still and I must to my rest as we are to be up at 5 in the morning.  Yours  L.C.  Station on the Yarra  5th July 1841 My dear Sisters Since we last wrote we have begun to earn a little by our butter. We are making about 20 lbs a week which we send into Melbourne salted once a month for which we get 2 shillings per pound for as much as we can send for a year. Thanks to Mrs Dawson I have become a first rate dairy woman and can cure meat make butter cheese fatten calves or pigs equal to Aunt Goddard herself and when I tell you that we have had no man the last month and George has had to be away every alternate day with the cows that I have all the baking washing and in fact everything to do and that I am now within a month of my confinement you will allow that we have no time for dress or play. Indeed could you see George when he comes in from milking in the stockyard these cold damp mornings covered with filth I do not know whether you would laugh or cry. [160] A scavenger in the City of London after a heavy frost and a thaw is clean to him but he puts up with it all and says he would not exchange his present dirty work for his old life of gentility at home.  You will know before this that you are to have a new nephew or niece about the beginning of next month. I was afraid I should be obliged to go to Melbourne upon the occasion but to my great joy I think I shall be able to manage here. A very respectable middle-aged woman who acted as servant to Mrs Howey is coming to stay with me the end of this week for as long as I like. She has had 5 children of her own and great experience that way. George asked her as a favour to come and expected she would and he was prepared to give a pound a week. To his surprise and satisfaction she said would he consider eight shillings too much which is quite as little as I could hire a raw Irish girl for. Previous to this George has endeavoured to get a man and his wife but they all have infants or young children which they seem to expect should be paid for by an increase of wages and when you do get a woman not one out of twenty will be of service to you.  With respect to the gentleman who is to take my old friend Mr Wallace's place nothing is settled. We are told that there are plenty about Melbourne not in practice who are glad for a moderate sum to go into the country a week or two upon such occasions - George has advertized in the Melbourne papers his want of such a person and he goes to Melbourne the end of the week to see the result of his application and then I hope all will be settled and he will be able to get a man into the bargain. For myself I must tell you that I am not like the person I was at home on such occasions. I am quite well and though I must confess generally very tired when night comes have scarcely an ache or pain. I have Mrs Dawson's authority who knows everything for telling you that it is sure to be a little girl very good tempered and the image of my sister Mary. Time only can show and the ship that conveys this to you may likely also contain a letter to contradict it all.  Melbourne the place is so overloaded with goods of every description that they are dayly sold by auction for less than they cost at home. Merchants are constantly failing and you may get any interest for money. The worthy Melbournites are now feeling the effects of their speculations. Glad am I that we embarked on no business in that good town. Did George live there I might buy goods of every description for what you may call 'an old song' by auction but the retail shopkeepers keep up their prices just the same so that persons in the country do not reap the advantage - as a specimen you cannot buy a raisin under 9d the pound at any grocer's. George got a box at an auction for 3d and hundreds were sold for 2d. Now they could not have been bought for that and we shall ere long feel the effects in the high prices for of course shippers will not send goods next year when they lost so much this. [161]  The boys are quite well. Our new neighbour Mrs Gardiner who only lives nine miles off has asked Prid to come and stay with her a few weeks. She was spending three days with Mrs Dawson when of course I saw a great deal of her. She is a very nice person not young has been married twenty years but has no family. They have a beautiful station with plenty of servants and a house and garden like a country cottage at home. Mrs Dawson rode on horseback to see them but I was obliged to decline. She was delighted with the place. They are most attentive and take to Melbourne and bring back all that we require by their drays.  Give my love to all  Penelope Selby  Caversham Rise March 21 1841  My dear Papa  it is a very great pleasure to me to be able to give you the satisfactory intelligence of our safe arrival at Swan River. The Sterling came to anchor in Gages Roads off Fremantle on Sunday last. Mr. Brown landed in company with Mr. Lewis in the first boat that came along-side of the ship and proceeded on horseback to Perth the seat of government. Every circumstance connected with landing me and the children with our servants and the freight has been concluded with great promptness. We are most hospitably entertained at Mr. Tanner's his residence is sixteen miles further up the Swan than Perth which latter place is ten miles from Fremantle. Mr. Brown came here before returning to the ship and upon finding it was convenient to Mr. Tanner to receive us made his way back again to the Vessel without delay to bring us all to Caversham. There was the ceremony to be gone through of having our people inspected by the Officer of health before they were permitted to go up the country and Dr. Criton whose duty it was to see them was obliging enough to come from Perth to Fremantle on purpose at which latter place he was necessarily obliged to stop the night for our accommodation. I left the ship Wednesday morning with little Kenneth Vernon Sarah and two of the men servants and all our personal luggage. Ann was left behind to attend on Mrs. Forster the Chaplain's Wife who is in a very sad state of health she will remain to nurse her in her approaching confinement and join us when the ship has discharged cargo which will take three or four weeks yet to accomplish.  Leave has been given by the Governor for our goods to be placed in the government store free of expense for ware-house room until Mr. Brown has time and sees a fitting opportunity to dispose of them. A flock of sheep has already been purchased to begin stocking our Farm with even before a location has been fixed upon where to pursue our pastoral and agricultural occupations a ship having arrived from Van Diemens Land with a cargo of sheep about the same time that we came into Port it was too good a chance to be thrown away for procuring some. They were sold at a very reasonable rate one pound ten each Mr. Brown bought the whole of them 400 in number. Fruin who is a skilful shepherd wholly approves of them and they are under his care to bring by gentle stages to Caversham Rise. The cow shipped at Plymouth supplied abundance of milk the whole voyage it was particularly of advantage to the children that we had a good supply the expense of its keep on board was defrayed by the Passengers we contributed four shares most willingly the only expense the cow has been to us independent of this was the cost of the animal. [20] We have not been charged anything for freight she is in very good condition and likely soon to have a calf. The Berkshire sow which Mr. Shrubb presented to us is come safely. I shall write again by the first ship that leaves direct for England this will come by Van Diemens Land for which place I have but just heard there is a vessel on the point of sailing from hence. I have Emma dear Matilda and two or three friends to whom I wish to write.  Mr. Viveash arrived today from the York District we are much pleased to see him and he appeared much so that we are come to the Colony. Land has much risen in value and is likely to be much dearer than at present. We have heard of several Farms for sale Mr. Brown will immediately set about looking where to fix he would write you but the time will not permit he is making out a list of things necessary to be forwarded to us with despatch from London.  Of course I am all anxiety to hear tidings of William and all of you pray write often. With kindest love to all my dear relatives  Believe me  Dearest Papa  Your Affectionate Daughter  E. Brown  Grassdale July 3 1842 [date wrong]  My dear Papa  We have now been four months in the Colony and not received a line from home the only letter that has come to hand from a relative is one from Mr. Brown's Brother Wm. which communicated the tidings of poor William's death the circumstance was touched upon more in the way of a passing remark than with any idea that it would be the source from which we should first hear the melancholy intelligence. These were his words "I have had a letter from Mr. Bussey (relative to some business concerning the insurance of our mares I believe) and was deeply grieved to hear from him of the death of his poor son". His letter is dated Janry. 27th poor William did not survive many weeks then after we left England. I did not think poor fellow he would have been cut off so soon though I felt persuaded there was no hope of his final restoration. [21] I am now more anxious than ever to hear from you being most solicitous to know how you support the trial. I feel assured your grief is deeply seated but trust to learn you have many consolations in the endearments of children still left to comfort you in whose peaceful and happy homes your sorrow will find alleviation and I also trust that the God of consolation will send peace to your grieved spirit and be your support through this life and to eternity.  I shall now be able to give you a more experienced account of what a settlers life is than when I wrote you three months since and will candidly state that it has hitherto been one of great perplexity to us. Mr. Brown has a most difficult task to perform in making it answer his purpose to have brought out so many labourers. The expense of providing for seven servants in addition to the wants of ourselves and little ones is a very serious matter wheat being at present £1 per bushel and 2/6 for grinding and every other article of food in the same dear ration. The pork and other things we brought for domestic consumption are scarcely available to us from the great expense of bringing them up from the government store at Perth to this District and we are as yet almost without the common necessaries of life though it is only the distance of seventy miles that parts us from the household conveniences that we set out well provided with from England. We look forward to having them brought over the hills to our remote residence by degrees but the first object is to get ploughing and sowing done to provide us all with bread next year. £25 per ton is the charge for conveying goods from Fremantle here eight or nine times the cost of bringing them 13000 miles over the sea from England between Fremantle and Perth and from thence to Guildford the sand is so loose and deep that a horse of good strength cannot without difficulty draw an empty cart over it. The mode generally adopted for the transition of goods into the interior is to take them in boats up the Swan as far as Guildford but in this way innumerable obstacles present themselves the course of the river is very circuitous several shoals come in the way over which the boats have to be dragged by the boatmen and there is no certainty of getting things conveyed in safety for it frequently happens that boats are swamped. The boatmen all bear a very bad character there is said to be not one honest and sober man of that calling who plies on the river we were run aground full twenty times in coming up to Mr. Tanner's and coming up the Swan did really appear to me the most dangerous part of our voyage.  We have a team of four bullocks two other bullocks two strong horses (bought in the Colony) and one young horse (saved from the wreck of those we shipped from England) but all this force is not available for the purposes intended namely the conveyance of goods from below and ploughing the cattle being almost constantly lost in the Bush and the men's time taken up in looking for them but when we become more accustomed to the wilds understand the native language better by which we shall be able to make the Natives more useful to us than they are at present we shall manage better I trust and get on with farming operations much more satisfactorily than it seems possible to do in the commencement of the undertaking in a primitive country under a different clime from that to which we have been accustomed and the circumstances altogether so novel as to make it a matter of hesitation what to proceed with to the best advantage. [22] Mr. Brown toils incessantly it is one unbroken period of manual labour with him from early dawn to bed time. The land has to be cleared previously to ploughing and our nights are generally illuminated with blazing fires. Tree after tree falls a sacrifice to the devouring element first being felled either with the axe or sawn down then the men with Mr. Brown to lead encourage them and set an example pile several together and set fire to the heaps we have sometimes eight or ten bonfires of this nature which continue burning for several days. With respect to cattle straying ours is by no means a solitary case the old established settlers are equally subjected to the same inconvenience and quite smile when we express any anxiety lest they should not be found again. Instances have been known of horses cows etc. being missed six and even twelve months yet returned to their original pasturage and rightful owners. We have a flock of about 600 ewe sheep that are attended with very little trouble it is about a sufficient charge for one shepherd. The experience of all the Colonists goes to prove that great profits can be made from sheep the climate being particularly suited to them they increase rapidly and the wool becomes of good quality even should it not be so when a flock is first imported ours are all long woolled sheep and considered very good ones.  Mr. Brown has accepted the appointment (which came out in due form by the Trusty) of assistant surveyor to this Government which will make matters pretty easy for us as regards sufficiency of income but he will have a most difficult task to perform not unattended with danger. Two soldiers will constantly attend him for protection and a civilian also to take care of baggage instruments etc and in case of any disturbances from the Natives a detachment of soldiers would be sent for from the nearest Barracks to quell it. The duties of the office will be entered upon in about three weeks from this time and it is arranged by the friendly concurrence of the Governor that the District where we reside shall be the first to be surveyed. This will give him an opportunity of overlooking concerns on the Farm which locality I shall now proceed to describe to you. [23]  Grass Dale is the name of the estate it is about eleven square miles in extent and has a range of hills running through one part of it the highest of which is called Mount Matilda. At the foot of this is our dwelling a cottage consisting of two rooms it is roughly built but of exceedingly picturesque appearance from the extreme beauty of the site where it is placed rugged rocks are heaped in wild confusion around and a fertile valley stretches itself for full two miles and a half like a green lawn in front of the lowly habitation. There is an outhouse near which serves as a temporary sleeping place for the men adjoining a stockyard where the bullocks mares etc. are penned at night. 5/- an acre 'was what Mr. Brown gave for the land with the buildings upon it since the purchase was made Government has raised the price of land to £1 per acre. We bought Grass Dale of Mr. Bland the Government Resident at York. We are about four miles from York and attend service at church there the Revd. Wm. Mears is the name of the clergyman. We are on friendly terms with him he preaches at Yanjedin Mr. Viveash's residence every third Sunday in the afternoon. Yanjedin is about 9 miles from here and at a convenient part of the York District for a congregation to assemble who are not within reach of the place of worship at York. It adds to the pleasantness of our position that we are not cut off from social intercourse. The Viveash's are farther off than I would wish but they are within occasional visiting distance and frequently the Doctor's profession and engagements bring him to York on which occasions he is pretty sure to give us a call. I am sorry to say it will be a professional one very shortly an increase to our family being looked forward to.  Mr. and Mrs. Hardey are our nearest neighbours the Evans know them their little boy Robt. comes daily on his pony to receive a lesson along with Kenneth. I take great delight in instructing them. Robt. Hardey is a nice companion for Kenneth he is a vigorous boy but of gentle disposition and seven years old. My little Vernon has had such serious illnesses from time to time since we left England Dr. Viveash expected we should lose him once. We spent a month at Yanjedin after leaving Mr. Tanner's and his worst illness was struggled with whilst there. His limbs were much swollen from debility when he was recovering from the last attack. He has gained strength since we came to Grass Dale and is now I hope likely to continue healthful. He is a child who attracts much interest and certainly is a pleasing little creature though unfortunately so delicate.  July 8th. Bedtime arrived before I had concluded my letter on the 3rd I had therefore put the writing [away] intending to finish on the following morning. Then a little boy arrived during the night resembling Kenneth for vigour and healthfulness but disabling me for resuming the pen again so early as intended and wholly frustrating my intention of writing dear Emma and Matilda at present. [24] Mr. Brown starts for Perth early tomorrow morning and will be the bearer of this to Miss Crocker one of our late fellow voyagers by the Sterling to this Colony. She is leaving by the Trusty and has offered to take charge of letters for us to England. I had many enquiries to make respecting Dorchester friends regards to send etc. but must now only inform you that I am according to general phraseology on such occasions as well as can be expected and remain  Dear Papa  Yr. Truly Affectionate Daughter  E. Brown  MARCH 1ST  My dear Alfred Are you alive and well this and fifty other things I want to know about you; Anna Mary's letters to Mamma did not say one syllable about you I never thought I could have been so angry with Anna Mary who was so kind to me at Esher and in London I felt very much inclined to wish her letters into the candle I hope she will never again forget to write about you and I will forgive her this once. And I think you deserve a scold too for you promised you would write to me as soon as you were at Heidelburg and give me a long account of its famous castle Mamma has often told me when I wanted something to do to begin you a Journal but I thought I would wait till your letter came but I am at last tired of waiting. To-day is very hot the thermometer 96 in the shade just the heat that suits me: I was very poorly all last winter and kept almost entirely to the sofa but the hot weather has at last began to do me good. Though I do not sit out of doors as I did last summer I get plenty of fresh air for we keep all our windows and doors open.  4TH Our dear little Charlie has many times been ill he is cutting teeth; now he is lying quite still on Mamma's lap and takes very little notice of us so different to when he was well oh what a fat merry little creature he then was; he has never been so ill before and Papa is very much afraid he will not get better. [44] I don't know what we should do without him he is such a very sweet entertaining little creature  13TH When I began this journal I had no idea I should have such a sorrowful subject to write about Our darling little Charlie died on the 9th at 5 in the morning He is buried in the garden. I shall put this by till we feel cheerful again  17TH I have had such a pleasant drive to day down to the Beach. the very sight of the sea did me good it was extremely green with just the tops of the waves tiped with foam many ships schooners &c were lying at anchor at Williams Town. 3 miles beyond the Manlius was in quarantine the Pathfinder with many of her sails set was tacking out of the bay; the Corsair steamer from Launceston was coming up some boats close to us were pulling out to sea and famously they were rocked up and down It was altogether a beautiful sight I did long to be on board the Pathfinder for I believe another journey would do me good.  18TH Willie and Edith go to school now to Mrs Stevenson from 1/2 past 9 till 3 and they like it very much Willie is reading Markhams History of England which have been very favourite books of mine He is a much better accountant than I am but that does not say much for him I had intended to learn Latin on the voyage but I have not begun yet in good earnest. I have no doubt you would think us all great dunces.  21ST to day the thermometer is 70 the sun is very bright and there is a most gentle breeze I am sure you would think this a most pleasant country.  12TH APRIL I have been staying 3 weeks at the Plenty with Mamma and came home yesterday I enjoyed it exceedingly all but the drive there and back which shook me too much. Uncle Robert made me a little carriage to ride in and took me several short drives in it. I went to see some trees that Willie had felled when he was there as thick as himself which he had made a famous boast of Uncle Robert has a very nice garden it is down in a flat you go to it by a zig zag walk; his vines were 14 feet high They have abundance of Melons The pigs are regulary fed on them while we were there the dray and 4 bullocks brought up a load out of the garden for the rats had taken a fancy to them there. The bell birds sing all day long at the Plenty I like to hear them much better than the laughing jack-asses I read The Talisman Old Mortality and Ivanhoe while I was there which delighted me exceedingly and I am now reading Quentin Durward As we came home we called at the Yarra to see Uncle Richard. The river winds there very prettily I had just a peep into the cottage but it did not look very clean I assure you Mamma got out but I took my very notes sitting in the carriage  29th All the talk lately has been about the Bushrangers who live in the Plenty district the first there have been in Australia Felix. they are a party of 4 well armed and mounted who have robbed more than thirty stations beside highway robbery but their reign of terror did not last more than a week. they commit their daring deeds in broad day light would you not think it extremely pleasant to be bailed up in a corner with some one standing over you with a pistol threatening you with instant death if you stired; this they do while the other bushrangers ransack the hut of what they want and then are off to the next station. [45] Two parties of gentlemen and a few of the mounted police went in pursuit of them one of the party 5 in number at last got on their track and at Mr. Hunter's the bushrangers were interrupted just as they were going to sit down to a breakfast of roast ducks The gentlemen of the house haveing been ordered from table to make way for their superiors When they saw the party in search of them they called out to stand to your arms men they then rushed out and fired a volley but in retreating to the hut the ringleader got separated from the rest and after a very desperate resistance 3 of the gentlemen haveing been wounded the man was shot in self defence The other 3 after fireing 60 shots at last surrendered and are brought in for trial. Uncle's escaped a visit from these Bushrangers and only heard of them the night before they were taken  29 Edith has been a week at Brighton and is to stay 2 more it is by the sea side. There is a nice firm beach. I dare say she will be fonder of tuning about on the beach than attending to her lessons though Miss Ascham a lineal descendant of Roger Ascham is the teacher at Mrs Were's. Little Johny Were is a very funny boy he says he does so wish he was married his Mamma is so cross to him he is only four years old.  May. I have had a very nice ship sent me it is not half complete in the rigging I have been very busy putting Main Mizen and fore top gallant masts flying jibboom main fore and sprit sail yards and in a few weeks I shall make it a complete model full rigged ship. It was made by a sailor who had not time to finish it. the length is two feet six it is a 4 gun ship Melbourne people are very fond of keeping birthdays the children went yesterday into the country to celebrate one and they had a famous romp at hiding seek among the bushes. They went and returned in a tax cart and were in such high spirits. Edward intends to be a Doctor and Mrs Palmer told him she would have him when she was ill to cure her and he is quite set up about it I read the papers every morning there is generally some good fun in them such curious police reports. The Police Magistrate is very peremtory so his name is a bye word here. "I'll Major St John you". Judge Willis is very quarrelsome in one case a little Lawyer who had the boldness to address him was frightened out of his senses by haveing thundered in his ear "who are you" "down sir down sir I say" and with this the little Man rushed out of Court upsetting every one in his way. so Tipstaff was not summoned to take him out. Even Teddy stands a little in awe of Judge Willis and Big Chin Mr La Trobe's messenger. But Judge Willis is a very good man though he is SO cross sometimes. Willie Edith and Edward join me in dear love to you Claude and Charlton and to Anna Mary  YOUR VERY AFFECTIONATE COUSIN / JOHN HENRY HOWITT  Written to P.F. Campbell Patrick's Plains Hunter River N.S.W.  Parramatta May 27th 1842  My dear Pat  I would have written to you before but I have had sad troubles since in money matters. The Oats and other things you sent for you will receive next week. I bought the oats I wrote to you about from A.B. Smith and ordered to be sent that evening per the Steamer. It must be at least five weeks since but I suppose through some mistake they were not sent. However I have given directions that three bushels should be added to the former quantity 12 bushells and sent in immediately with the other things.  I have given Isabella an order to get them so I am starting for Bathurst in about two hours and she will write to you when to send for them. I wish it was in my power to assist you more substantially but I look forward when we shall be able to render assistance to each other as Brothers ought.  Hoping all your family are well Believe me my dear Brother Yours affectionately Dal. Campbell  Excuse the scrawl I'm in a hurry.  Grass Dale Swan River September 26 1842  Dear Papa  The Hough ton Le Skerne has been coasting from hence to the more southern settlements and back again to receive a freight of wool to go laden home with. I had the gratification of receiving a letter from you and Matilda by the above ship. Your liberal wishes with respect to a numerous household population rather amused me and gave an increase to self estimation and a high opinion of the dutifulness of all your children for surely you would not so cordially wish a numerous family might fall to the lot of any one if you had not experienced a great delight in your own. I hope ere this you have the letter that introduced little Aubrey to you he was born on the 4th. of July 41. The greater part of my letter was written on the 3rd. and was completed on the 6th. or 8th. I assure you it grieves me that it has not come to hand for I do not know how to pen you another description of our first entering upon the arduous romantic but not unpleasing vocations devolving upon newly arrived settlers. A very curious feature was the numerous group of aboriginal natives who watched every movement of our busy household with looks of intense curiosity. We have seven natives employed at the present time on the Farm it is sheep shearing and all the white hands are busy with the shears. We allow each of the natives 3 lbs. of flour per day for their services three of them are out with the sheep to take care of them as they are feeding two with cattle one with horses and one is employed about home fetching wood and water. The greatest inconvenience in employing natives is that they are not constant their services cannot be secured and it takes up a great deal of time to persuade some of them to accept employment. There is also no punishment for them when they evade an engagement and often when they forsake others cannot be found to fill up their places as they will vacate a district suddenly and not appear again for several weeks. In a subsequent letter I will dwell upon the aborigines at greater length and relate what occasionally may come under my observation with respect to them but now I must tell you of what more particularly concerns ourselves and the arrangements that have been thought most advisable for our advantage.  It is very perplexing to know how to act for the best when a choice is offered to the new settler as was Mr. Brown's case of accepting a government appointment or pursuing the intentions with which we set out from England of becoming rural settlers and farming. We endeavoured to combine both the appointment which was productive of about £300 per annum was too tempting to reject as it offered a certainty of sufficiency of income without resources from the Mother Country and another inducement to taking this offer was having brought out Fruin as Bailiff whom we relied upon for superintending the men during Mr. Brown's absence in his official duties. [26] Do not let it come to the ears of his friends but I regret to say his old habits of drinking revived which rendered his services wholly inefficient and the men without a director as might be expected were of very little service. This state of things joined to another circumstance which though of less weight yet helped to balance the scale in favour of a resignation namely the being linked in office with a person who made himself wholly repugnant to Mr. Brown induced him to give up the appointment altogether. The result has been that work goes on much more rapidly and Mr. Brown certainly feels much greater satisfaction in exerting his undivided energies in carrying forward his original plans. Fruin of course is no longer in our service therefore no burthen to us but he resides on the Estate in a cottage with several acres of cleared land attached to it which he rents at £40 per annum. The above was the spot of our first operations detailed in my letter of July 1841.  It was in Novr. same year that we left this part of our grant (Fruin and his wife succeeding us) for a hut on the bank of the Pool which Mr. Brown had put up as a temporary residence until the house should be built. Here we remained until the following April it was not until Xmas that Mr. Brown gave up his appointment and it was but seldom I had an interview with him until after that period. Fruin you will perceive was off our hands Mitchel received his pay from govt. as Mr. Brown's chainer his passage money was paid to us when he was taken in that capacity. One man who had behaved ill was also let depart upon his new master defraying the expenses of his passage and finding one of my female servants take up too much room and making more work rather than lightening its burthen I obliged a friend by allowing her to quit and had £30 for her expenses.  This you will see reduced our expenditure very materially and while at the hut I had only one female servant one shepherd and a young lad who fetched wood and water tended the mares and helped to protect the place. The flock at this period was but small in comparison with the present number and the shepherd brought them home every night. He and the boy slept out of doors under a hay stack so innocuous is the night air in this climate indeed it rather braced and strengthened them.  One circumstance tending to make it less desirable for Mr. Brown to continue his appointment was the necessity he would have been under of spending two or 3 months at a time in Perth a place of great expense and conforming to the usages of which he would not have been able to save £30 during the year out of the govt. salary. [27] He had a three months trial of it and with the greatest care his expenses during that period came fully up to the receipts from that quarter.  Immediately upon giving in his resignation of office Mr. Brown returned to us and with Mitchel whose choice was to come home with his master he set to work clearing land and in three months had 30 acres ploughed and sown by the pool side which we consider by far the most desirable part of the grant for the principal farm and where the house for our own residence stockyards stackyard and barn will be built. We have planted 300 vines and numerous other fruit trees which are now being fenced in with a very substantial I will not call it pail but pillar fence each post of wood being fixed firmly in the ground at the depth of at least 2 feet and 5 feet high above the ground. It will embrace the site of our future garden vineyard and orchard in an area of 6 1/2 acres.  In prospect of the rainy season advancing upon us and being houseless Mr. Brown has taken a farm house just opposite our present clearing on the other side of the pool which we have occupied since the last day of March. The grant he also rents with about 50 acres of cleared land farm buildings etc. which will be very convenient until our own are put up. We have also taken to the sheep of the late owner Mr. Hardey who has quitted this to improve a farm he has in another part of the colony. 300 of the sheep we pay him so much a year for and have all the produce two hundred are his own and he pays us £25 per hundred for their keep.  Perhaps I may have recapitulated in this letter some things I may have said before and really I feel a little dubious whether some matters that are here touched upon have not been detailed previously but if so you must excuse it. I think I have not before said what great trouble we had from the obstinacy and wrong feeling of the men who actually sometimes would not take out the sheep cattle or do any thing during Mr. Brown's absences. Once I had occasion to solicit the aid of the neighbouring magistrates to bring them to order. Mr. Brown too has had a hard task all along to get any thing like justice and fair work at their hands but this is a general complaint. The prospects of masters will be much improved by the arrival of laborers which is now daily expected there being a great deal of money in the hands of govt. for that purpose. We have no doubt indeed that 2 or 3 hundred are on their way to this colony.  Adieu  My dearest Papa  With affectionate regards to all  my sisters Aunt love to Bussel [28]  I remain  Your attached daughter  E. Brown  The idea of my little ones being an after consideration not a word of them until the postcript. I know you would say no news is good news but still it would be unnatural not to say they are all well.  Still direct Grass Dale. We are close upon it though for a time at Mr. Hardey. Mr. and Mrs. Brown Grass Dale would individualize us from other Browns of whom there are several in this Colony.  Melbourne 24th August 1842.  I should have before this written to you according to my promise but the sameness of the country through which I travelled where you meet nothing pleasing to the eye or interesting to relate induced me to defer writing up to this time in the hope that I might be able to give you some information respecting Gippsland which may not before have reached you. Count Strzelecki's description of it as an agricultural and grazing country is fully borne out. In all my travels in New South Wales for those purposes I have not seen its equal. His chart however gives you a very incorrect idea of the courses of the rivers as you will see by Mr. Townsend's survey which I suppose will have arrived in Sydney before this. That part of the country marked in the Count's chart between Gippsland and Omeo as Buckley's and Macalister's stations is a very extensive country and better suited for sheep than Gippsland and I have no doubt the greater portion of it will be taken up next summer. The richness of the soil in Gippsland makes it with the exception of small portions of it less suited for sheep but it is capable of feeding an immense number of cattle. [242] The runs which I have selected are on the Avon River and extend to a lake into which the river empties itself and are a fine open undulating country sound to the water's edge. I however do not consider them equal to those I occupied at Wellington had we the same moisture as I am led to suppose we have in Gippsland; the lake itself is a very large sheet of water which I suppose to be in width about twelve or fourteen miles and from what I saw of it from the mountains when coming to Gippsland I should imagine it to be from fifty to sixty miles long. The water when I visited it was brackish but not too much so for stock and we were soon able to enjoy a good pot of tea made with it after a long day's ride. I am however assured by Mr. McMillan (Mr. Macalister's superintendent) and the first discoverer of this country who had visited it three times in the summer months that he never found it so before and the only way in which I can account for this is that I suppose the rush of water into the lake at this time of the year is so great as to break through some outlet or sand bank leaving a passage for the salt water to enter which passage fills up in the summer months. I however intend on my return to make an excursion on the lake and examine the coast side of it as well as the soundings the particulars of which I will give you when I return to Sydney after shearing. I have not as yet fallen in with any of the aboriginal natives but from what I can collect respecting them they are a wild race and have already committed some outrages on the settlers.  There are already in Gippsland about seven thousand head of cattle belonging to Messrs. Macalister Macfarlane Arbuckle Cunningham Pearson Jones Taylor and Loughnan and some small squatters who I understand do not hold licenses; thirty-five thousand sheep brought by Messrs. Macalister Curlewis Reeve Taylor and Loughnan Jones and myself; and about one hundred horses and a population of one hundred and forty-four free men thirty-three bond twenty-six free women and seventeen children - most of them in service the remainder living God knows how on the beach where they have erected huts for themselves waiting they say for the town allotments to be put up for sale. [243] We feel the want of a police bench here very much. The servants do just as they like work or walk away as they think proper and are harboured by those people on the beach. If my father agrees to my proposition to bring down the remainder of our sheep and to reside there I shall willingly do my best as a magistrate to keep the district in order if His Excellency will give me the power by granting a Court of Petty Sessions a clerk and a few constables; or perhaps a party of the border police under the direction of a sergeant of the mounted police would be more available in the district. Mr. Curlewis I understand intends to reside in the district; so does Mr. Reeve; and these gentlemen would I think be eligible for appointment to the Commission of the Peace and their services as magistrates would I have no doubt be of great advantage to the district.  I arrived here last week after a very severe journey by way of Western Port. Mr. Albert Brodribb Mr. Pearson I and my black-fellow whom I brought with me from Wellington started on the information of a Mr. Campbell who stated that he had ridden for three days in the direction of Western Port and had got sight of that place. Upon this information we took with us ten days' provisions and pack-horses to accompany us for two days; we however owing to the denseness of the scrub found it impossible to bring the horses farther than the first day's journey about fourteen miles; consequently we shouldered our pack (blessing the informer) and with great difficulty made about four miles that day; for fourteen days during ten of which it rained without ceasing we never could exceed eight miles in the day. On the fifteenth day we got into a lower and less broken country the scrub still continuing with water up to our knees and our provisions with the exception of a little flour and tea were all exhausted. [244] We however managed to exist to the end of the journey upon what the blackfellow could get in the shape of two pheasants five monkeys and a parrot a small portion of which was served out in the morning with about two table-spoonfuls of flour which we put to boil in a quart pot of water. In the evening by way of change we had the monkey and tea without sugar. In this way we lived for eight days at times so exhausted that when we walked a mile or two we were quite done up suffering severely from the cuts we got getting through the scrub - our clothes and boots being completely torn off of us; and it was I can assure you to our great joy on the eighteenth day that we made Western Port when we were picked up by Mr. Surveyor Smyth who is surveying the coast and who kindly conveyed us in his boat to Mr. Jamieson's and thence to Mr. Manton's from whence we made this place making the journey on foot in twenty-two days.  12th June 1843  Bankruptcy is almost universal and confidence in mercantile matters lost entirely - I consider Dickson Dee and R. P. Cummins the only 3 solvent men left in Maitland and it would be difficult to name three in the neighbourhood of the town of whom so much may be said.  [Note in Margin] 1846 Cummins took to drinking and died insolvent. The other two weathered the storm.  On the 3rd April 1 was obliged to file my schedule and take the benefit of the Insolvent act I was arrested for my bill given to release a friend from the same case a year before.  So valueless has property of all kind become that no monied engagement can be met but at most dreadful sacrifices - sheep are sold at 6d and 7d each stations given with them horses £7 each and cattle any price picked cows for dairy of good kinds 2 guineas each fat cattle 50/- and hardly to be sold at this price a company has been started in Sydney for the purpose of salting beef for exportation and is now putting about 25 per day away. Many proprietors are also salting and the establishment is now going boiling fat sheep for the fat wethers are sold in Sydney for 3/-to 5/- - the whole community seems horror struck and nothing that can be now foreseen can avert general bankruptcy.  Nov. 15 - 1843  Bankruptcy has now overtaken or is upon the heels of almost the whole community.  1 Jan. 1844  Mr. Wentworth of Windermere has established a large boiling concern to get rid of fat stock it is sinking daily 200 sheep [...] . all the large properties of sheep and cattle are getting down their stock by this process - the destruction is immense.  Yarra River  3rd February 1843   My very dear Sisters It is long since I wrote to you but having nothing either new or pleasant to communicate has made me lazy. I fancy I hear you say 'I wish Pen would tell us something about the country' - Alas I can say little good of it for just now it is looking very barren the grass is all either burnt with the sun or the fires and we are anxiously looking for rain. I have had Captain and Mrs Howey with their daughter staying with me the last week and as it always happens in this country George's horses - that is his mare my mare and a foal - most mysteriously disappeared out of the paddock the day before their arrival and he has not found them yet so that the whole of his time has been taken up seeking them and we ladies could not have any rides but it is always the case here if you want to do anything or go anywhere. Either the horses or cows cannot be found and you are obliged to stay at home. The most provoking part of this business is that George has been at great expense enclosing a paddock for these beasts and thought himself so secure and we had them at the door late the night before we lost them.  Everybody in the very worthy town of Melbourne either has or is likely to fail and the distress they say is very great. The settlers too are nearly as badly off. As a specimen one settler has a fine run and about 400 head of first rate cattle. [166] [He] put them up to auction and was only offered 22 shillings the head with the Station and all the improvements to be given in. For cows no better George paid thirteen pounds when he came here. They say that they who can weather the storm will do well and I have no fear that we shall be able to do so. Still we feel it though we may not be so likely to be uprooted as the proud oak. We only now get 13d for the butter and that we would not have had if George had not made a contract for the year and I do not think that commodity will ever be higher for all the large stock holders that scorned making butter when they could get 2/- the pound for it now that it is half the price are establishing large dairies. If you should chance to meet Miss Martineaux you may mention this to her and as she is a great writer on political economy she may write a book upon the subject.  Our establishment is very much reduced. We have only ourselves and cousin George who has not suited himself with anything yet so he is staying with us instead of a boy and milks the cows and tends them through the day just as the boy did. He is a real good tempered lad. I often say to him 'how are the mighty fallen' and he only laughs and I am glad he has the sense to put pride in his pocket.  The boys are growing fast and are very useful to me. They have been staying a week with Mrs Dawson and almost as soon as they returned told us with great glee that Mrs Dawson and they had dug a long time near where her little baby was found and at last they came to one which looked just like a chrysalis wrapped in a piece of brown paper but that in six months it would be big enough when they would dig it up again and bring it to me - she is a funny body and though she may have the chance to dig out one it will not be before the middle of September.  With our best and lasting loves to all around your fireside I remain  your affectionate  P. Selby  Sydney Pencilville [?] January 11th 1843  My dear Cousin  You will say that I have quite forgotten my promise of writing to you immediately we arrived at our destination / when I tell you that we have been there nearly three weeks / but really I have been so busy and so unsettled since our arrival that I have been unable to spare time to write but as I know you dislike apologies so I will make none but leave you to imagine that I have not been able to write before and now to proceed to particulars. We sailed as you know from Leith on Monday the 31st. of July we went on very well for two days and saw the Orkney Islands though at a great distance but after we passed them the wind became foul and [?] so all day we were very close to the land - Cape Wrath - where we saw a great number of vessels at one time there were fifteen in sight we spoke one /[121] She was from India bound to Sunderland. Our foul wind lasted till the 19th. of August when it changed but the fair wind only lasted one day when it again veered round and continued alternately a foul wind or a dead calm till the 1st of September when we got into the trades but those only lasted us for a few days at a time it was so often calm. Mamma wrote you by a vessel we spoke called the "Ca [?] " but I do not know if she said anything of the first part of the voyage. We saw several vessels before we spoke the Ca [?] but did not speak any we signalized one for some hours one day / it was very amusing to see the vessel putting up and taking down signals as quick as possible - she was a Dutch East Indiaman from Rotterdam bound for Batavia she was a vessel of a thousand tons. We crossed the Line on the 27th. of September - it was very hot and we were becalmed near the line but after we had crossed it we proceeded very well and had a splendid passage to the Cape of Good Hope. Captain Morrison said that he never had such a fine passage from the line to the Cape as he had this time. Part of the time we had what we called rather rough weather - we were under three reefed topsails several times and a slight gale of wind but we ought really to esteem ourselves fortunate never to have been round the world and to have had one heavy gale of wind. We arrived at Port Phillip on the 2nd. of December where we remained a week and a very pleasent week it was for we stayed at Mr Wills's the whole time / he insisted upon the whole of us going out to his place to remain there all the time the ship stayed / both him and Mrs. Wills were very very kind to us they seemed as if they could not do enough for us and are very anxious that some of us should go and spend some time with them at Port Phillip they have got a very nice place with a beautiful house upon it. We sailed from Wills and Town Port Phillip on the 12th. of December but from contrary winds could not get outside the heads for a whole week but lay at anchor inside the Head from Tuesday Morning to the following Monday / we were a week on our passage - having had only three days fair wind the whole way. We arrived on the 25th Christmas day it was late in the afternoon before we [?] and in consequence of having powder on board we could not go up to the Wharf but had to anchor some distance down the harbour / my Uncle Innes was in waiting with a boat long before we anchored but owing to Papa's state of health and the lateness of the evening neither Thomasina or him went on shore but myself accompanied by my sisters at least some of them went on shore to my [?] [?] [?] /[122] we found my dear Grandmamma who I am happy to say is in better health than she has been for years. I suppose long ere this you will have heard of the death of poor Uncle James who died on the 11th. of September / he had been suffering more than usual the attacks of gout had been more severe and more frequent and he had called in more advice the first day the new doctor saw him he had asked what should be his diet the two Doctors turned round to consult and when they looked at him again he was dead; though long ill [?] the manner of his death was very sudden / but death is always sudden come when at [?] it never enters a family singly but cuts off two or three ere it ceases / poor Grandmamma has now lost all her sons and two of them within the twelve months. We heard of Uncle James's death when we arrived at Port Phillip from a perfect stranger who told Thomasina not knowing that she was any relation to Mr James Reibey. We are all staying with my Grandmamma it is about three miles from Sydney and a beautiful place it is / every one says that it has been the saving of Grandmamma's health for before she came out here she was in very bad health and now she is very well and so stout [?] and is never troubled with her health at all / I can assure you it was a very agreeable surprise to find her in so much better health for when we left ill in bed and subject to constant attacks of asthsma. You will be surprised to hear that we are going to Launceston to be at Rosetta as we found our affairs in a much worse state than we had any idea of / they have not got one penny of rent from Rosetta but have brought us into debt for ejecting the last tenant; the bank of Australia has failed and we have lost the thousand pounds that the Youngs placed there for us to get the interest / so we have literally nothing of our own to depend upon for if we let Rosetta it is not likely that we should get any rent no one [?] now a day we have nothing to go a farthing with and if we had it would be no use for nothing can be sold meat is a penny a pound sheep can be bought a shilling a head / cows five shillings and all the settlers are not attempting to sell anything but are actually boiling down all their sheep and cattle for fat for export so you may fancy what a dreadful state the country is in / we are therefore going to live in the house at Rosetta and are going to try and let the farm out in small pieces to try if we can get some little rent there my brother is very anxious we should go down there he thinks it will be the best thing we can do /I suppose we shall leave Sydney in about three weeks or a month I wonder when our travelling days will be over I am sure we are all weary of this wandering. [123] Thomasina desires me to say that she is really so harassed and so completely out of spirit that she really has not the heart to sit down and write but she will write you a long letter shortly / she is not very well though a great deal better than when we left Scotland for she has entirely lost the dreadful cough she had when you last saw her but she is so out of spirits with the deplorable situation of our affairs that she looks quite ill / but bad as our state is we are very thankful that we are not as bad as many are who once drove their carriage and are now so reduced that they can hardly get their daily bread / oh it is dreadful the state of misery the country is in there is hardly one who have not been obliged to go into the Insolvent court / there is a talk that the times have begun to improve but every one says they should see it. I am sure I hope it would soon take a favourable turn for our own sakes and that of all belonging to us for all of our relations are suffering like ourselves.  Papa is much the same as when we left that is in health but he is more helpless and cannot assist himself in the slightest degree he has to be carried by two people and cannot even lift a spoon to his mouth but has to be fed like a child / another deprivation is that he cannot read and it is so difficult to amuse him for he will have some one to read to him.  Young Thomas Reibey was here some little time before we arrived / all here are just delighted with both him and his wife they remained about three weeks in Sydney / when he arrived here he had not heard of his father's death - poor fellow he was much shocked; have you heard anything of young James Reibey no one here has heard anything of or from him for this long time and they cannot imagine what has become of him. Will you make some enquiries about him. What do you think of the young men (gentlemen I cannot call them) on board the Midlothian never adressing a word to one of the ladies during the whole voyage and not only that but took every opportunity during the whole voyage of insulting us most openly and grossly even at the cuddy table. They used to call us fools use to carricature me and of and at us in the most disgusting manner / one of them a Mr Young from Edinburgh wrote two letters to Mamma copies of which she means to send to you as a specimin you never in your life heard or saw anything like the disgraceful conduct of people who called themselves gentlemen but to which name none of them had or ever will have pretensions to behave in so shameful a manner to a [?] of young and unprotected girls for none of us having a brother and knowing Papa was in that state of health that he could take no notice of their conduct /[124] two of them in a more disgraceful manner than I can tell you Mamma will write you all about it as [?] it often made our blood boil to hear the disgusting remarks that were made at us at the dinner table / the Doctor to whom you introduced us on board the steamer never took wine with us the whole of the voyage / he used to talk to Papa of us of course knowing well that so young a child would tell us anything and everything that was said and used to sit at the dinner table (when I had the honour of sitting next to him) and turn his back to me and take out a book and read he used to join and approve of all the others conduct / far more could I tell you if I had only the time and patience of their cowardly conduct such as bowing to us and kissing their hand to us at the time when they never spoke to us; one thing was that we did not care for their acquaintance but were so happy and independent amongst us and I know this very independence [?] them for they saw us so very happy and caring so little whether they spoke to us or not; the only one who behaved well and he did behave well was the first mate he is a man and really he did behave well and politely what none of the rest did / of course the Captain behaved well to us The first mate's name is Mr. Robertson and if you meet him in Glasgow pray thank him in our name for his kindness and attention to us during the voyage / we should have fared very badly if it had not been for him and the captain - And now I will say a few words about our Glasgow friends.   I hope Mrs. Dickson and all her family are well / We heard that Mrs [?] ra [?] son was getting on pretty well but we did not see her. How is Mr. Fergusson getting on I have no doubt [?] that he will get on well for he is a very good and a very gentlemanly young man / I am sure he would not have behaved the way the [?] did if he had been on board the Midlothian / give our kind respects to him and say we often talk and think of him. How are Mr. & Mrs. (P) give our kind regards to them and all enquiring Glasgow friends we shall always retain a grateful [?] of our visit to Glasgow and the kindness we received there. All my sisters are quite well and desire their best and kindest love to you / they will write you in a short time but you know they are not good pen correspondents [?] Grandmamma is writing to you I believe but when she means to finish the letter I do not know / she desires her kind love to you. My Aunt Innes whom you used to quiz me for talking so much about is quite well and desires her kind regards to you. I do not think I have any news to tell you but hope you will excuse this uninteresting letter but I really do not know of anything that will amuse you so far from Scotland for you like nothing out of Glasgow though you did make much of your foreign cousins. [125]  When you write to Penelope tell her that I will write to her very soon give my kindest love to her in which all my sisters most cordially join. It is very hot weather here but I do not like it half so well as the fine snowy weather of Scotland.  I do not think you like a crossed letter but you will like it better at any rate than a double letter for postage is very high.  And now I think I will conclude as you think I daresay it is high time and with kind love from Mamma and all my sisters in which believe me I most sincerely join  I remain my dear Cousin Your very sincerely attached friend and cousin  Mary Helen Thomson  Grassdale  March 4 1843  My Dear Sir  I have today received a letter from my brother enclosing an account from you up to the 5 of May last. I also received some time since your letter and account written about the previous Xmas and wrote to thank you most kindly which I again do for your great generosity and kindness as well as for the trouble you have taken in seeing matters arranged so correctly. I assure you I have much pleasure in seeing so good an account from Summertown.  Now for the Colony.  All is as yet hard work not only with me but with most of the settlers there is at first so much to do in clearing land providing provisions for men building stock yards for horses and cows as well as hurdles and folds for the sheep that the poor pigs get forgotten altogether until by their sleek coat and plump appearance it becomes evident they are helping themselves to the best they can find whether corn potatoes or cabbage. The one given me by Mr. Shrubb had no young ones on board but has done well since producing a very fine description a cross by a Neapolitan Boar I have now in all 60 very fine ones.  The price of bacon is still upwards of 1/- per lb. mutton is now as low as 7d. and beef about the same price. The weather is at present extremely hot and the greater part of the grass dried up we generally get rain about the end of this month or beginning of April when we shall at once have plenty of grass for all descriptions of stock. My sheep are at present in the Bush that is they are at a distance of 40 miles on government land for the benefit of a change of feed and plenty of water for you must understand this country is in general badly watered that is there are few rivers and those only run in winter and the settlers have like myself had so much to do that as yet they have scarcely dug a well but those who have done so have nearly all succeeded in getting water and next year I shall most likely dig a well at two places on the back of my grant where there is plenty of feed but only one spring and that not yet made sufficiently large to water a flock of two thousand sheep which I now have belonging to myself and others. [29] I have 400 for which I receive £25 pr. hrd. pr. year and as many for which I get thirds of increase and wool the rest are my own.  On the front of my grant is the River Avon in the bed of which are several pools one large at which the sheep water during the hot weather say from the first of Nov. to the first of April being five months. During this time they could be driven more than 3 or 4 miles from the water and as my grant runs back 6 miles I have some good stations there which are fed in the winter or rainy season as well as all the good government land which lies convenient but with one or two good pumps and plenty of water troughs my back land would be more valuable than the front. My wool brought 120£ last year and this season I expect to have £200 worth.  Horses. On coming here I landed one mare out of four from England and bought two here they have increased to 7 and have every appearance of again increasing their numbers to twelve this season. When not at work ploughing drawing in timber for fencing and many other matters they are turned into the bush and keep themselves in fine condition both summer and winter. The first year we came here I had no hay or corn (cut by seal) a very little at a high price and every time they got loose they went away and sometimes I did not find them again for two months. Now I have plenty of hay and corn and when by accident any of them get away from me when 40 or 50 miles distant they at once start for home and generally get there the same day passing through the Bush often quite new to them and seldom going a mile out of a straight course.  Sheep are at present selling at £1 each and wheat at 10/- pr. bushel. The loss of the fruit trees by shipwreck was a great disappointment to us as we relied much upon getting superior sorts to those usually grown here. I am however still persevering and have enclosed by a pail fence 61/2 acres of land which I have planted with such fruit trees and vines as I could get cheap.  Cows. We have 3 for our own use and being obliged to herd them for the sake of regularity I have taken in 50 more to keep on shares. Thirds of increase. [30]  A few respectable settlers came out lately and most of them are likely to settle in the York district. We are all anxious to see as many settlers come out as possible and think the advantages here are equal to any of the other colonies. Labour is still extremely high I am obliged to give my shepherds £40 a year with board and lodging and labourers £30 with board and lodging.  A comet has been seen here for the last 2 nights which excites the curiosity of every one. The tail is very long luminous and beautiful. Mrs. B is quite interested about it. She is still in good health and high spirits and the little fellows can run and walk over the roughest ploughed land we have and are all quite delighted to help me at the plough amongst the sheep or cows in the garden and particularly to water and feed the horses. I think Vernon may now be said to have recovered from the inconvenience he suffered from on leaving England.  English goods are very high in price here slop shoes £l-5-0 pr pair for the last 5 months generally one pound pr. pair  Thos. Brown  I am at present building a dairy by the water side and under some large trees for the benefit of the shade where Mrs. Brown and myself are to churn and make butter at daylight in the morning.  OCT. 1. [1844] - After having repaired some harness which had been broken by our refractory bullocks upsetting their loads and after my companions had completed their arrangements in which Mr. Bell kindly assisted we left Jimba and launched buoyant with hope into the wilderness of Australia.  Many a man's heart would have thrilled like our own had he seen us winding our way round the first rise beyond the station with a full chorus of 'God Save the Queen' which has inspired many a British soldier - aye and many a Prussian too - with courage in the time of danger. Scarcely a mile from Jimba we crossed Jimba Creek and travelled over Waterloo Plains in a N.W. direction about eight miles where we made our first camp at a chain of ponds. Isolated cones and ridges were seen to the N.E and Craig Range to the eastward: the plains were without trees richly grassed of a black soil with frequent concretions of a marly and calcareous nature. Charley gave a proof of his wonderful power of sight by finding every strap of a pack-saddle that had been broken in the high grass of Waterloo Plains.  October 7. - In following the chain of lagoons to the westward we came after a few miles travelling to the Condamine which flows to the north-west: it has a broad very irregular bed and was at the time well provided with water - a sluggish stream of a yellowish muddy colour occasionally accompanied by reeds. We passed several gullies and a creek from the northward slightly running.  The forest on the right side of the river was tolerably open though patches of Myal scrub several times exposed us to great inconvenience; the left bank of the Condamine as much as we could see of it was a fine well grassed open forest.  Oct. 11. - Travelling north-west we came to a Cypress-pine thicket which formed the outside of a Bricklow scrub. [212] This scrub was at first unusually open and I thought that it would be of little extent; I was however very much mistaken: the Bricklow Acacia Casuarinas and a stunted tea tree formed so impervious a thicket that the bullocks in forcing their way through it tore the flour-bags upset their loads broke their straps and severely tried the patience of my companions who were almost continually occupied with reloading one or other of the restless brutes. Having travelled five miles into it and finding no prospect of its termination I resolved upon returning to our last camp which however I was not enabled to effect without experiencing great difficulty delay and loss; and it was not until the expiration of two days that we retraced our steps and reached the lagoon which we had left on the 11th. We had lost about 143 pounds of flour; Mr. Gilbert lost his tent and injured the stock of his gun [...]  Nov. 3. - For the past week the heat was very oppressive during the day whilst at night it was often exceedingly cold; for two or three hours before dawn and for an hour after sunset it was generally delightful particularly within the influence of a cheerful cypress-pine fire which perfumes the air with the sweet scent of the burning resin.   It had now become painfully evident to me that I had been too sanguine in my calculations as to our finding a sufficiency of game to furnish my party with animal food and that the want of it was impairing our strength. We had also been compelled to use our flour to a greater extent than I wished; and I saw clearly that my party which I had reluctantly increased on my arrival at Moreton Bay was too large for our provisions. I therefore communicated to my companions the absolute necessity of reducing our number: all however appeared equally desirous to continue the journey; and it was therefore but just that those who had joined last should leave. Mr. Gilbert however who would under this arrangement have had to retire found a substitute in Mr. Hodgson who had perhaps suffered most by additional fatigues; so that he and Caleb the American negro prepared for their return to Moreton Bay. Previous however to their departure they assisted in killing one of our steers the meat of which we cut into thin slices and dried in the sun. [213] This; our first experiment - on the favourable result of which the success of our expedition entirely depended - kept us during the process in a state of great excitement. It succeeded however to our great joy and inspired us with confidence for the future. The little steer gave us 65 lbs. of dried meat and about 15 lbs. of fat. The operation concluded we took leave of our companions; and although our materiel was reduced by the two horses- on which they returned Mr. Hodgson left us the greater part of his own equipment. The loss of the two horses caused us some little inconvenience as it increased the loads of the animals. The daily ration of the party was now fixed at six pounds of flour per day with three pounds of dried beef which we found perfectly sufficient to keep up our strength.  Nov. 7. - The first two hours of the day were cloudy but it cleared up and became very hot; the atmosphere was hazy and sultry; cumuli with undefined outlines all round the horizon: wind from south-west and south. I travelled west by north about eight miles along the foot of Bastard-box and silver-leaved Ironbark ridges. The country was exceedingly fine; the ground was firm; the valley from two to three miles broad clothed with rich grass and sprinkled with apple-tree flooded-gum and Bastard-box;. the hills formed gentle ascents and were openly timbered. The water-holes seemed to be constant; they are very deep densely surrounded by reeds and with numerous heaps of broken muscle-shells round their banks. Scrub was however to be seen in the distance and formed the dark spot in the pleasant picture. Game became more frequent; and last night every body had a buck. As we were pursuing our course Mr. Gilbert started a large kangaroo known by the familiar name of 'old man' which took refuge in a water-hole where it was killed but at the expense of two of our kangaroo dogs which were mortally wounded. As we were sitting at our dinner a fine half-grown emu walked slowly up to us as if curious to know what business we had in its lonely haunts; unfortunately for us the bark of our little terrier frightened it; and although one of my Blackfellows shot after it it retired unscathed into the neighbouring thicket. [214] Mr. Roper killed a Rallus which Mr. Gilbert thought to be new. The high land from which we came appears at present as a distant range to the south-east. Finegrained sandstone with impressions of leaves was again observed and a few pieces of silicified wood. A Thysanotus with fine large blossoms now adorns the forest. The native carrot is in seed; the Eryngium of Jimba and a leguminous plant prostrate with ternate leaves and bunches of yellow flowers were frequent; several beautiful species of everlastings were occasionally seen and the little orange-tree of the Condamine grew in the scrub.  Nov. 10. - The country along the river changed during the last two stages considerably for the worse. The scrub approached very near to the banks of the river and where it receded a disagreeable thicket of Bastard-box saplings filled almost the whole valley: fine lagoons were along the river frequently far above its level; the river itself divided into anabranches which with the shallow watercourses of occasional floods from the hills made the whole valley a maze of channels from which we could only with difficulty extricate ourselves. 'I never saw such a rum river in my life' said my blackfellow Charley. [...]   Nov. 14. - A dense scrub which had driven us back to the river obliged me to reconnoitre to the north-west in which I was very successful; for after having crossed the scrub I came into an open country furnished with some fine sheets of water and a creek with Corypha palms growing to the height of 25 or 30 feet. The feelings of delight which I experienced when upon emerging from the more than usually inhospitable Bricklow scrub the dark verdure of a swamp surrounding a small lake - with native companions (Ardea antigone) strutting round and swarms of ducks playing on its still water backed by an open forest in which the noble palm tree was conspicuous - suddenly burst upon our view were so great as to be quite indescribable.  [Nov. 19] [...] I had descended - from a scrubby table land the continuation of Darling Downs - into a system of easterly waters. I had followed down the Dawson for a considerable distance and then following up one of its creeks found myself again on westerly waters. [215] I could not decide to my entire satisfaction whether my views Were right; for the country was difficult for reconnoitring; and I was necessarily compelled to move quickly on to accomplish the object of my expedition: but it is a very interesting point for geographical research and I hope if I am not anticipated by other explorers to ascertain at some future period the course of these creeks and rivers [...]  [Nov. 20] We now entered a mountainous country; and the banks of the creek became sometimes very steep and broken by narrow gullies rendering our progress slow and difficult. We had to wind our way through narrow valleys and over ranges from which the descent was frequently very steep and dangerous. The latitude of our camp of the 21st November was 25° 28' 12"; that of the 22nd was 25° 25'; that of the 23rd about 32 miles west of Murphy's Lake was 25° 27' 12'. Here the ranges were for the most part openly timbered with the exception of the higher points which were generally covered with vine-brush; in one of which we found the nests of the brush turkey (Talegaila Lathami) and observed the bird itself. Some considerable stretches of beautiful country were now travelled over; the leading feature being low ridges openly timbered with the silver-leaved ironbark covered with an abundance of grass and herbs and furnished with large lagoons; there was also a constant supply of water in the creek itself. On the banks of the latter a species of Sterculia grows to a large size and is one of the most pleasing and ornamental trees of the country; it is probably different from although nearly allied to S. heterophylla. Very disagreeable however was the abundance of Burr and of a speargrass (Aristida) which attached themselves to our clothes and blankets and entered (particularly the latter) into the very skin. I have also to mention that a yellow Villarsia was found on one of the lakes; which were generally surrounded by high sedges. We have not seen black swans since leaving Murphy's Lake; at which place we first saw a species of whistling duck (Leptotarsis Gould.)  Appearances indicated that the commencement of the ranges was a favourite resort of the 'Blackfellows.' The remains of recent repasts of muscles were strewed about the larger water-holes and as I passed a native camps which had only lately been vacated I found under a few sheets of bark four fine kangaroo nets made of the bark of Sterculia; also several bundles of sticks which are used to stretch them. [216] As I was in the greatest want of cordage I took two of these nets; and left in return a fine brass-hilted sword the hilt of which was well polished four fishing hooks and a silk handkerchief; with which I felt convinced they would be as well pleased as I was with the cordage of their nets. [...]   1st January 1844  Monday Margaret was the first to wish me a happy New Year! I am determined on not grumbling this year if I can avoid it - and so I trust myself that it may be happy!  I have begun it by doing all that I most dislike on purpose to try and improve my temper - for they tell me I'm altered for the worse in this respect - Oh! who would not [be] in my case?  3rd Wednesday Baxter and Mr Salwey rode over to Sherwood - and returned to dinner - and Mr Stephen did not leave until after that meal - [135]  I made a strange bet with him - He and Mr Salwey have taken this station - and we shall leave in about a month - so I shall go by land with Baxter to Port Fairy - Mr Stephen has bet me his own Portrait against Baxter's that I don't go by land - I have today written what I wish were unsaid - it is always thus - when you do anything in a flurried way - but I shall see that which ensues - There is some fun expected up the River today as Messrs Hitchcock & Jobling and Major Innes were having their runs decided - I am so tired that I must say Good-Night to my journal - 7th Sunday On Thursday Baxter had intended going to the settlement - but it commenced raining and we had a delightful quantity of rain - Accordingly on Friday he started early and was to go the whole way - Mr McLeod is evidently smitten I think with Isabella - he told me so the other day - and I asked him since then how his love affair was progressing? He said 'Oh! so I made you believe it - the idea of my telling you of all people!' - Now that I'm about to leave this I love all the various little nooks & corners - I wonder whether I shall ever see them again? or whether I shall ever be thought of by those who visit or rather did visit Yesabba? - What a hollow sound appears in Friendship! & what persons calling themselves friends we meet with - really in general if we could only think a little what is there to attach us to this life? Very very little indeed - I sat up so late last night finishing a dress & reading - it was morning before I fell asleep - I so often dream the same thing - I appear to be in a beautiful house well furnished - but chiefly composed of bed rooms - in one of these are four large beds - always occupied by pretty women - I then go some way off the first room to another which has but one bed - and a beautiful woman in it - opposite to this is a bath room - and the same ugly old woman shows me first into the bath and then into a handsomely furnished bed room - which she tells me is mine - I then begin to undress and she retires - but I all of a sudden seem to wonder where I am and why? I then throw myself on a couch opposite to my bed; and while there I hear a voice lamenting so much to find me there - at the same time using the most passionate entreaties for me to return home - I look up and see - I then know why I am there - ('A man cannot be too dissipated in some ways before marriage'!!) The house is one of Vice and I am one of its votaries! And so finishes my 'dream' - May it always remain one! [136]  Altho' I did once say 'If we ever meet again it will be miserably' - We were highly entertained by Mrs Freeman's description of her visit to the Scotch Carpenters - She says they gave her such a reception! The next day after she was here our servants said they wished to leave - the man because there was too much to do & Baxter had attempted to seduce his wife - This was very delightful to me to hear her told the woman that she must have mistaken him - She said 'It is not at all likely Ma'am - the Master offered me cattle if I would sell my soul to the d-l!'  I have pretended total ignorance on the subject - as I knew it was true by his being so frightened at the man's speaking out loud about it; and repeatedly telling him not to talk so loudly - At the time this occurred I was in my bed hardly expecting to live - It amuses me very much to see Margaret while I am writing this trying to peep into it at every opportunity - Whenever I go out of the room she is into my room in an instant - what she expects to find there I don't know!  Mr P. Stephen brought me some nice peaches from Wollowbie Hill - I have never been there but once - not so Baxter - his love affair there with the black woman is repeated as a fine joke - Agnes is not yet returned from the Naanbucca where she is staying with Mrs Scott - the latter is very ill off indeed!  It is most insufferably hot this afternoon really it makes one feel quite ill I did not say to Maria how much I felt their not coming to see me on Christmas Eve when they passed to the Plains - I thought it was of little consequence - and so made her the present I had intended - Mr McLeod was saying that if Major Innes got the better of Mr Hitchcock in the settling of the run that he thought he could recover his from Mr Cameron - as it was illegally given to him - That he saw no use of there being a Commissioner for he had not visited the stations for many months and he hoped it might soon be done away with! I suppose to him he is all sweetness!  Ada has had puppies and I had them all drowned - she is in a sad way about them -  It was laughable to see the tired coolness that appeared the other day here - I saw so plainly what the real state of the case was!  I have a bet of a riding whip with Margaret about Miss Stephen & Mr Salwey - She says they will be married before next January - I say 'Not' [137] - Baxter is gone to settle all his debts in the settlement - and then we have nothing to do but get ready for a start - I need not have gone until he was at Port Fairy - but I in the first place wish to see the country between this & Melbourne - in the next it is too expensive to go by sea and I should not go at all - and I wish to see the Station before I go home - besides I shall see all my poor horses & dogs taken care of on the road - A bush trip may recruit me too - then again I care little what becomes of me!  8th Monday We have both been working away today in spite of the heat - In the evening we rode over to Dandingalon - Messrs Freer and Dent were there but I did not go to the house - There is a sad story afloat about a poor girl named Blair - She is said to be in the family way - and the other Parent is the clerk of the Church - It is a shocking thing - for she was always so well behaved - and the horrible man will not marry her - now that he has gained what he desired - Oh! man! Where is generosity in your composition? People will say 'But he is of the "lower order"' - Man is the same from the highest to the lowest! His are the feelings of a Sensualist - and so that he only obtains that which he wishes for he cares not what ruin he may have been the cause of - Mr Purves went down the other day to Mr Arkroyd's in a terrible way - and said that the evening before two gentlemen had been prowling about his house after his servant Mary Ann Blair - and that he had determined upon his honor to say publicly who the two were the very next time he heard them - Now altho' 'dissipation may be allowed in single men' still I think that some delicacy too may be used at the same time - I know the two and I will let them get a hint of the matter - I'm glad I shall not hear any more of these to me painful tales - I shall be away from them all soon - Margaret took such a large Centipede off my neck this evening - she was more frightened than I was about it - All is nothing now - to me - 13th Saturday Baxter is gone to the Plains this morning so I write a little more here - On Thursday we rode up in the afternoon to Major Kemp's where we found all in such a sad state of dirt - The hut looked disgustingly dirty - the children too - Mrs Kemp came out after some time dressed very smartly - It appears that she has since said that she wondered at persons paying such untimely visits - and that altho' in the bush they remembered who they were!! Oh! Pride - We have twice ridden over to Sherwood and not seen its owner - but I will go again - for I'm determined too - Messrs Salwey and Stephen were here yesterday on their way to the Commissioner's about their cattle - The former was 'squiff' - and the latter had shaved off his whiskers and made himself a perfect fright - I had an answer about the journal - it was a very cavalier one - N'importe! [138]  Marion is to be married in June I believe - to Mr Mordaunt McLean - She is an excellent soul! but is fretting herself very much about religious matters! She thinks herself not half as good on these points as she should be - I don't like religious discussions but I love her so well that I am writing to her on them - as she wishes it - I wish I could love God half what I wish - but worldly passions & feelings will intervene - and then I find I am only 'Mammon'!  I have been copying some pretty waltzes - yet of what avail will they be for I shall have no piano - Cowen will take this one from Captain Briggs at £20 - The pearls & brooches are gone up to Sydney to be valued - and then I shall take the latter - I fear very much that I have not the power of entertaining - for Margaret is most decidedly tired of this Elysium retreat - and sighs for more gaiety - I wonder if she could pass her life as I have? Few women could - The answer about my journal was so ill judged! not a line - If my friend thinks it right I suppose it is - but really I can see neither common politeness or the smallest feeling on his side - Friday Mr McLeod came over last night and he Margaret & I started early for the settlement - We reached the Plains in very good time - changed horses and on again we went - About 12 o'clock I arrived at Yarloowa - They were as usual glad to see me - They are a delightful family certainly - Annie is looking very poorly - The poor little soul has been spitting blood for some time - and becomes so terribly alarmed about herself that they fear remarking whether she is looking ill or not - Captain Jobling had been all day in the settlement and did not return until evening -   Saturday Mr McLeod came to the Point for me this morning - and I got into town pretty early - The girls were all on the lookout for me - Marion is looking very well - with such a beautiful colour - Jessie is much thinner and improved by it - In the evening Miss Hunter Miss A. Paterson - and some gentlemen came in - amongst others Mr Massie - It is the first time that I have seen him in public for 9 months - and shall I say it? It would not pain me much if I never did so again! [139] Illness may alter a person - and time many! but I never beheld a person as altered as my friend - He looks very well - & his eyes are as expressive as ever to other people - but nine months have made a change in his cold cold heart -  At first I thought he did not intend speaking at all to me - for he merely gave me a formal bow - I had been told he was smitten with Miss Paterson - and was astonished to see how far the flirtation had gone - I said to Marion 'If Mr Massie cannot remember me I shall not remind him by speaking' - Accordingly until he thought fit to come up to me I remained silent to him - He then said he was sorry I was going to leave - and looked exceedingly so as he caught Miss Hunter's eye and laughed!  Mr Salwey was flirting with Margaret - it's too bad - She is so fond of him - I cannot fancy a person falling in love with such a man - He & Mr Massie are both regular 'dog - Vanes'! They change with every breath - both taken by a pretty face - It would not be worth the pleasure of loving - to waste its sweetness on two such men - They are both good companions tho' - and the latter I would never tire of.  It commenced raining this afternoon and looks extemely like a continuance - so that I shall be unable to return home on Monday -   Friday The steamer has been off here for two days but the surf has been too high for any boat to go to her -   Yesterday a boat with two men in her was very nearly taken over the bar - it was frightful to see the poor creatures hurrying on to destruction - Eternity seemed within their reach - oh! who would have tried to turn aside unless those terrified at the idea of death -   We have seen Messrs Massie & Montgomerie every day - The former positively condescends to shake hands with me; and addresses two or three words to me! Mr P. Stephen ('toujours le meme should be his motto!) has been in several times - Yesterday evening he accompanied us for a drive on the 'Lake' road - It does me good to see his bright face -   27th Saturday In the evening a walk was proposed; and to my extreme horror I found myself linked to W. N. Gray Esq - We went as far as Mr Salwey's to see his two young puppies - and the whole way Mr Gray was trying to make himself understood in the English language! I never in my life heard any person express himself so badly - This day week after all the people had left and I had retired to my room - I sat musing on 'times gone by' - and altho' I certainly felt glad to have seen my soi-disant friend again still Nature would feel sorry at the reception I had met with - so different from what I had any right to anticipate - Surely in justice Mr M. should have explained why he was so rude as not even to speak to me! [140]  All my thinking ended in wishing I had met with a good husband and then all my heartaches would have been spared in a great measure - I cried myself nearly into hysterics & was so far insensible as to say to Marion when she came to bed 'Is that you - ?' She asked me if I were awake and I pretended not to hear her - She then touched me and said that she could not bear to hear me sob so terribly - We remained awake a long time - she was telling me all her plans for the future - may they all be as bright & lasting as I wish them! Nobody knows of her engagement but Margaret her Mama & myself - She advises me strongly not to go to Port Phillip - Only one person could have prevented me & that one takes no more interest in me now - I knew so well it was mere Passion - but thought at least I had not been mistaken in a true & sincere friend - All my dreams are passed! I. C. said 'I'm to have the other journal am I not?' No - he has not deigned to ask for it until then most certainly not - at least so far this book will accompany the others - but until I am asked for it it shall remain sealed - (12 o'clock) All are gone! and I am going too - to bed - Mrs Richardson Messrs Massie Montgomerie Salwey & P. Stephen were here this evening - I danced the first Quadrille with I. C. and spoke in the Verandah to him for a minute or two - but he was so eager to go into the drawing room that I could not say half what I wished - It is the last time I will ever speak to him -  I then danced with Mr P. Stephen - He told me a very bad piece of news - that Mr Baxter had failed - it will involve us sadly I fear - This and other things made me feel wretched - I was sitting in the Verandah with Marion when Mrs Richardson came up; and just behind her Percy Stephen - I was amused very much by Mrs Richardson saying 'How much attention Mr Massie pays Miss Paterson; only look at them now!' [141] [142] Before I could turn round Mr Stephen touched my shoulder and said 'Don't mind her! I've made you miserable telling you that news' - I first assured him I was often in low spirits without hearing bad news - and turned and looked at the pair in the corner - Mrs Richardson was right in this instance - and I was quite astonished that in about an hour after Mr Massie left his belle amie to stand an instant by my side - We neither spoke - and no wonder - Just before he left he shook hands - for the last time in this country - or any other - and I have found out that there is but one man I ever met truly worthy of my love - Thus ends the Comedy or Tragedy - for it has been both to me - Isabella & Annie are both sleeping in the room with me - the former says she wishes I would put away that odious book (this one) and tell her what I shall do with myself in Port Phillip - I could tell her - but won't - 29th Monday I this morning said Addio to my friends in Port Macquarie and started for the Plains in Mr Marsh's gig - with his two horses and the old Grey tied to their heads - so that we had three abreast - We journied on famously - Mr McLeod shaking the vehicle as little as he could - Baxter did not expect me - He is looking very ill - While I've been away he has been having Dr Madden to quack him - He says he can scarcely walk with rheumatism -  The woman I left here is gone - She came up when I returned and told me some long story about her Master & she having words - so that I'm 'my own femme de chambre again - I only dreamt my 'dream' once in the settlement - it makes me quite miserable dreaming it so often - Ada was so glad to see me - I do love her - all my pets look well notwithstanding the rain - 30th Tuesday Mrs McLeod wishes me to remain with them & not go to Port Fairy - but I cannot be dependent on any one - If I could work in any way all well - but to remain even for a few months a burthen on any one I could not - Every place about looks so pretty - every little nook has its charm to me now - But however painful it may be to separate from & give up for ever what is lovely and attractive in natural scenery; it is altogether nothing when compared to the breaking up of those living attachments which have become a part of Nature - This is most true - and I shall find that 'Friendship is Love without his Wings'! [143]  On the 28th after undressing I gave Margaret my old gown - I'll never wear it again! and to dear Marion a pretty buff châle - the last time I wore the latter dress it was at a large dance at Mrs Wardell's in Sydney - A great many Naval Officers were there amongst the number Mr H. Elliott of the Conway - He knew Baxter very well but not me - I was talking with Marion when Mr Elliott said to Baxter 'I would like to know that pretty woman Waltzing with Miss Marion - who is she?' Baxter waited until we came near them and then said 'Annie here is a young friend of mine wishes to be introduced to you - Mr Elliott - my Wife'! Poor boy he looked aghast - but quickly recovered his usual spirit and I found myself talking with a very good partner - His cousin another evening at Government House asked Mrs Hazard whilst talking with Baxter 'Who that singular looking woman was with Cain's brand on her forehead?'  I've been trimming my grass borders for the last time - I wonder who will do it after I'm gone?  6th Tuesday Today Messrs McLeod & Duff came up from the settlement - The former brought me an English letter which has been some time in the Sydney Post Office - I wrote last week to Mr Gordon asking him to send me any letters there might be and I received a very polite note in return & a long letter from my darling William Harriet and my Uncle They were all at Harriet's staying some time - She says they only want me there! - Just at this time she writes (June) I was out in this Wilderness enduring tortures! - But I'm happy to think & know that they are so - Harriet desires to be kindly remembered to Massie - so I've sent her message - Baxter cut all the names out of the books given me by Richard Dry - however I've written them in again - I shall get my name written in a book that was given to me - That unfortunate man Knatchbull is to be hanged for murder on Tuesday next - It would really appear that he was tired of his existence to go so deliberately and kill a woman - We have bought Mr Salwey's gig - and when Mr Stephen takes the cattle we have little to do at dear Yesabba - 7th Wednesday William's 31st Birthday - May our good Almighty preserve him to see many more - How I do idolize him - it is almost sinful! I never did meet with such a man in my life - By the by tho' he says in his letter that to be wild and a roué is only natural - He appears to coincide with another person I once knew! - 8th Thursday My wedding day! Many a bitter day have I seen since that event took place - Mr Benjamin dined here yesterday - He and the Major's family don't appear to agree very well in their Politics - but his chief wish appears to be to try and annoy the said family as much as he possibly can - I told him it was anything but Christian-like - and oh! horrors! I never until now thought that he being a Jew it became strictly personal - I loaded him with peaches & cucumbers for his children - What a capital Aunt I shall make - ruin all my nephews & nieces - and of course get the thanks of Parents Uncles etc for making them pets! [144]  This evening Mr P. Stephen came - He did look so sleepy and squiff - Naughtey fellow! I'm afraid he gives way a little to dissipation of various sorts - He's young yet - and single - He did not forget my roses tho' - notwithstanding his being elevated - I told him he might go to sleep on the sofa and I would not take any gloves - He said he would not mind losing them - Mr Montgomerie called a few days ago - I was packing up a trunk for the settlement - & had taken off my dress and put on my dressing gown - it was so warm - but I soon made my entrée - The Blacks are all here - Barney too - my favorite Black - They are stealing corn in real earnest from Mr McLeod's and our Pig-station - 9th Sunday Such very unpleasant weather! it rains one minute and is fine the next - Baxter is going nearly mad about his cattle! He fidgets my life nearly out about them - I have made a bet with Mr Stephen - He is to have Baxter's picture that is here if we don't get to Port Phillip over land - and I'm to have his if we do - I would like to have his handsome saucy face!  He told me that he was sure I. C. did not care for Miss P. - 'Indeed' said he 'I think he does not care one atom more for any one person than another' - This rather entertained me - He very often talks of his favorite - and complains of other persons abusing him for being partial - at all events I cannot complain of the latter lately - This evening I rode 'Gratis' up to Dungee - accompanied by Mr Stephen - He says he shall often think of these firs: rides over his run when he is coming home tired at night after a day's hard work - [145]  The cattle were counted and given over today to Mr Stephen - I ought to tell Baxter of his brother's Failure but I cannot - he is so irritable - and really ill - How frequently I pity him! when I think that altho' I do everything a wife or servant could do for man; still there is a way of doing it - When I ask him how he is it is not as I would ask anybody I loved - How differently different persons are affected by any pleasure or pain - Mrs Jobling kind good and religious as she is; when she receives an English letter frets herself terribly about it until indeed she is quite ill Isabella devours hers almost and reads it aloud as she goes on - Mrs Kemp - it puts in high glee for several days and she says she does not mind all her work! as to myself - oh! how does it affect me? Why I wish for one person to communicate the news - and I don't now grumble as I did - at being so far from happiness - for I deserve all all that I endure - Baxter says I take less care of myself than ever - Yes! I do indeed - While I thought I was cared for I did take some slight care of my health - but when I saw it was not the case; it has altered even my heart - I fancied when in the settlement that nothing could make me fret for any person in misery - my soul felt hardened - but I found on seeing the two poor men drowning (as we supposed - ) I had still a tear for a fellow creature in distress!  14th Wednesday Baxter went to the settlement today - The Blacks have been very troublesome for some days - they rob the corn most terribly - I gave the men some caps for their guns and advised them to shoot quietly! - I shall be taken up for manslaughter - or aiding it - 'Same thing!' as Miss Fattorini says - Thursday Such a wretched day - raining nearly the whole day - I sat working and not minding the weather - and have finished a pretty pair of cuffs for myself - the first work of the sort I ever did for myself - The fire and Ada have kept me up very late - it is long past 12 o'clock - I'm afraid of having my old dream again tonight - for last night it continued so long - and it makes me miserable - Oh! I must never be so low as that comes to surely? - I should never doubt! - 16th Friday Such weather! really tantalizing - one minute the sun shines in all his glory the next - nothing but rain & gloom to be seen - It is a beautiful idea calling the sun 'He' and the Moon 'She' - the latter merely a reflection of the former! [146] - I've been very industrious today - the Blacks are all come back - Tommy has been telling the men in the kitchen that the Commissioner is a better man than Mr Gray! - (Whoever doubted it?) and a great deal in his favor - 18th Sunday I should Harriet to have seen me with my companion Tommy yesterday evening - I sat down to the Piano at dusk (which I always do when by myself) and was amusing myself when I turned round to the open window and spied Tommy in an attitude of great attention - I asked him to walk in and sit by the fire which he did - He told me that the Commissioner played on the Flute sometimes not always! That Mr d'Niban was a nice gentleman tall as Mr Bell at Yarrowal - and that he took horses down from Mr Townsend's to bring the Messrs Massie up when first they arrived in this Colony - that Mr Massie always stayed at Mr Bodgell's - and he didn't know who made Black fellows songs! Here was news of various kinds - Mrs McLeod was talking to me the other day and amongst other things she said 'Do you still continue separated from Mr Baxter at Night?' Strange thing that people cannot fancy my doing so! I only answered 'I slept with Mr Baxter for the last time in this World next May will be 4 years' - and now I think that I shall adhere to my resolution - The peach trees are so loaded that they are breaking down - and the fruit on some of them is very tolerable - 19th Monday I am very far from well - and am rather suffering - Dr Carlyle recommends me to undergo an examination - but this is strangely at variance with my wish that I would rather prefer going on as I am - I suppose it cannot last very long - altho' he says it may for years - They think to frighten me by saying I shall or rather have a Cancer - They little know me! I do not fear death - altho' I have been wicked enough to covet it frequently -  22nd February Baxter was in a perfect fury at my having met with Mr Massie again - & asked me if I had spoken to him? - Of course I told the truth - I'm not ashamed of having such an acquaintance altho' it does not appear to be the same in his opinion of me - He was quite as furious as ever - I told him that I would speak to Mr Massie whenever I should meet him - and that William would account to Baxter for my actions - He was perfectly dismayed when I said I hoped to see my brother out in a short time - He had never dreamed I was in earnest when I said I had written home - 24th Saturday I had a long note from Isabella - she is in hopes that I have changed my mind about going to Port Phillip - No! I am going - Mr McLeod thought to frighten me by telling me of three Bushrangers being out on the road - Meeting them will be a novelty - so that they don't take my horses - and then I really think I should fight for them - Upwards of 70 Blacks were here today - It appears they had been fighting some others over at Yarroowa - and had been Victorious - It was a remarkably pretty sight to see them coming into the paddock - with their spears shields etc - and as they entered the gate they filed off in two ranks - these were the separate tribes - They then ran up together into a circle and danced & yelled - It was quite an exciting scene to an old Soldier! They then sat down - and after remaining a short time off they all went to the Plains to fight again! [147]  27th Tuesday I have been so very hard at work making new dresses - Messrs P. Stephen & Herring came up this evening and I have passed such a happy evening - as the old gentleman went to bed - I never should have imagined what I was told this evening - strange tho' that it is the first time I ever knew myself to feel sorry at anybody's loving me - Poor boy - and he told me so unconsciously too - After saying that he loved Mr Salwey better than any one he had ever known he soon after told me that that was after me - That his Mother & sister were quite secondary to me - I was really vexed with myself for having said that had I been single & a few years younger I should have taken advantage of leap year and proposed to him - and finished by saying 'but I suppose you would have rejected my suit!' 'Not if you had been old & ugly; I could never have rejected your heart & mind!' He did not mean this as a compliment altho' to me from such a boy it was a great one - 29th Thursday Mr Stephen left soon after breakfast - and I have said 'Good-bye' to him the first down here - One of the last I would wish to say it to - 4th Monday Poor Mama's birthday - Would to God I could recall her memory with all the true affection that a child should! but I have been so estranged from her - and now that she is gone altho' I forgive her all that she ever did to me still it is not with a wish to have had her with me longer that I think of her - [148]  Mary Ann Reid tells me that she saw G. Wlately - that he is not one bit altered! Just as handsome and exactly as much of the roué - so much so that his Mother & sisters would not live with him!' - Telle est la vie! - Had we been married he might have been reclaimed and I happier - as it is we are both lost - There has been a tremendous affair at Wollowbie Hill! Mr C. Curr was sent away one morning without his breakfast - however he was nothing daunted and now that Mr McLean is in N. England he is visiting again at the house - and people do say that an elopement is very likely to be the termination! Poor unfortunate girl what will then become of her; drinking too as she does - Mr Curr has not sufficient refinement to make up to any woman for the very great sacrifice and sin they have committed - I have been so busy - and have everything put away - I try so much to prevent myself thinking of leaving this dear old place - I would not mind if I were going home - but to have to undergo all the privations & fatigues of a new Station I certainly do feel it rather hard on me; especially as I. am in really ill health - Mary Ann says she wishes I were at home as she then would have a confidante to whom she could tell all her troubles without any fear of meeting with satire - I can always sympathize with a person let them be high or low - yet I never tell a woe of my own to a female - it is a strange thing but I don't like Women - This will be nearly the last time I shall write in my journal - and it will be left to be looked at! - I was saying that I need not keep out my hat as I supposed I could not' spare much time to ride at Melbourne; and besides my habit was so bad - 'You'll have something else to do besides riding about there!' said my amiable sposo - We shall sees I rather think I shall find time for riding - and that I shall be more trouble to him there than here - for I shall see all 7 my old friends and I will try and see what he will do when he finds me befriended - I told him a few days ago when he was abusing Mr Massie & I that he had better wait and tell that all to William - He was perfectly' amazed to think that I had written home - as he never thought I would do so - Well! I've endured misery enough in this Colony God knows - altho it might have been the same in some respects in any country in the World - It is a most providential thing that we don't know what is to be or we should always be pining - 5th Tuesday My last day at Yesabba - how very often I shall wish myself back here again in my bark hut - I have finished my packing - and this evening I rode over to Sherwood to say adieu to the folks there - The night is exquisitely bright - and everything in the garden looks so pretty - I suppose I shall never see the place again - Well! let me hope that the change may be for the better - I have passed many happy hours here; and God knows many wretched ones too! [149]  They tell me that I'm mad to leave this to go to Port Fairy! - Perhaps I am - but what oh what can I do?  Port Fairy  6th November 1844  My dear Mary & Kate  This is my dear Mother's birthday. She will surely be fifty-two. I cannot fancy her any older than when we left five years ago. [167] How quickly time passes and yet it does seem long long to me since I saw you all. Well is it that the future is hidden for were it not so we should not have left England with such hopes for after days. What were we not to do in five years - and see the result. We have both grown older and poorer but still with hope and willingness to try for better times.  I wrote about a month ago an account of our settlement here upon a very fine station but unfortunately not ours. Mr Dawson is the owner of it but George has the privilege of keeping his cattle on it for one or two years if he pleases free of expense and he thinks we shall be better off than fighting on with a dairy now butter is so low as it takes more than the profits to pay wages besides spoiling the growth of the calves.  Mr Dawson does not live here. He is going to commence melting down at the port. He is putting up buildings upon a large scale and I hope he will succeed. There was a misunderstanding between him and George with regard to this station but it is amicably arranged and although we have not the half of the station as we supposed we should it will be better for us in the present state of the finances to be relieved from the expenses. Mr and Mrs Dawson have always shewn themselves sincere friends to us and I should have been sorry for anything to break the friendship. Mrs D. is now on a visit to me and after being sometime alone you may be sure it is a great treat to talk over our respective troubles.  My old friend the Yarra Yarra has overflowed beyond the calculation or remembrance of any persons here and done great damage. Entire houses have been washed away. The blacks still say as they said the last flood 'This is only piccaninny - big one coming.' My affection for the Yarra is still great and this run not being George's I never shall feel at home here as I hoped to do were we owners of a really good station such as this is.  If my last letter is duly received you will know that I have again had a still born child. It came at the seventh month the 12th of September. I had been very unwell the month previous and was truly thankful when all was over. I was very ill for some time after and I think so when I wrote but am now recovering very well though I fear I shall never be so strong as I have been. I need not repeat the particulars as I filled my last sheet with them but I fervently hope I shall have no more. If ever such a thing should be likely I shall be obliged to have medical advice all the time as constant bloodletting they say will be my only safety and that - of course must weaken me much. [168]  When in Melbourne I saw a gentleman who knew the Palmers well. He did not give a very favourable account of their circumstances. Poor Mrs Palmer like so many others has had her expectations sadly blighted. They are very ill off. Frederick who was troubled with epileptic fits fell into a river and was drowned. The other boys are variously dispersed none doing well. The daughters are very nice girls and he speaks highly of Mrs P. but said that Mr P. was sadly given to drink a bad thing for the family but I recollect my Mother suspected him to be guilty of that failing.  Mrs Dawson is sitting beside me and she sends her kind love. I wish you knew her. I never met a woman with such a heart and so sensitive for the troubles of others. She is a universal favorite. She has been living in the town of Port Fairy called Belfast but prefers the Bush. She finds no one like me so she says but I don't believe her. I much fear this air will be too keen for her and she will not take the rest which the doctor says is the only thing to prolong her life. I must confess I have a great fear for her and feel convinced that some of the violent attacks of pain she has will carry her off but dare not tell her so.  Some day perhaps we shall get a batch of likenesses from Chester; it is quite as well you never came here though the best off now are steady young men who came when we did without any money to lose. They received such high wages that they could save the greater part. A great many persons here have become insane and it is said to be in consequences of the reverses and great shock their expectations have received.   Prid is the image of his father in face figure and walk. I must make him write a letter soon. He gets on the best with figures and though not at school is really not bad at his books. He will soon know all I can teach him and is constantly longing for books.  Am I to believe my letters are such a treat? I get quite stupid at writing and if you can make sense of the epistles and decipher the words it is more than I sometimes can myself - this is not the life for intellectual improvement and few children reared in the colony have hitherto had more than a Charity boy's education at home with the addition of being taught to swear smoke and ride. The first some children of those that consider themselves snobs are adepts at. I never heard my boys utter a bad word but they are fortunately uncontaminated. How they would be injured by bad example remains to be proved. [169]  With lasting love to all assembled at our cottage fireside I remain  my dear sisters  P. Selby  I begin now to get nervous before opening letters death has been busy with so many friends at home that I always fear the loss of nearer and dearer ones. Every time we remove our hut is worse. I often wonder what you would think of this one.  August 17 1844  Dearest Papa  I am in possession of yours and Matilda's combined letter enclosed in a closely written envelope in which you acquaint Mr. Brown of the state of affairs at Summertown and it bears the several dates of Feby. 15 - 19 March 1st and 6th. We received the letter on the evening of the 10th. I had most anxiously been on the look out for tidings as report had brought out the intelligence that poor Mama was no more. Some passengers by the Trusty of the laboring class about two months ago told the Viveash's they had heard of her decease just before leaving Oxfordshire and Charlotte Smith also in writing her sister mentioned that there was such a report. It was so likely to have been founded on fact considering her emaciated and melancholy state that I had no hope left that there would not be a confirmation of it.  You will have had several letters from me since that of Sept 8th 43 if they have safely reached their destination. I forget the dates of them but from this time think of taking an account of all letters sent as well as continuing to keep those we receive.  I regret not having sent you the address of Mr. Bland in case you might wish to write him. I know he intends paying you a visit but you might even then not know where to address him in case of wishing to do so (Mr. H. Bland Esqr. Powles & Co Austin Friars).  I have acknowledged in many instances receiving the case No. 4 changed to No. 1 and hope you have had the satisfaction of hearing it long ere this. I have parted with £60 worth of the things and shall if necessary dispose of more indeed with all except presents and what we cannot possibly do without of plain wearing apparel that the packages contained. Mr. Brown intends reserving the child's carriage that has come in the case per Unicorn but every thing else that is disposable will be converted into cash. Perhaps I may never see the contents for it is uncertain whether we shall have it brought over the Hills this depends upon whether the contents will sell well in Perth. [48] I long to see the letters that are enclosed in the box but must wait patiently until Mr. Brown can afford me that pleasure. His engagements are so very pressing that he cannot go below just now.  We quitted Mr. Hardey on the 1st of April and are now on our own and proper side of the water. Hardey is finally settled with both for rent and compensation for our giving up the farm. I have told you what he asked for the latter £210 the value of sheep at that time was £1 per head and we gave him 210 sheep for compensation.  Great progress has been made since we have been here in many things. Stock yards are put up in the same substantial manner as the garden fence I once described to you. Mr. Brown has done all the ploughing with his own hands and an additional quantity of land has been cleared also a portion of the walls of the house put up but this work is at a stand still at present it being the season to plant trench and manure the garden which is a matter of too great consequence to be neglected. A season passed of necessary work to be done there would put us back so much in one of the enjoyments of life a well cultivated and fruit bearing garden. Besides we can have no wine until we produce it for ourselves that article from necessity having long been done away with.  This is the first season of blossom about 2 dozen of the peach trees are ornamented with bloom these were of the first season's planting. Some of the almonds we expect will shoot forth next year and we look for a sufficiency of grapes for the table the coming season. The fruit time here is from January to March. I have met with one disappointment from Flora who will not foster the English seeds we had sown with great care in well prepared ground in April last those you sent from Cuddesdon. I should have had great delight In seeing them flourish.  You perhaps wonder what we have done without a house the last five months with a prospect of five months more passing away before we shall inhabit one. We live in one end of a thatched shed adjoining the stock yards where there is just room for a table the sofa Mr. Brown made our boxes (some of which serve for seats for the children) and two beds. Our goods are stowed away in a compartment in the middle of the shed and the plough box we have a nook behind these detached we have a temporary kitchen and dairy made of boughs and split wood with loose straw thrown over the top. The fire is out of doors and when it is very cold we have a pan of hot embers brought into the shed. It was severely cold for several weeks in June and July we had ice 1/2 an inch thick (with occasionally a greater thickness) morning after morning in the water buckets. [49] Milk in the pans was frozen from beneath the cream to the bottom of the pans in numerous flakes. it would have been very possible to make ices in such weather which I should have done by mixing some cream with raspberry or strawberry jam and then congealing it with flakes of ice but had not the preserve. The novelty of such a confection in this country would have been pleasing and formed no bad present to the Governor.  The children thrive in our gipsy mode of life as regards robustness of frame and activity of limbs but the coming to this country has a great disadvantage for children in one respect the dearth there is of good instruction. I had hoped and have endeavoured to teach my children until they might be put into abler hands but the increase of family diminished my opportunities and energies for keeping up sufficient discipline to be enabled to do much if any good with the elder ones. I believe it is a generally received opinion that it is almost impossible for a mother to perform the office of governess to her own boys with any chance of a satisfactory result. I had hoped otherwise but experience tells in favor of that opinion. In any case I sometimes think I do more harm than good to them and that is by not possessing the necessary virtues for the vocation.  The boys would be quick enough and good enough if ably superintended and our intention is (should not bad fortune baffle it) to have a youth in his first zeal from one of the Normal or Diocesan Schools either in England or Scotland to take the superintendance of the four boys both at their studies at work in the vineyard and at play with two other (the sons of gentlemen to be educated with them) which would defray the expense of salary. You do not know how my hopes rest on this. After two more years the promising Kenneth would be injured for want of mental culture and in two years the others will be quite ready for a Master's firm hand. All four in fact might then be trained together and continue our delight and pride without bowing the spirit down in almost fruitless endeavours to teach them.  I am entirely out of brown holland and calico now for making up into garments for the children so they will be but poorly clad soon if I cannot avail myself of any thing that has come from England for their use. Shoes and boots they only wear on Sunday when they go to Church and that is only the two eldest the other two little wild colts never have been shod.  I shall leave a little room for Mr. Brown to say a little but must first tell you that my thoughts have entirely corresponded with yours as regards the little Eliza. I shall write dear Matilda when I have perused her other letter enclosed in the case meantime my love to her dear Mary (who I hope has written) Emma whom I have not heard of or from for a long time and dear Aunt also remembrance to Bussel [50]  I remain  Dearest Papa  Your affectionate Daughter  E. Brown.  Mr. Brown declined to avail himself of the small space left to write in having more to say than will fill it.  On the sixth of this month the rainy season set in. Previously to that the ground lacked moisture failing crops were anticipated and much distress to cattle and sheep for lack of the green herb. Prayers were said in the churches for rain now the windows of Heaven are opened the bed of the Avon is filled thereby not only connecting the pools but a flood overflows its banks. It is very difficult to keep up a fire out of doors in such weather but of this Mr. Brown is the main prop now that he is about the dwelling. All outdoor occupations are at a standstill except the herdsman's and shepherd's but the time is not lost this opportunity being taken for repairing harness mending sacks making wool bags etc. A new saddle has been constructed for Vernon's nice pony (foal of Kenneth's pony) the saddle is of goat skin and a good bridle also and a saddle for the men's use or Natives when they ride abroad on any mission for us.  We have still the native boy Corell who is very useful he generally herds the horses and in rainy weather brings the wood and water that we require. In fine weather this falls a good deal on Kenneth of course it is a laborious occupation for such a young boy but he performs it with great cheerfulness contriving to bring up a short hill two buckets half filled at a time. He was seven years old on the 9th. of August the day before I received your last letter.  This letter has not been written all at once. I have dated it for post day indeed I write with difficulty and but a little at a time having a very bad thumb caused by a trifling cut. It gathered and is very slow to heal the general consequence of a cut at this season of the year in this country.  We have encountered some frowns from Fortune in our Colonial enterprise which in my hopefulness I was slow to recognize. Mr. Brown became the anxious man soon after we entered upon Hardey's farm but continued perseveringly labouring from day to day though without hope to cheer. He appears gradually to be losing the load of care now that incubus is done away with as he now sees we shall prosper if supported by our English friends. After the house is finished our expenses will be very small our settling them will be accomplished and all its attendant inconveniences and expenses at an end. [51] We shall then employ but one man except the herdsman and shepherd. and do away with these even should it not be remunerative to retain them. All the substantial necessaries of life are produced from our own farm bread mutton bacon pork butter even candles made from sweet mutton suet eggs poultry etc. Tea and sugar which we have to purchase are only used now for the shepherd when he is stationed at the back of the grant at home milk suffices except occasionally when a guest arrives or I who am privileged sometimes prefer a cup of tea or coffee generally indulged in through Mr. Brown's persuasion. Clothing for the family is nearly all we should find it necessary to purchase. £25 worth of goods sent from England yearly for sale in this Colony would put sufficient funds into our hands to meet passing wants and any more of our English income we do not intend to touch until our debts are paid in the Mother Country. Here we shall incur no further liabilities and become quite straight with the assistance from home that Mr. Brown is about to seek.  I am warned by him that a wrong impression is conveyed in my letter as regards Hardey being settled with it is true we have settled with him but are still liable ourselves for some portion of funds furnished which was done by drawing a bill. This Mr. Brown would not have had recourse to could he have sold sheep cattle or horses but these he could not dispose of at any price and Hardey was threatening law proceedings on the second day after the rent became due. It is true sheep were nominally £1 per head but there were no buyers. 200 of our wether lambs went to Hardey in part payment for rent at 10/- each.  This letter is spun out to a trying length but I trust you will have patience with me  Yours  E. Brown  My DEAR ELIZABETH  I am sure you were much distressed when you heard of the Death of your dear brother I wrote a hurryed letter to your Aunt acquainting her of the sad event and also sent a newspaper with the particulars - it seems that he was catching some small fishes which are left by the tide among the stones at the falls and in getting up in haste one of stones he was standing on gave way and he was immediately carried away a considerable distance by the current into the middle of the unlucky Yarrow Yarra and before any assistance could be procured my lovely boy had sunk every effort was made to get the body but to no purpose until next morning when several of the blacks dived in different parts of the River and were successful in finding him - oh my dear child had you but have seen him you would never have forgotten his countenance no person would have thought he was dead he looked as if he was in a quiet sleep with a heavenly smile on his sweet face I am almost heart broken when I think of him and believe me Elizabeth all my happiness in the world is buried in the grave with him I loved him to excess - the only thing that reconciles me to this Bereavement is that I am sure that he is now in heaven the Lord has taken him from the evil to come he gave him to me and he has in the order of his divine will taken him from me and blessed be his holy name I send you a piece of his hair which I cut of myself before he was put into the coffin he was buried Very Respectfully Several Gentlemen attended they wore white Bands and scarfs he was carried in a hearse and about one hundred and fifty children followed carrying flowers in their hands which they threw over his grave he was buried in the Vault with his Father and placed on the top of his coffin which looked as fresh and as new as the first day it was placed there altho six years have nearly elapsed since the unfortunate occurrence - Lucy has been living with Mrs Soloman for some time and intends to remain until they return from VD Land they go over in the next Shamrock the wax candles Lucy has now in her possession they are very good give my Affectionate Love to my sister and Mr Stevens and accept the same [51]  YOUR AFFECTIONATE BUT AFFLICTED MOTHER  JAN. 28 1841. [...] The native boys I intended to accompany me in my journey as they would be better able to put up with the fatigues and privations we should have to go through than Europeans; whilst their quickness of sight habit of observation and skill in tracking might occasionally be of essential service to me. The native who had lately joined me from Adelaide and whose country was around King George's Sound would I hoped be able to interpret to any tribes we might meet with as it appeared to me that some of the words we had heard in use among the natives of this part of the coast were very similar to some I had heard among the natives of King George's Sound. Three natives however were more than I required and I would gladly have sent the youngest of them back to Adelaide but he had been with me several years and I did not like to send him away whilst he was willing to remain; besides he was so young and so light in weight that if we were able to get on at all his presence could cause but little extra difficulty. I therefore decided upon taking him also. [173]  There remained now only the overseer; a man who had been in my service for many years and whose energy activity and many useful qualities had made him an invaluable servant to me at all times; whilst his courage prudence good conduct and fidelity made me very desirous to have him with me in this last effort to cross to the westward. Having sent for him I explained to him most fully the circumstances in which I was placed the utter impossibility of taking on the whole party through so inhospitable a region as that before us my own firm determination never to return unsuccessful but either to accomplish the object I had in view or perish in the attempt. I pointed out to him that there were still eight hundred and fifty miles of an unknown country yet to be traversed and explored; that in all probability this would consist principally if not wholly of an all but impracticable desert. I reminded him of the fatigues difficulties and losses we had already experienced in attempting to reconnoitre the country only as far as the head of the Great Bight; and stated to him my own conviction that from the knowledge and experience we had already acquired of the nature of the country the journey before us must of necessity be a long and harassing one - one of unceasing toil privation and anxiety whilst from the smallness of our party the probably want of water and other causes it would be one also of more than ordinary risk and danger. I then left him to determine whether he would return to Adelaide in the cutter or remain and accompany me. His reply was that although he had become tired of remaining so long away in the wilds and should be glad: when the expedition had terminated yet he would willingly remain with me to the last; and would accompany me to the westward at every hazard [...]   Jan. 31 1841. We were now alone myself my overseer and three native boys with a fearful task before us the bridge was broken down behind us and we must succeed in reaching King George's Sound or perish; no middle course remained. [174] It was impossible for us to be insensible to the isolated and hazardous position we were in; but this very feeling only nerved and stimulated us the more in our exertions to accomplish the duty we had engaged in; the result we humbly left to that Almighty Being who had guided and guarded us hitherto amidst all our difficulties and in all our wanderings and who whatever he might ordain would undoubtedly order every thing for the best. [...]   Feb. 24. [...] It will be remembered that in stating the origin and commencement of the Northern expedition it was remarked that a previously contemplated expedition to the Westward was made to give way to it and that I had myself been principally instrumental in changing the direction of public attention from the one to the other; it will be remembered also what publicity had been given to our departure how great was the interest felt in the progress of our labours and how sanguine were the expectations formed as to the results; alas how signally had these hopes been dashed to the ground after the toils anxieties and privations of eight months neither useful nor valuable discoveries had been made; hemmed in by an impracticable desert or the bed of an impassable lake I had been baffled and defeated in every direction and to have returned now would have been to have rendered of no avail the great expenses that had been incurred in the outfit of the expedition to have thrown away the only opportunity presented to me of making some amends for past failure and of endeavouring to justify the confidence that had been reposed in me by carrying through the exploration which had been originally contemplated to the westward now it was no longer possible to accomplish that to the north for which it had given place; I considered myself in duty and in honour bound not to turn back from this attempt as long as there was the remotest possibility of success without any regard to considerations of a personal or private nature. Under these feelings therefore I resolved to remain only another day in Depot to reply to the letters I had received and return my best thanks to the many friends who had expressed such kind interest on my behalf. [175]  February 25. - Having finished my letters and buried all the spare stores I sent the native boys away early with the sheep that they might travel more slowly than we should do with the horses. About two we loaded the pack animals and wishing Mr. Scott a final adieu set off upon our route. The party consisted of myself the overseer three native boys nine horses one Timor pony one foal born at Streaky Bay and six sheep; our flour which was buried at the sandhills to the north-west was calculated for nine weeks at an allowance of six pounds of flour each weekly with a proportionate quantity of tea and sugar. The long rest our horses had' enjoyed and the large supply of oats and bran we had received for them had brought them round wonderfully they were now in good condition and strong and could not have commenced the journey under more favourable circumstances had it been the winter instead of the summer season [...]  March 2. - A hot day with the wind north-east. Between eleven and twelve we arrived at the first water - at the head of the Bight and had a long and arduous task to get the sheep and horses watered no natives being here to help us now and the sand rushing in as fast as we could throw it out. By great exertion we effected our object and then getting some tea and leaving a note to tell the overseer not to halt at this difficult watering-place if he could possibly avoid it we pushed on again and took up our position at Yeerkumban kauwe in time to dig holes and water the sheep before dark.   March 3. - Having got up and watered the horses and sheep I sent the boy out to tend them at grass whilst I commenced digging two large holes to water the pack-horses that there might be no delay when the overseer came up with them. I had nothing but a shell to dig with and as a very large excavation was required to enable a bucket to be dipped my occupation was neither a light nor a short one. Having completed my work I killed a sheep well knowing the party would be fatigued and hungry when they came up. About three they made their appearance and thus upon the whole we had very successfully got over this our first push; and were soon very comfortably established at 'Yeerkumban kauwe? [176] The holes I had dug enabled us easily and speedily to water the horses and the sheep I had killed afforded a refreshing meal to the overseer and boys after their harassing journey. In the afternoon the sand blew about in a most annoying manner covering us from head to foot and filling everything we put down if but for an instant This sand had been our constant companion for many weeks past; condemned to live among the sandhills for the sake of procuring water we were never free from irritation and in convenience. It floated on the surface of the water penetrated into our clothes hair eyes and ears our provisions were covered over with it and our blankets half buried when we lay down at nights - it was a perpetual and never-ceasing torment and as if to increase our miseries we were again afflicted with swarms of large horse-flies which bit us dreadfully [...]  March 8. - Having turned the sheep out of the yard three hours before daylight I was in hopes they would have fed a little before we moved on but they would not touch such food as we had for them and at six I was obliged to proceed onwards; the morning was dark and looked like rain but as was the case yesterday a drop or two only fell. We made a stage to-day of twenty-six miles through a level country generally open but near the sea covered with a very low dwarf tea-tree small prickly bushes and salsolae and having the surface almost every where sprinkled over freshwater shells; further from the coast the plains extending to the north were very extensive level and divided by belts of scrub or shrubs. There was no perceptible inclination of the country in any direction the level land ran to the very borders of the sea where it abruptly terminated forming the steep and precipitous cliffs observed by Captain Flinders and which it was quite impossible to descend any where. The general elevation of this table land was from three to four hundred feet.  The day turned out fine and clear and the effect produced by refraction in these vast plains was singular and deceptive: more than once we turned considerably out of our way to examine some large timber as we thought it to be to the north of us but which upon our approach proved to be low scrubby bushes. [177] At another time we imagined we saw two natives in the distance and went towards them as carefully and cautiously as we could; instead however of our having seen the heads of natives as we supposed above the bushes it turned out to be only crows. Yet the native boy whose quickness and. accuracy of vision had often before surprised me was equally deceived with myself [...]  March 10. - At five we were again on our route every moment expecting to see a break in the line of cliffs along which we had now travelled so far. Alas! they still continued stretching as far as the eye could see to the westward and as fast as we arrived at one point which had bounded our vision (and beyond which we hoped a change might occur) it was but to be met with the view of another beyond. Distressing and fatal as the continuance of these cliffs might prove to us there was a grandeur and sublimity in their appearance that was most imposing and which struck me with admiration. Stretching out before us in lofty unbroken outline they presented the singular and romantic appearance of massy battlements of masonry supported by huge buttresses and glittering in the morning sun which had now risen upon them and made the scene beautiful even amidst the dangers and anxieties of our situation. It was indeed a rich and gorgeous view for a painter and I never felt so much regret at my inability to sketch as I did at this moment.  Still we kept moving onwards and still the cliffs continued. Hour after hour passed away mile after mile was traversed and yet no change was observable. My anxiety for the party who were to follow behind with the pack-horses became very great; the state of doubt and uncertainty I was in was almost insupportable and I began to fear that neither sheep nor horses would ever reach the water even should we succeed in doing so ourselves which now appeared to be very doubtful. At noon I considered we had come one hundred and ten miles from the last water and still the country remained the same [...]  The country which had heretofore been tolerably open was now become very scrubby and we found it almost impossible either to keep a straight course or to make any progress through it in the dark. Still we kept perseveringly onwards leading our horses and forcing our way through in the best way we could. It was however all in vain; we made so little headway and were so completely exhausting the little strength we had left that I felt compelled to desist. The poor boy was quite worn out and could scarcely move. I was myself but little better and we were both suffering from a parching thirst; under such obstacles labour and perseverance were but thrown away and I determined to await the day-light. After tying up the horses the boy lay down and was soon asleep happy in his ignorance of the dangers which threatened him. I lay down too but not to sleep; my own distresses were lost in the apprehensions which I entertained for those who were behind. We were now about one hundred and twenty-eight miles from the last water; we had been four whole days and nights without a drop for our horses and almost without food also (for parched as they were they could not feed upon the dry and withered grass we found.) The state the poor animals were in was truly pitiable what then was likely to be the condition of those that were coming after us and carrying heavy packs. It was questionable even if they would reach the distance we had already attained in safety; and it was clear that unless I discovered water early in the morning the whole of our horses must perish whilst it would be very doubtful if we could succeed even in saving our own lives. [178]  March 11. - Early this morning we moved on leading slowly our jaded animals through the scrub. The night had been one of painful suspense and gloomy forebodings; and the day set in dark and cloudy as if to tantalise us with the hope of rain which was not destined to fall. In a few miles we reached the edge of the cliffs from which we had a good view of the sandy valley we had been travelling round but which the thick scrub had prevented our scrutinising sooner. I now noticed some hillocks of bare sand in the midst of it. These I had not seen before as the only previous point from which they could have been visible had been passed by us in the dark. It now struck me that the water spoken of by the natives at Yeerkumban-kauwe might be situated among these sand-hills and that we were going away from instead of approaching it. [179] The bare idea of such a possibility was almost maddening and as the dreadful thought flashed across my mind I stood for a moment undecided and irresolute as to what I ought to do. We were now many miles past these hills and if we went back to examine them for water and did not find it we could never hope that our horses would be able to return to search elsewhere; whilst if there was water there and we did not return every step we took would but carry us further from it and lead to our certain destruction.  For a few minutes I carefully scanned the line of coast before me. In the distance beyond a projecting point of the cliffs I fancied I discerned a low sandy shore and my mind was made up at once to advance in the line we were pursuing. After a little while we again came to a well beaten native pathway and following this along the summit of the cliffs were brought by it in seven miles to the point where they receded from the sea-shore; as they inclined inland leaving a low sandy country between them and some high bare sand-hills near the sea. The road now led us down a very rocky steep part of the cliffs near the angle where they broke away from the beach but upon reaching the bottom we lost it altogether on the sandy shore; following along by the water's edge we felt cooled and refreshed by the sea air and in one mile and a half from where we had descended the cliffs we reached the white sand-drifts. Upon turning into these to search for water we were fortunate enough to strike the very place where the natives had dug little wells; and thus on the fifth day of our sufferings we were again blessed with abundance of water nor could I help considering it as a special instance of the goodness of Providence that we had passed the sandy valley in the dark and had thereby been deterred from descending to examine the sand-hills it contained; had we done so the extra fatigue to our horses and the great length of time it would have taken up would probably have prevented the horses from ever reaching the water we were now at. [...]   March 12. At night the whole party were by God's blessing once more together and in safety after having passed over one hundred and thirty-five miles of desert country without a drop of water in its whole extent and at a season of the year the most unfavourable for such an undertaking. [180] In accomplishing this distance the sheep had been six and the horses five days without water and both had been almost wholly without food for the greater part of the time. The little grass we found was so dry and withered that the parched and thirsty animals could not eat it after the second day. The day following our arrival at the water was one of intense heat and had we experienced such on our journey neither men nor horses could ever have accomplished it; most grateful did we feel therefore to that merciful Being who had shrouded us from a semi-tropical sun at a time when our exposure to it would have ensured our destruction [...]   March 19. [...] We had still 600 miles of country to traverse measured in straight lines across the chart; but taking into account the inequalities of the ground and the circuit we were frequently obliged to make we could not hope to accomplish this in less than 800 miles of distance. With every thing in our favour we could not expect to accomplish this in less than eight weeks; but with all the impediment and embarrassments we were likely to meet with it would probably take us twelve. Our sheep were reduced to three in number and our sole stock of flour now amounted to 142 pounds to be shared out amongst five persons added to which the aspect of the country before us was disheartening in the extreme; the places at which there was any likelihood of finding water were probably few and far apart and the strength of our horses was already greatly reduced by the hardships they had undergone. Ever since we had left Fowler's Bay the whole party excepting the youngest boys had been obliged chiefly to walk and yet every care and precaution we could adopt were unable to counteract the evil effects of a barren country and an unfavourable season of the year. The task before us was indeed a fearful one but I firmly hoped by patience and perseverance safely and successfully to accomplish it at last. [...]  March 26. - Upon moving on this morning we passed through the same wretched kind of country for eighteen miles to an opening in the scrub where was a little grass and at which we halted to rest. [181] There was so much scrub and the sandy ridges were so heavy and harassing to the horses that I began to doubt almost if we should get them along at all. We were now seventy-two miles from the water and had in all probability as much further to go before We came to any more and I saw that unless something was done to lighten the loads of the pack-animals (trifling as were the burdens they carried) we never could hope to get them on. Leaving the natives to enjoy a sleep the overseer and I opened and re-sorted all our baggage throwing away every thing that we could at all dispense with; our great coats jackets and other articles of dress were thrown away; a single spare shirt and pair of boots and socks being all that were kept for each besides our blankets and the things we stood in and which consisted only of trowsers shirt and shoes. Most of our pack-saddles all our horse-shoes most of our kegs for holding water all our buckets but one our medicines some of our fire-arms a quantity of ammunition and a variety of other things were here abandoned. Among the many things that we were compelled to leave behind there was none that I regretted parting with more than a copy of Captain Sturt's Expeditions which had been sent to me by the author to Bowler's Bay to amuse and cheer me On the solitary task I had engaged in; it was the last kind offering of friendship from a highly esteemed friend and nothing but necessity would have induced me to part with it. Could the donor however have seen the miserable plight we were reduced to he would have pitied and forgiven an act that circumstances alone compelled me to.. March 28. [...] Our route lay along the beach as the dense scrub inland prevented us from following any other course; we had therefore to go far out of our way tracing round every point and following along every bay whilst the sea-weed frequently obstructed our path and drove us again to the loose sands above high water mark causing extra fatigue to our unfortunate horses. At other times we were forced to go between these banks of sea-weed and the sea into the sea itself on which occasions it required our utmost vigilance to prevent the wretched horses from drinking the salt water which would inevitably have destroyed them In order to prevent this we were obliged to walk ourselves in the water on the sea-side of them one of the party being in advance leading one horse another being behind to keep up the rear and the other three being at intervals along the outside of the line to keep them from stopping for an instant until the danger was past. [182] [...] It was indeed a fearful and heart-rending scene to behold the noble animals which had served us so long and so faithfully suffering the extremity of thirst and hunger without having it in our power to relieve them. Five days of misery had passed over their heads since the last water had been left and one hundred and twelve miles of country had been traversed without the possibility of procuring food for them other than the dry and sapless remains of last year's grass and this but rarely to be met with. No rains had fallen to refresh them and they were reduced to a most pitiable condition still they travelled onwards with a spirit and endurance truly surprising. Whenever we halted they followed us about like dogs wherever we went appearing to look to us only for aids and exhibiting that confidence in us which I trust we all reposed in the Almighty for most truly did we feel that in His mercy and protection alone our safety could now ever be hoped for.. [...]   The country we had already passed through precluded all hope of our recrossing it without the horses to carry water for us and without provisions to enable us to endure the dreadful fatigue of forced marches across the desert. The country before us was it is true quite unknown but it could hardly be worse than that we had traversed and the chance was that it might be better. We were now pushing on for some sand-hills marked down in Captain Flinders chart at about 126.5 of east longitude; I did not expect to procure water until we reached these but I felt sure we should obtain it on our arrival there. After this point was passed there appeared to be one more long push without any likelihood of procuring water as the cliffs again became the boundary of the ocean; but beyond Cape Arid the change in the character and appearance of the country as described by Flinders indicated the existence of a better and more practicable line of country than we had yet fallen in with. [183]  My overseer however was now unfortunately beginning to take up an opposite opinion and though he still went through the duty devolving upon him with assiduity and cheerfulness it was evident that his mind was ill at ease and that he had many gloomy anticipations of the future... March 29 Our last drop of water was consumed this evening and we then all lay down to rest after turning the horses behind the first ridge of the coast as we could find no grass; and neither the overseer nor I were able to watch them being both too much worn out with the labours of the day and our exertions in searching for water.  March 30. - Getting up as soon as the day dawned I found that some of the horses had crossed the sand ridge to the beach and rambled some distance backwards. I found too that in the dark we had missed a patch of tolerable grass among the scrub not far from our camp. I regretted this the more as during the night a very heavy dew had fallen and the horses might perhaps have fed a little [...]  Leaving the overseer to search for those that had strayed I took a sponge and went to try to collect some of the dew Which was hanging in spangles upon the grass and shrubs; brushing these with the sponge I squeezed it when saturated into a quart pot which in an hour's time I filled with water. The native boys were occupied in the same way; and by using a handful of fine grass instead of a sponge they collected about a quart among them. Having taken the water to the camp and made it into tea we divided it amongst the party and never was a meal more truly relished although we all ate the last morsel of bread we had with us and none knew when we might again enjoy either a drink of water or a mouthful of bread. We had now demonstrated the practicability of collecting water from the dew. I had often heard from the natives that they were in the habit of practising this plan but had never before actually witnessed its adoption. It was however very cold work and completely wet me through from head to foot a greater quantity of water by far having been shaken over me from the bushes than I was able to collect with my sponge. The natives make use of a large oblong vessel of bark which they hold under the branches whilst they brush them with a little grass as I did with the sponge; the water thus falls into the trough held for it and which in consequence of the surface being so much larger than the orifice of a quart pot is proportionably sooner filled. [184] After the sun once rises the spangles fall from the boughs and no more water can be collected; it is therefore necessary to be at work very early if success is an object of importance [...]  As we progressed it was evident that the country was undergoing a considerable change; the sea shore dunes and the ridges immediately behind them were now of a pure white sand and steep whilst those further back were very high and covered with low bushes. Upon ascending one of the latter I had a good view around and to my inexpressible pleasure and relief saw the high drifts of sand we were looking for so anxiously in the corner between us and the more distant point of land first seen. [...]   Leaving the boys to attend to the animals I took the overseer up one of the ridges to reconnoitre the country for the purpose of ascertaining whether there was no place near us where water might be procured by digging. After a careful examination a hollow was selected between the two front ridges of white sand where the overseer thought it likely we might be successful. The boys were called up to assist in digging and the work was anxiously commenced; our suspense increasing every moment as the well was deepened. At about five feet the sand was observed to be quite moist and upon its being tasted was pronounced quite free from any saline qualities.   Monday Morning  My Dear Sir  You will no doubt think me a curious sort of a being for not having called for you in this time - the truth is I have been over head and ears in business which I hope will plead as a excuse for my impoliteness. Mr. Atkinson is just setting off for the new Country where he remained for a fortnight my seeing you this week is rather uncertain as I cannot rightly leave this Shop.  I hope the palpitation of the old boy's heart has ceased and that it has improved his generosity.  If you are going his length today I wish you would [?] him I will not require the needful for a month and if he could not give me the whole £300 try if he will 2 - but do all you can for me which will be held for ever in remembrance. I trust that your better half and all the [?] are enjoying their usual good health. Believe me ever  My Dear Sir Yours very Sincerely [?] [?] Crawford  I think I can safely say we are now in a more prosperous state than we have ever been before with our wool tallow oil etc. to England and our horses to India. We have now established a valuable export that must rise more rapidly than any other colony and what is of more consequence our social condition is fast improving; the introduction of so many females into our society has had the most beneficial effect and I sincerely trust the exertions now making at home to establish a universal system of emigration will succeed as in most of our colonies there is abundance to supply the wants of your overplus starving population; in this for one there cannot be a finer opening for industrious people. [35] One of our greatest evils is the want of religious instruction a want that is not easily supplied in so widely spreading a population as ours although I think a great deal more might be done than is. The few clergymen of our persuasion are by no means active at least compared with the Roman Catholics who are fast gaining ground in these colonies. Our bishop Broughton is a talented man but like most of his class eaten up with pride and bigotry and his violent opposition to all other persuasions does our church no good. The clergy are not sufficiently paid and have recourse to keeping schools which occupies the greater portion of their time which ought to be spent in visiting their extensive parishes. We are 6 miles from Goulburn where our nearest church is situated therefore our attendance cannot be very regular. We have become quite settled here now. I feel much more satisfaction in living on my own property than in rented one. Notwithstanding the had times I have managed to get up a very good stone house or part of a house as it is built with the intention of adding considerably to it with a capital garden and other appurtenances around; the surrounding scenery is very beautiful and capable of great improvement in laying out the ground and planting. In a few years I expect Pomeroy will be the gem of Australia in point of picturesque scenery. I can even have my boat and water sufficient to pull or sail a mile in length on the river Wollondilly which runs through my property nine miles in a direct line. We have Willoughby Dowling his wife and family and Miss Dickson living with us therefore are a strong party and a very Recherche one as they are all good looking and possess considerable accomplishments. We astonished the Argyle County in giving a grand ball a few weeks since at which there were 60 persons quite as refined as you would meet in England; some of them came 40 miles to it; by this you will perceive we are not destitute of society and still we can be as retired as we like.   We must remember that our life is as but the vapour and the morning cloud that soon passeth away that we are but the beings of an hour compared with the years of time much less with those of eternity. this afflictive dispensation of an all wise Providence has my dear Richard I feel been a great trial to you a severe calamity and heavy stroke indeed. I look upon your loss by this visitation of Providence as in some measure irreparable and one I fear you will in a greater or less degree (according to circumstances) continue to feel for perhaps many years yet to come [...]   I feel persuaded that your trial and affliction is one of no ordinary kind indeed and must as it were have borne you down almost to the very earth and been felt by you with an intensity and keenness to which language fails to give expression and known only to those who have experienced the like bitter pangs of grief for departed worth and that of one so nearly allied but from which if the sincere wishes and fervent prayers of an affectionate but far distant brother could relieve you or be of any service they are before a Throne of Grace and I trust will occasionally continue to be offered up for you and your now double dear to you motherless little ones. As for myself I am on your account much consoled in consequence of the pious resigned and truly christian manner and spirit in which you have borne and written to me of this distressing event and in which pious and christian spirit of resignation to the will of Almighty God I humbly hope and fervently pray His sustaining grace will keep you and though you will continue to feel in all the relations of life more particularly those of domestic happiness the great loss you have sustained yet your consolation will be the certain knowledge (as I am firmly persuaded it is) that your loss is her great and eternal gain and that you can look forward with cheering hope and even a bright countenance amidst all the turmoil the storms and troubles of this transitory life to a joyful meeting of redeemed spirits in that happy place where parting will be no more where the wicket cease from troubling and the weary are at rest. [40] I trust you are now by God's dealings with you and the afflictions you have experienced often led for consolation to the contemplation of these things and the happy termination of all the afflictions and troubles of this life when time as to us here shall cease through the saving grace and merits of our adorable Redeemer and though that by this heavy stroke and visitation of Providence the beloved and affectionate wife of your bosom the pious and tender mother of your dear children has been severed from you and them yet I trust and rejoice to think that you are by grace and with pious resignation to the divine will enabled to say with good old Eli it is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good and with Job the Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.   Pencilville New Town Near Sydney 21st. June 1845  My dear Cousin  It is so long since I have heard from you and which I intirely blame myself for as of late I have become a very bad correspondent not only with you but with every one/ for with my breavements and embarrasments I almost gave up every enjoyment and social comfort till when I came to reflect I thought it wicked and sinful to dispair / it is the Lords will and it is right we should be punished or we should not know ourselves /[127] you may remember in my last I told you of my making myself responsible for a certain persons bills to a very large amount/ will you believe it I have never had the slightest help towards returning them altho promised and I am sure might have been dupe [?]  but while they know my property is the fountains I am obliged to pay to the last pound to meet them & as the Bank are very kind in giving me time I shall best enabled to get through it in two or 3 years to save my property for my children/ and which I am obliged to exercise the greatest prudence and ecconomy still in my old age and so many years of perseverance and industry it is hard to be deprived of the many comforts I have been acccustomed too/ but that I do not think so much of as the unprincipled feeling towards me in the matter/ so long as I can be punctual in my payments and do what is right in the sight of the Lord I am willing to give up all enjoyment in this world trusting in the mercifull goodness of an all seeing God / I am afraid I shall tire you with my complaints but my dear Cousin I know you are nearly all I have to simphathise with me and I have ever since I knew you considered you more as a Br. than a Cousin / I open my mind to you more than any one else since the Melancholly death of all my sons - my son in law Mr Atkinson is living at Van Deimans Land or he would be of great assistance to me as far as advice etc: he is an exellent man a good husband good Father and a sincere friend and if we may judge by all accounts we hear [?] the Character of a honest and just man / he is a Magistrate at Launceston / dont you think that I ought to be proud of all my family turning out so respectable all my sons and son in laws with the exception of Mr Thomson were Magistrates.   Mrs Atkinson and family 7 in number are coming up in a few days to pay me a visit several of them being in ill health which I hope the change may do them good/ Mr Atkinson will come up himself in a few months to take them back and me also as he says/ but I am now so taken up with my residence that I told you I had purchased I do not like to move and notwithstanding my dear purchase as I told you befor I consider it was the best I ever made as it has quite renovated my health/ and I am now in the enjoyment of as good health as ever I was excepting my age and it is to the salubrous air that I account it to/ it is a beautiful spot we have a pleasent view of the Botany Bay Heads and the sea and I am making a great improvement on it / there is 21 acres of all pretty good land I have an exellent garden on it which I re-made myself / it was all bush and trees when I purchased it with the exception of a small patch round about the House / I now also Fenced it all in with a close pailing; Since I have laid out a great deal of money on it since I bought it/ I also intend to Build a nice Cottage on it (as soon as I can recover myself a little) for Mrs Thomson and her family were she will be free from House rent a good garden and many advantages /[128] poor girl she is now living in Launceston were her Farm is but it being let before she arrived there she was obliged to rent a Cottage and it is so expensive voyaging backwards and forwards / she must stay their till I get her House to live in here / do you hear of any of the young if they are inclined to assist her it is a hard task for her with 8 Children only one able to do anything that is her son James a very good youth he is and I think clever / he is in the Bank of Australasia at Launceston and I think his salary is £180 per annum/ but they are kept very close to it almost to the [?] of their health indeed young John Atkinson was obliged to leave on account of his bad health being impaired by too close attention/ he was in the Branch Union Bank I think he got £100 per annum / forgot to tell you that Mrs Atkinson would have been with me before but she lost one of her litle girls / she died very suddenly and a great favourite she was with them/ she was called Celia Alice after my lamented dear girl/ they both took it very bad indeed / you see in so short a time so many deaths in one family ought to learn us to prepare for the one thing needful/ Mrs Innes is expecting to have an addition to her family next month will make seven / she has now 3 boys and 3 girls and I am glad to say she is looking as well and young as her eldest Daughter which is 15 years of age/ they are all very fine Children her Eldest Bessey is two inches taller than her mama and she is that much taller than poor Celia was/ they desire to be kindly remembered to you I think I have given you an acct of the most part of my female branch / I must now tell you that I had the pleasure of my two Grandsons and their wives they both coming by the way of Sydney I had not seen them since they were boys before they as you know are two very fine young men/ Thomas was ordained some time back at V. Deimans Land / he his mother and wife was up with us lately he preached in the parish Church of St Peters were I go / when I heard him my feelings was so overcome that I cannot discribe to you/ he made a very short visit on acct of his affairs requiring him /   I believe he would sooner reside here than in V.D.Land for that place is getting into an awful state through the great influx of Convicts being sent their/ I must revert to your own family in the first place may I ask if you have Changed your situation - I began to think so through not hearing from you and let me know how poor John gets on/ their is no person on this earth has a more sincere regard for his welfare than I have altho he has not written me / I do not think it is but of any ill feeling to me but want of thought/ give him and Mrs H. my most grateful thanks and remembrance for their attentions to me & my family when in Manchester/ I shall never forget the [?] hour of my life /[129] also to William and his amiable wife make my kind regards to them not forgetting Alice and her spouse & her son/ I recd 3 Blackburn papers the other day which I thank you for they afford me a great deal of Gratification to hear anything of my own Town I sent you one Sydney Herald with the [?] of the Bank of Australia & Australasia & thought it would be Interesting to you / have you heard anything of Mr Cobal [?] lately you may thank him for me for the two [?] he so kindly sent me by Mrs Thomson/ but it must have been quite a mistake on his part he could not have known me. I must now Conclude with my most affectionate regards from your ever Cousin   M. Reibey  Mrs Foster is still living with me and is something better tempered than usual  Grass Dale  January 8th 1845  My dearest Papa  This letter will be of a different tenor to others that I have written since we left England for I have never before had to record any domestic grief all had fared happily and prosperously with our sweet children but now dear Vernon is no more. He was drowned in the river Avon on the 15th of December. On the evening before this calamity which was Saturday Mr. Brown had returned from a journey below bringing with him the letters per Halifax. We were perusing these on the following morning when the accident occurred having staid at home instead of going to Church as the horses wanted rest. The children would therefore appear to be safer than usual though had we gone to Church poor Vernon would in all probability have accompanied us for we frequently took him there indeed whenever we could conveniently. Kenneth went on his pony being the only one absent on that fatal morning. Vernon left his Papa and me with one of his sweetest smiles hand in hand with Aubrey and in a playful mood. Not much more than half an hour before the latter returned sobbing and said that Vernon had fallen into the pool and was drowned. We think Aubrey staid some time after he fell in and only came home alarmed when his brother did not appear again. You know Aubrey is only about three years old and would not be supposed to know the necessity of coming home immediately for help but he had the good sense to guide us to the spot where poor Vernon fell in but a fatal time elapsed before his anxious Papa succeeded in getting him out of the water. Even had Aubrey given the alarm in time nothing but heavy pieces of wood caught to the crook for full half an hour with which his distressed parent tried to catch hold of poor Vernon's clothes. [56] At length the dear child was extricated but there was not a spark of life remaining though his natural and composed appearance gave us hope that life was not extinct. We therefore pursued the means for reanimating him while Kenneth who returned from Church just before his poor brother was got out of the water went to York again with all speed for Dr. Landor. But no human aid was of any avail the dear lamented Vernon was quite dead. The poor venturous little fellow had climbed along the branch of a tree that overhung the pool in search of a bird's nest a piece of it gave way and let him into the water.  If any consolation is to be derived from human comfort we have been offered it from all the neighbourhood and distant parts of the Colony even strangers interesting themselves in our trial for the loss of a beloved child suddenly taken from us when the delicacy of constitution that he had betrayed in early childhood and little ills that he then suffered had wholly disappeared and we were rejoicing in his vigour activity and pleasantness.  Though the sympathy of friends is very pleasing it is religious consolation that is most available in the present instance and from which all our comfort is derived. "The tender mercy of God" no doubt wills that our treasure should no longer be on Earth the more to fix our hopes on Heaven where only we can be reunited and whither through His gracious assistance we may the more vividly raise the regards of our remaining little ones to be fixed by mention of him who is gone before for may we not indulge the Christian's hope that the youthful member of Christ's Church upon Earth rendered so by baptism dying before the time of committing actual sin is a blessed dweller with God and Angels.  Since this affliction I have been at Grass Dale Cottage keeping watch with Mrs. Fruin over her dying little one (I had mentioned its birth in a letter to Emma) it was an only child and great distress to the mother to lose it. Mr. Brown Mr. Viveash and I were by when it breathed its last on Sunday the 5th of this month.  When I wrote you last I remember one topic to have been the gracious rain that had fallen to refresh the Earth and give hope to the cultivator of the soil. Since then a second despondancy has occurred and so late as the 26th October there was no hope of a crop entertained. Since then another favorable change has taken place rain has again fallen. Harvest is reaped and we have a fair average.  It is very satisfactory to me that Mr. Brown has been made a Justice of the Peace which I told Matilda to communicate to you. The Governor called upon us was evidently pleased with all that he saw expressed his anxiety for our prosperity and his satisfaction at seeing us established on our own property and introducing and proving by experience that fruit of nearly all kinds could be raised in the York district in the greatest luxuriance and abundance. [57] About ten days afterwards the appointment came no doubt to the disappointment of some older settlers who thought themselves entitled to the compliment but I am happy to say there appears no alteration in the good will of all parties towards us. Mr. Brown intends writing he is very busy carrying corn but intends saying a few words about Summertown etc.  I remain My dearest Papa  Your affectionate daughter  Eliza Brown  Grass Dale  June 20 1845  My dear Papa  I am in possession of your letter of the 12th of Octr. 1844 but the letter to Mr. Brown by private hand that you speak of has not reached. We wonder who you could have sent it by. The Blands and Mr. Phillips arrived by the Prima Donna on the 5th of this month. The Blands brought me a parcel from Matilda. I was at Mrs. Viveash's when she opened the case from Wilts having gone below to be present at the christening of her little boy to whom Mr. Brown and myself are sponsors. I received the packet for us with joy. The contents of your letters are more than satisfactory the kind feeling evinced for us will cheer our way and remove the anxiety as to what our fate will be when an answer to our requests in the letters of Octr. - Novr. & Decr. /44 is received.  What a world of events seem to have passed over my head these last eighteen months first our release from Hardey's which I assure you was not effected without great determination and shall I call it diplomatic skill on Mr. Brown's part. Considering how the Colony has gone a-back since it was a wonderful disburthening for us even more than we could foresee at the time. The terms exacted for our abandonment you are made aware of if my letters have reached how I hope there has been no break in the correspondence.  How affectionately you speak of the dear departed Vernon thinking him still amongst us. I sent you a full and particular account of our sudden bereavement. This calamity was very shortly followed by the birth of another boy who is more delicate than our other children but an extremely lively child and very much endeared to us. We have named him Vernon. I think he resembles our last boy and is more like me than any of the other children at all events there is a great sympathy between us for I am particularly interested with this last born and he takes particular notice of me. [60] [61]  We entered upon our new (and no doubt permanent) dwelling on the 10th of April. It is in a promising way towards completion. We are highly satisfied with the spot on which we have located preferring it to any other in the Colony. It is said we have the nicest residence over the Hills and I assure you we should not be ashamed to show it in comparison with any cottage in the neighbourhood of Oxford or elsewhere. I prefer it to Elm Cottage. Our garden is a boon that would be appreciated in any country. You have had it described so I will pass on now to tell you that those earthly gifts had well nigh ceased to be ours or rather mine and the little ones for Mr. Brown happened to be from home and out of the danger when a storm of thunder and lightning raged around us. Never was the power and mercy of God so sensibly brought home to me as in this visitation. It happened on the 17th of May the lightning entered through the solid wall of one of the front rooms then struck the wall above the fireplace entered the chimney and exploded there sending the bricks with great force onto my bed and the children's. In the back room the electric fluid also entered nearly every box in the room. The large English case was like a smoked chimney between the paper at the bottom and the tinning. Strange to say we had nothing spoilt worth mentioning though there were such visible marks of the lightning having been amongst every thing. Two of the children and myself received a severe electric shock we screamed out at the same instant and felt something very powerful around us. Had it happened in the night we should have been crushed to death that is Mr. Brown myself and the infant for more than a ton of bricks fell on our bed. I shudder to think of the desolate state the poor children would have been in had the storm not providentially happened in the day time. The iron rods on the top of our bedstead were wrenched off by the lightning and scattered in all parts of the room it also deeply indented a tin box underneith the bed in two places and perforated a small hole beneath which some flannel in the box was scorched.  How pleasing it is to me to hear of your journeying to the Village where was my married home a few years before bidding adieu to old England. I trust that Matilda may be spared to welcome you there a la me! What a loss it would be if her constitution should sink under the repeated trials of ill health from which she suffers. Would change of clime be likely to effect any good? is a question that often suggests itself to my mind and of course my prescription and recommendation in that case is Western Australia and I hope it would be the Doctor's also. I am about to write her and shall dwell particularly on this subject.  What a jade Mary is not to have acquainted me with her matrimonial intentions. You have no idea what a surprise it was to me to hear of so unexpected an event my good wishes go with all settlers but most particularly do I wish that she and her husband may prosper. [62] It rather pleases me that she has married a Young. There is a great deal of good nature in that family I have often heard you say.  Kenneth begs me to say that he recollects you and I fully believe that he does his perceptions were very vivid at a very early age and continue to be so he remembers the sound of the railway train from behind the Wittenham Hills which I found out quite by chance. On the 27th of April he drove me to Church and back in the spring cart and is often employed to go in pursuit of stray cattle and head them home if perchance they should be trespassing on a neighbour. On these expeditions he is always mounted either on one of the horses or his pony.  I suppose Mr. Brown will be writing you in answer to your very kind letter to him and about the papers relative to Summertown so I need not ask if he has any thing for me to say.  Believe me  My dear Papa  Your affectionate Daughter  Eliza Brown  Grass Dale  June 22 1845  Dear Sir  I am delighted to receive yours of the 12th of October last and as Mrs Brown has been writing you at some length I will only say a few words upon the business part of your letter just thanking you for all favors and the great trouble you have taken with respect to the accounts which I doubt not are correct. I have great satisfaction in saying that from henceforth I think there is nothing to fear the concern has paid itself this year and when we shall be free from debt through your good help we shall be very comfortable and afterwards enabled to refund from our English income by degrees what we have drawn from our friends. I am much pleased that Mrs. Ward has [cut out by seal] her £160 and thank you for the decrease in interest. Piercy's letter gives me no information and does not say one word respecting the improvements he has made in his own house. He never had any permission from me to spend one farthing in doing so. With respect to the sale of the property I have written to my Brother and am quite willing that you and he should do what you think best. [63] Bates's account was most extravagant and would not have been half as much had I remained in England. but I am glad it is at an end and that he is no longer my tenant.  Mrs. Brown and myself have last week been down to Perth from whence we returned with a cart load of fruit trees and vines which I have been busily employed in planting. We hope to be able to dry raisins of the first quality next year and make a wholesome and generous wine from the juice of the grape. We shall also in two or three years have a large quantity of almonds sufficient I hope for a profitable export.  My vocations are now a little varied by having to attend at the Court House at York once a week as a Magistrate and when below at the time of sessions I shall be expected to be amongst them on the Bench there. This takes up a little time but is no expense as we are all equally poor here and cannot vie with each other in extravagance.  I remain Dear Sir  Yours very truly  Thos Brown  All this Redundance of the Necessaries and Luxuries of Life is rendered valueless from the great and increasing Scarcity of Labour. Wages since you left have I should say nearly doubled. In many Parts of the Colony Shepherds are receiving £30 and £40 a year; and I am told that in the Port Philip District Flockmasters have in some few Cases been obliged to give as much as £1 a Week for Shepherds. In Sydney I am assured that the Want of Female Servants is felt more urgently than ever and that Housemaids and other domestic Servants are asking and receiving £25 and £30 a Year. All this you will I think admit is ruinous to the Master and generally in the End far from advantageous to the Labourer. So great indeed is the Alarm that is felt on the Subject that as you may probably have seen by the Papers Efforts have been made to induce the Home Government to renew transportation to the Colony. The Proposition has been met with great Opposition on the Part of the Labouring Classes and also of many influential Persons including generally the Ministers of Religion who deprecate the Idea of the Colony being again converted into a Receptacle for the Crime and Vice of Britain. The Reply to this is that the Want of Labour is so irresistible that unless procured in this Way we must have recourse and that upon an extensive Scale to the systematic Introduction of Expiree Convicts from Van Diemen's Land and Norfolk lsland - Characters who are generally found after the Schooling they have had in those Places to be infinitely more immoral than Convicts sent direct from England; for the Fact is we must have Labour in some Shape or other - free Labour if we can get it - if not this Prison Labour and failing either Coolie Labour.  3rd Oct. 1846  Fox came up from Paika this afternoon to mention that this morning shortly after he and Cooley left the hut five blacks burst in the door of the hut and took away all the clothes and bedding they could find and a bag of flour after wasting a considerable quantity they could not carry - fortunately upon their coming up to the hut Mrs. Cooley had presence of mind to begin rin[g]ing the large bell I had slung in case of attack and the two stockmen being within hearing of it returned in time to prevent the blacks doing other mischief as they decamped before the men arrived - but for the alarm bell no doubt the woman and her two children would have been destroyed this morning sent Taafe back with Fox to act as hutkeeper for the present as the woman must not be left alone any more. [289]  Kangatong  27th August 1846  My dearest Mother   Your last letters were dated February wishing us to return but our lot is cast at least for the present here and were we to return we should be in a worse position than when we left. Besides I trust the worst is past. We could live here now upon the increase of the cattle in your country it would not pay house rent. Had we a station now we might be saving money as dairy produce is again paying well but the country is so much taken up that I fear there is little chance of procuring one so George thinks of turning farmer but we are still unsettled yet as he will not be able to get this land if he does until the beginning of next year. [172]  I wish my mind was easy about you all. Mary does not seem to be getting so many scholars as I could wish. Dear Mother I cannot tell you how constantly you are all in my sleeping and waking thoughts. The forms of the departed ones are always more vivid to me when asleep than the living; doubtless they are the same to you. Well I for one would not want my nightly visions for a trifle.  I am glad you like Mrs Slate although one part of Mary's last letter grieved and astonished me that relating to the Dawsons. I suspected that his friends would not be so free with their cash as he supposed and frequently said as much as I could do to that effect to Mrs D. but to no purpose and when they lately received a bill for one hundred pounds they were consequently disappointed. Still I think Mrs Slate ought not to have said to any of you almost strangers what she did and I hope you will not repeat in your turn anything I may say about the D. Family for it is necessary to bear in mind that all persons are not as sincere or little given to make mischief as yourselves. I am really sorry for Mrs Dawson. She would give her last penny to another and she fancies all are like herself and I am convinced this expectation of money from home has done and is doing them a great deal of harm for they spend a great deal uselessly and though there are plenty of milking cows on the run and butter and cheese are realising good prices they are not yet milking any.  Mrs Dawson is still very unwell. Indeed I fear she will never be better. I am sure hers is a life of suffering and yet she clings to it. A change to her must be for the better.  So poor Mr Aspland is released at last he was long ill. I saw a notice of his death in two different London papers and cut one out. The boys read aloud one of his sermons every Sunday night which brings you all to my recollection. Mrs Dawson says that Mrs Slate's father and mother were Unitarians what she is and that the Dawson family are also. She says that Mr D. here is one but I think he is an Anything Arian.  An old Irish woman gave me a lesson in stocking knitting so now I can knit [the boys'] socks and can consequently make everything they want but boots. My eyes are not nearly so young as they were I cannot read at candlelight or work much consequently I knit or plait.  If I return with a fortune and reside near London some part of Hackney will be the place but I do not think I should like your forms and fashions and coal fires and would long to be in the Bush again. [173] [174]  The boys are quite well. Prid is riding to Mrs LeMann's to borrow some sugar and George is seeking the bullocks to send the dray to the port for stores. The weather has been very wet and the roads are so bad it has been put off as long as possible. Mrs D. has borrowed my sugar while it lasted. Pleasant is it not? This is one of the comforts of the Bush.  Do you know they are talking of railroads here. I wonder where the passengers will come from.  Lasting love from us all  I remain  your affectionate daughter  Penelope Selby.  What fearful accounts there are of Ireland. I trust the worst is over now and that the potatoes will be sound this year. This free trade will surely benefit you among the rest. I have taken great interest in politics lately. We get the Examiner and another English paper from Mr LeMann.  Grass Dale  July 4 1846  My dear Papa  I did not have the pleasure of a letter from you this time nor do I expect to find one in the Bale but of course I perused that with which you favored my good man and it afforded me very good satisfaction though I rather missed the appendage of a page or two to my own cheek. [69] He requests that I will write instead of himself as he is so dreadfully busy this being seed time and ploughing season for the garden and vineyard. Though he has put it into rather bad hands I fear he expresses his acknowledgement of your goodness in attending to so many troublesome matters at home and supporting us as you have done abroad by encouraging and affectionate attentions.  We have been very fortunate in receiving letters and parcels so punctually. I hope ours have reached you relative to the previous package per Unicorn.  I am very much cheered by hearing of Matilda's better health how earnestly I hope it will continue to improve. I do not wonder at your finding the house at Dorchester too small I never considered it by any means a pretty place. We had many comforts there indeed I think I may go so far as to say many little elegancies but I rather considered them thrown away upon so contracted a residence in my opinion not very nicely situated. The attraction to you in going thither was doubtless to be near dear Matilda and its having been our residence of old but I do not wonder at your preferring Cuddesdon after making trial of it.  My letter I fear will not contain much matter of interest there is nothing new to relate 'tis the same round of duties as formerly. We made fifty gallons of wine from the vintage of February last which is highly praised by all tastes and I assure you we enjoy it much ourselves at dinner occasionally. We expect it will last the year out if we do not draw it over freely for family consumption but reserve it to enjoy with our friends.  Mr. Brown went down to Leschenault a settlement formed by a company in London about the time that we came out of which Mr. Clifton is Chief Commissioner. It is about one hundred and seventy miles from this I accompanied him as far as Perth where he left me to visit our friends there. I staid only ten days a long time for me and a sufficient one to be called upon by the inhabitants whose acquaintance I had not previously made. The new Governor and his Lady had arrived not many weeks previously so we paid our respects to them.  Mr. Brown was exceedingly pleased with the great man Wailer Clifton Esqur. who accompanied him two days on horseback to call upon the surrounding gentry and view the splendid country which has great charms to the partial and enthusiastic W.C. but did not equal the York District in the unpenetrating eyes of T.B. The object of the journey to Leschenault was to procure a fine Arabian Horse from a gentleman in the neighbourhood with a view of improving the breed of horses in this part of the country. [70] Mr. Brown succeeded in his mission and Yussuf is now here not purchased but on hire for a season and a noble animal he is delighting the eyes not only of good judges but of all the Ladies who have seen him.  The Bale is not yet come up and I think it will be a week or two before Mr. Brown will be able to fetch it from Mr. Moore's at Guildford. I assure you it is most acceptable and makes a little money go a great way in the payment of work people. It seems grasping to speak of another but necessity obliges me to speak up for some boots and shoes which are so very difficult to get here and when procured intolerably dear and inferior. Matilda once enclosed some in one of the cases some black Prunella boots at 3/6 per pair they were quite right in length but too narrow as were all the last lot both for Mrs. Viveash and myself. Nevertheless we wore them and I have now come to the last pair. Could more of the black prunella be procured at 3/6 the same length but a little wider they would be just the thing I suppose fawn colour would not be any dearer. They would make a variety and are great favorites with me. Also a prunella cloth dress same material that children's cloaks are made of would be a very useful and suitable garment not over dear and it would provide me a pattern for the fashion. You see it is hard to root the seeds of vanity from my ways and nature.  I was much gratified with dear Matilda's letter that you prevailed upon her to write. I was apprehensive that it would have been my lot never to hear from her again but now I have great hope that she will recover.  Our boys are much the same as usual except the Baby who is very delicate though so forward in many things. He is very subject to dysentery and is now suffering from it though rather better than he has been. The present attack has lasted more than three months. Viveash has been prescribing for him and has lately seen him. He does not like some of the symptoms but has hope of the child's recovery. I think the complaint will be better when teething is a little over. You do not say any thing of little Eliza this time. I think you had better send her to me as I have no girl unless you are afraid of all the boys falling in love with her and so causing strife in a peaceable household. And now I must say good bye and not tire you with nonsense  My dear Papa  Yours Affectionately  Eliza Brown  December 19th 1846. Saturday  This morning was rather rainy; Mr Barker called on his way to town. He told us that there were some blacks at the foot of the fence. We accordingly went down and recognised several of our old friends and amongst them Ben-Benjie who readily agreed to shoot ducks for us. We gave the gun to him after he had breakfasted and he set out. After breakfast we went to school and went over all the French history and we came out. Mr McLure went to dig potatoes for dinner with Willie. After dinner Ben-Benjie returned without the ducks and gave me the charge and three bommerings as he was to go away tomorrow.  December 21st. Monday  Sandy and I arose early. We walked up along the beach and gathered some currants for a tart. After we returned we bathed and walked up to breakfast. Having breakfasted we went to school. We learned part of our French history read a chapter in the Bible. I learned a part of the AEneid Willie and Sandy began a new book in Caesar's Commentaries and Perry learned a part of the English history. We all wrote part of our lists of plants and went out. Sandy went to the lower garden to cut some lettuces for dinner while I ran up and called Ellen from the wash-house. We soon went to school. Mr McLure asked us a few questions on the map of Scotland but the bell soon rang and we ran to dinner. Lucy brought into the house a salmon-coloured Mantis having a claret tinge and striped with white. [123] Tom turned out "Duncan" this day. The school bell soon rang and we went to lessons. We read a part of Cornelius Nepos's life of Hannibal a part of our Latin Delectus. We worked a few sums together tonight. Mr McLure and I went to Ellen's well and thinned the lettuces. Mamma gave me a book to sketch in but I have not as yet used it. Tom and the boys went to the beach and caught four small fishes resembling sprats and two or three flounders.  December 22nd 1846. Tuesday  We rose rather late. Sandy and Perry and I walked to the beach where we stayed for some time. We walked up to breakfast. We had one hour of leisure after breakfast. We went to school: learned the reign of Charlemagne. I learned a part of Phaeton along with Willie and Sandy. We all wrote part of our lists of plants and after a time went out it being very hot. After a time we came in again were examined on the northern and middle countries read a part of our Latin Delectus and came down to dinner. After dinner the wind suddenly changed to south having blown from north during the whole day. We went up to school. We all read a portion of Middleton's Life of Cicero worked a few sums together and went out. We went out in search of a kangaroo which Sancho had killed but could not find it. However we had a chase of three kangaroos. When we returned the wind was still blowing violently from the south. "Flora" was run down and terribly bitten by the other dogs. Paddy one of Mr Barker's men came here he brought with him the two puppies that we had given to Mr Barker; they were so changed that I scarcely knew them. They were twice as large as our puppy.  December 23rd 1846. Wednesday  We rose pretty early and walked down to the beach and bathed. I find swimming easier than it was at first. I walked in to the sea until the water touched my throat and threw myself forward I then floated and striking out with my arms and legs I swam for a short space. After breakfast was over we went to school learned a part of the French history read a part of a chapter in the Bible and I Willie and Sandy translated an account of the Battle of Phillipi from Velleius Paterculus wrote a part of our lists of plants. We went out it being late and also near dinner-time. After dinner we had a long play but were interrupted by the lesson bell. So we went up. We took our slates and worked a few sums together in the rule of three. Willie called out that Papa was come and that somebody was with him. Mr McLure sent Perry to see who it was and to come back and tell. But Perry not returning he despatched Sandy and as he did not return he sent me. I went came down searched the house but could not find him. [124] I went into the kitchen and enquired where he was; while I was asking who walked in but Jamie the shoemaker (whose horse Willie had mistaken for "Don") and Dunn from the Survey instead of Papa! Jamie informed me that Mr Campbell of the Scotch school was coming here but could not on account of the flooded state of the Mordiallock Creek. Mr McLure and I walked along Mr Smith's road where we found many native raspberries and currants of which we brought home some to Mamma. The boys brought home a blossom of the native convolvulus.  December 24th 1846. Thursday  After breakfast we went to lessons and as usual learned a part of the French history. We read a chapter in the Bible and a piece from Milton's Paradise Lost. I almost finished the third book of the AEneid. Willie and Sandy translated a part of Caesar's Commentaries and Perry read a part of his English history. We all wrote a part of our lists of plants with their botanical descriptions. We then went out. A black boy came here with a present of veal from Mr Smith shortly after we had come out. Papa returned riding on a mare which he had lately purchased. She had been lately imported from Van Diemen's Land and was very thin. We soon came into school again. We were again examined upon the map of Scotland learned a part of the Latin Syntax and wrote more of our lists of plants. We then went to dinner. After dinner we went to lessons again. We worked a few sums in proportion and went out. I and the boys walked to the "Nose" and back before tea. I brought some wild clematis seed home as there is much of it ripe. Willie brought home a curious hollow stone from the "Nose". It might serve the purpose of an ink-bottle.  December 25th 1846. Friday  Christmas! We all rose early and had a fine bathe.  After breakfast we had prayers and Papa read a sermon to us. We walked to the beach. I caught a fish which we supposed to be a young native salmon. Willie and Tom between them speared a dozen of toad fish. Papa and Mr McLure then came down and we walked to the Honeysuckles with them and collected some cockles. In the evening we managed to catch a sting ray (vulgarly termed stingaree) having speared two others without being able to hold them. That which we captured was young and like the rest armed with a barbed weapon on its tail.  December 26th 1846. Saturday  We rose early and bathed. I stuck my spear into the back of a sting ray but he escaped. After breakfast Perry and I went to the beach in search of sting rays while Papa Mr McLure and Willie and Sandy went to the duck ponds to shoot ducks. [125] We saw no rays but an enormous shark which was prowling about so close to the shore that I almost struck him with my spear. Papa Mr McLure and the boys had better success for they brought home two ducks one white and one black magpie. The black magpie is of a different shape from the white. It has a curved bill and bright orange eyes inclining to scarlet and feet like those of a crow with this difference that it is pied black and white. We had the sting ray cooked for dinner today. It was very good Tom brought back "Maggie" and her foal from the Survey having taken the new mare there in the morning. Tom saw Ben-Benjie and Eliza on this side of Dunn's they will be here tomorrow. While walking in quest of raspberries near the beach I saw a black lump on some rushes which lump proved to be a very small swarm of bees. I broke the rushes and carried the bees on them carefully to the house. I placed them in a small basket turned upside down previously smeared with honey and they are adhering to it.  December 28th 1846. Monday  We rose and bathed. Ben-Benjie went out with the gun in search of ducks. We went to the scrub to look for seeds of the leafless creeper with blue pea blossoms but could not find any. After dinner Ben-Benjie returned with the hind quarters of a kangaroo an opossum and a duck. A man came here today with a horse which he said he was bringing to Dr Hobson whom he said he expected here at night. Ben-Benjie amused us much tonight by throwing his bommerings. We gave him some flour tea and sugar. The man came here to reap the barley. He is to begin tomorrow morning.  December 29th 1846. Tuesday  We rose early as Papa and Mamma are to breakfast early. Ben-Benjie went out with the gun at break of day and returned with two ducks one of the common kind and another of a new sort. It had a dark brown head a blackish beak with a broad blue band across it. It had eyes white with black pupils. Papa and Mamma started this morning for Mr Balcolmb's. Ben-Benjie with Sandy Perry and me went to the "Nose" and speared four leather-jackets and four sting rays. We brought the fishes to Eliza and went out a second time. We saw no leather-jackets; but as we returned Ben-Benjie struck a large Tem-Tem and brought it ashore.  After tea late in the evening Ben-Benjie hearing the porpoises coming to the shore ran down to the beach and speared six large fishes each about 15 inches in length. He gave us all of these with the exception of one which he reserved for himself and Eliza. [126]  May 10 1848  (Son Teddy ill)  Yesterday our (servants) shewed their true colours the woman refused to wash some trifling things required for Teddy - because it was Sunday - as she said by her husbands wish - she has never offered the slighest help since he has been ill although she knows well two of the family sit up every night and that he can't be left for a moment night or day - she was reminded of her unfeeling conduct and in a passion declared she would do not more whilst she remains on the premises - they are both old convicts but even in that class I never before met with any so devoid of feeling under such circumstances - another cause for the family being moved to a neighbourhood [i.e. Bacchus Marsh] where masters and servants are not obliged to change places at the pleasure of the latter. [...]  6th April 1847  A hut-keeper and bullock driver bolted without any known cause within the last ten days and the two men who contracted to fence in the point walked off for fear they should be without tobacco till the drays returned.  Farnham Port Fairy  31st October 1847  My dear sisters Since writing we have received [a letter] from Susan. Tell her how pleased I was to see her writing and to find she is so contented with her lot. I wrote to all my sisters at once- so she must not think I forget her or any of you from my always addressing my epistles to the oldest of my six unmarried sisters. Is there one of them who would think it worth while to come to Australia with a husband if they had the chance? If they were all here they would soon get off but marriage is a greater lottery here than at home.  Little did I think when we left home that we would be no better off after seven years working than we were when we left but it is better to be born lucky than rich. We must try on and see what an apprenticeship at farming will do.  Your last was a very satisfactory letter. What pleasure it gives me to know you are comfortable and your school increasing. Many hours have I thought of you all during the time of scarcity and- wished you in this land of plenty and waste. If the government does not send some emigrants I don't know what will become of us. From fifty to fifty-five pounds a year is now wages for a man and wife with two or more children all of which are to be found in what they choose to eat and waste. [175] The men are so particular now they will not submit to be kept on rations but must have all they like and work as little as possible. Nearly all the men about this part are old Vandemonian convicts and a notable set they are but I trust their days of extortion and impudence are nearly over.  Did I ever mention that Mr LeMann was going to visit his family at home? He intends leaving about Christmas and will be away about two years. We will give him letters and ask him to go to see you. I know you will be pleased to see one who has been so kind to us and who is really worthy. He is very quiet and unaffected but well informed and well to do in the world. I do not know if he wants a wife but she will be a lucky girl who gets him.  William has been most anxious to write to his Aunt Esther and has a letter nearly finished but I must send this without telling as I do not think it worth while to make you pay postage for him when he can send it by Mr LeMann.  We have had a disagreeable winter but hope to be quite snug by next. We are having the fence put up now. Our farm is a mile long and one-third of a mile wide. Our neighbor does the half of the fence. We shall then be able to keep our bullocks without trouble. As it is they have to be constantly watched which comes very hard on the boys. Almost every person in the colony has been laid up with influenza. Never was any disease so prevalent as it has been. Our men have had it and I was in hopes we were going to escape but Willie is very bad today and my throat feels sore so I suppose it will go the rounds. My poor Mrs Dawson has been very ill all the winter. I fear she will not hold out much longer but God only knows. How much I have missed her it is not likely I shall meet her like.  We have a very nice neighbour about half a mile off Mrs Urquhart. Indeed this is a more civilized place and I shall have to furbish up my silk gowns etc that are precisely in the same condition as when I left home but I am rather at a non plus for I saw in the paper that the sleeves are worn full (I do hate the tight ones). Now mine are large with a vengeance I wish I had you or some fashionable to give me a shape.  November 21st This letter has been lying long but I have had no opportunity of posting it. Besides we have been bad with influenza previously mentioned. I have had nothing like it since we left home. The boys particularly Prid was very ill but I am thankful we are all better now. [176]  Willie has finished his letter and makes so much work that I must put it in though I am ashamed of the mistakes but it is entirely his own. Prid has been the last week staying with Mrs Dawson and come home quite well but has brought a sad account of [the Dawson's daughter] poor Isabella. She has turned so weak she cannot walk. I am very unhappy about her. She is a sweet child. Mr D. had been to consult a doctor but I don't know what he thinks of her. I am going to try to go up to see her this week. Poor Mrs D. has her share of the troubles of this life. I think the high spirited and merry often have the greatest portion of them.  Our garden is looking well. We shall have peas and new potatoes by Christmas. I wish I could send you some. I have a fine lot of young ducks. The boys are very keen to have some on Xmas day but too many good things won't do. I begin to think with all its troubles this is a better country than yours no fear of famine all we want is people to eat. If you were all here on this snug little farm you would think it holiday time fine grass you could live in the open air if you chose but the sun is rather hot.  Your very affectionate sister  Penelope Selby  I humbly trust the famine and distress is quite over now. We cannot understand why Government don't send them out here as there is plenty of room and plenty of food and to spare. We are giving from £28 to £30 a year to all our men hut keepers and shepherds; our married couple get £36 a year and all our neighbours are giving from £40 to £50 a year and cannot even get them at that. We require 13 and 14 men constantly and a man and his wife [...] You would be delighted with this climate. Everything can be grown in the open air although the winters are generally wet and cold yet few ever get colds or fevers. Since I last wrote you we have got a very good comfortable house built which has cost £200. [...]  He also bought a screw press for to press the wool which cost £40 in Melbourne. We have 72 bales of fine wool each bale containing 200 flushes or 300 lb. each. We are expecting £13 this season as it is not so dear as it has been for the last two years. We have got our shearing over this season five shearers they shore upwards of 9000 at 16s. per 100 and 4s. a day for washing the sheep. [41]  I still have plenty of fowls 24 turkeys 12 ducks and a large flock of geese. I take the credit of having the best poultry in the country. We have plenty of eggs and lots for killing. We can also kill our own beef pork etc. and a sheep every day and Muirhead brings up every little thing from town that I require so we live most comfortably. We have plenty of potatoes vegetables cheese and milk and butter so that I have every comfort that this country can afford. You would be delighted with our place. We are surrounded by the fine Grampians and Mount William. [...]  You wished to know in your letter if we had any clergymen or doctors. We have no clergyman. The neighbouring settlers are giving £10 each to a Doctor Wilson from Melbourne for three years. It amounts to £300 a year to him. He lives 35 miles from us. Still it is better to have him there as we live 120 miles from town. When I required him as I was ill on Sunday night we sent for him on Monday but he did not come till Wednesday but my little son was dead. I am now quite well thank God for raising me up from the bed of sickness.   March 1848  Mr. Stack stopped at Wentworths head station as he returned the Monday from the post office and in conversation Mr. Christie the Superintendent there told him that Wentworth had the Monday tendered for the whole of my run at Paika an ex prizefighter William Guise and W. C. Wentworth M.C. have with several other dirty dogs Alderman Hood among the number under the opening made by the Home Govt in their foolishly legislating for a country they know so little about - been placed by their cupidity upon the same level by their meanly attempting to possess themselves of my property and the fruits of my industry and enterprise. Surely such a display will strongly influence the Government here in protecting the interests of settlers like myself - I will not give up my right under any circumstances that may occur without an appeal to the Governor in person and if that is ineffectual I will lay the whole affair before the public through the newspapers if I can do no more to cast shame upon all concerned - but I can't suppose so gross an injustice will be perpetrated and tho' our case might be slurred over there are luckily a large number circumstanced as I am with Paika. [294]  My DEAR Hep  Just recd your January despatch by ship with queer name. I think you will not complain again of the paucity of my letters. They come thick and long don't they? As for Papers - the Chronicle is dead and of course can't send he. Then the Herald contains nuffin worth nowin Well now I think of it I will send you the Advocate - a weekly - [30]  Your Papers serve one purpose - You have news to the 9th of March - and your January and February Papers are not yet in. Much interest when they do come - well I reads and thinks [NN] . Now tell me have you made enquiries at War Office? about Daniel? Would you call at 35 Golden Square and enquire if the Vicar Gener. has ascertained whether a wife I wrote about be dead or alive. I can never get answers on these subjects. So you have killed Dr Walsh Ah you Lunnuners! R.I.P. Have you received a desire of mine to remit some two or three pounds to Dr Murray. Hope so. Be sure you let me have the "acquits" - for my good name for honesty is sadly pulled about of late.  Do you recollect Jesson's Brass Band? Well we have one. First rate I assure you but we want Music proper for it. Be so good as to send two or three copies of Music arranged for Brass Bands by Cocks. It comes out monthly. I think I saw it advertised in Jerrold. I want I tell you again some works on Architecture. There is one entitled Parish Churches - Another by T & W. Brandon. Hansom's specifications do not suit us.  We have had a small to do about the Convicts sent out. The big and little folks were all in a splutter. A Vote of Censure on the Gubner - a turn out for Earl Grey. What think you of that Master? - Great fools they made of themselves - Poor Connolly! I never thought well of the man. He attended me at Mass & seemed to know little about his business but what has the fellow to do in the Court of Arches? Let him go to Rome and take his wife if she be there. The Bishop thank God continues to improve in health. I expect him down in Sydney next week. I enclose a scrap of a Note the first I have received from him since his resuscitation. It was a near go I assure you - had not my clothes off for many nights - was quite in my own true and real vocation. Night Caps not Mitres were meant for me - ahem! At all events he is himself once again - God and his B. Virgin Mother be praised for the same - shall write again shortly. C. Fransoni won't complain I guess I do not write often enough.  EVER MOST AFFLY J.B.P SYDNEIEN  Write on my part a line to Rev. N. Davis or Mother and Downside  Newlands Port Fairy  20th October 1849  My dear sisters   [Sister] Sarah has been most fortunate in her experience of governessing.  I suppose in another year her boys will be too big for her management and she will have to transfer it to a husband. You Mary and Kate do not seem likely to fix on one for your calves. By this time it will be decided whether either of you have been plucky enough to become Mrs LeMann for I cannot think if you had the chance you would refuse him. I do not think there is any magnet at Bath except his family and I know he much wanted a wife but would not have a fine lady one. He fortunately for himself - and his wife too - knows the Bush here too well to risk his happiness with one who would not be contented.  Mrs Dawson had a letter from him mentioning he had been to see you. He was quite astonished at my dear Mother's youthful appearance. I will not flatter you by repeating what he said of you. Mrs Dawson is in high spirits. She thinks already she has one of you for a neighbor. For myself I am not so sanguine. I have too long held the first rank in Mrs D's estimation to wish to be superseded by a younger sister. Still I am willing to waive all selfish considerations and would receive either with open arms but it is nonsense this for before this time the die will be cast and though both George and I have occasionally built a few castles we have not allowed them to be any more than air. When I think of the way you have to slave at school - and embroidery and old age will overtake us all - how much better you would be here with a good husband and home even though you do leave many near and dear to you behind.  Did I tell you I had taken a little girl six years old to live with me? She was motherless and I was to have thirty pounds a year. [179] She was just three months here and both George and I were becoming fond of her when she was attacked with water on the brain and died after a week's illness. I cannot tell you how I missed her and I was going to do so many things with the money.  This has been a bad year for farmers. Wheat has been so low that we have been unable to have many comforts we intended. Still George does not despair and we are creeping on not racing. I hope it may not be a short race. I do not know what farmers would have done had emigration not commenced. As it is wages are still high in this part the immigrants not liking to come so far from Melbourne.  Prideaux has left school and William taken his place. He is very thin and delicate. Unfortunately for himself he is too watery headed and lately teased so that the boys at school lead him rather a hard life. I cannot think who he takes his crying propensities from but do you remember if I ever disliked teasing?  Our garden is looking well now. In another year we shall have plenty of fruit. I am trying to get a few flowers too. I have very little to write about. Year after year passes much in the same way here. I leave home but seldom see very few strangers. This has been the wettest winter ever known consequently the roads are quite impassable. They talk now of spending half the purchase money for land in making roads and much needed for you can have no idea of the difficulty of travelling in the bad weather. I went into Belfast about three months ago and about six miles of the way it was as much as my mare could do to get her feet out of the mud. It was above her knees rather different from your railroads! Even now that summer has almost come George has ten bullocks and as much as they can do to drag a light load of wheat through part of our farm. Fortunately it is not so bad all the way to the mill.  We have nearly seventy acres cleared now and a most expensive job it has been a great many of the farmers saying it cannot pay and there is such a demand for them you can always find parties to buy. Time will show if we do better than our neighbors. From my two years experience of the country had I my choice it should be a good cattle station as the least risk and expense with the surest profit. Be assured my dear Mother brothers and sisters that - though we are far from you we do not forget you but will love you as long as life is given us and though we may not meet here may we hereafter is the sincere prayer of   Your ever affectionate sister  Penelope Selby [180]  Newlands Port Fairy  23rd December 1849  My dearest Mother  We received a letter from Mr LeMann about a fortnight since containing the very best news to us we have had since we came to the country. I need not tell you it related to my dear sister and the prospect of seeing her here at no distant period. I cannot express to you the unbounded joy and happiness it gave both George and me for although we had built many a castle on the subject we were afraid they would be merely castles in the air and indeed I have partly resided in that very light element since. I know she will grieve at parting from you but hers will be much sooner removed than yours.  With regard to any imaginary privations you may fancy she will have to endure you may make your mind quite easy. Port Phillip is a different country to what it was ten years ago and the Bush a different place to live in. You now see houses and furniture there that would not shame a town and as good living as they have in Northumberland very different from what I had to put up with. Besides is she not coming to friends who know her through me and will be ready to welcome her as soon as she sets foot in Australia to say nothing of those she will have for her husband's sake who is universally respected and is every way worthy of such a wife?  Mr Dawson was here yesterday he had got a letter from LeMann. Mary had he said won the hearts of all his family. He wrote in capital spirits and was most anxious for Mr Dawson and George to have everything nice but we all laid our heads together and determined upon putting up no building until they both should see the place. As we could not agree where the house should be our plan is that they should come here first. Of course it will take Mary and I a long time to talk over the events of ten years quite as long as getting the house ready. Besides if everything is so very comfortable she will think we have been exaggerating all this time.  If Mary arrives safely here I shall begin to think there is a good time coming and we will get on by degrees. I am thankful to say my health is better now than it has been for many years. [181] My friends tell me I am growing young but I shall never be strong. My only fear now is of anything happening to dash the cup of happiness from our lips but we are in the hands of a Higher Power and must put our faith in Him.  I do not despair now of seeing others of the family here. My sisters would get good situations as governesses until married and you might live like a queen on your income. Now what have my sisters to look forward to at home? Slavery all their lives to keep up an appearance. Kate must really make a move after her cousins have done so well. She had better seriously think of the offer I have had for her but I fear the gentleman will not wait long. Courtships are always very short in this country seen one week and married the next. Another peculiarity of this country is that men gentle and simple are rather fond of beating their wives - a gentleman residing in Belfast killed his the other day. He had not been married six months.  Our harvest will soon commence. I hope men will be more plentiful this year. Oh servants are a bother and the newly arrived ones the worst for they have their heads filled with such absurd notions before they leave home. I have an Irish woman lately arrived who can do nothing but boil a potato but she grumbles at everything and wishes herself back in Ireland where she had cream in her tea.  Your always affectionate daughter  Penelope Selby.  It was rather queer that not one of them had ever visited those ranges till I did but the truth is there is nothing almost in any of the settlers heads but some half dozen things to wit sheep wool bullocks drays servants horses and occasionally a little about tallow and boiling down and huts and such like. That is the eternal never ceasing lingo day and night summer and winter. It becomes horribly boring and you can rarely get anyone to talk even for a few minutes on any other possible subject whatever. They shirk it immediately so that all your previous knowledge and stores of information are perfectly useless and become as it were screwed up in one of their screwpresses. As an instance last year when the most intense interest was prevailing amongst one would have said the whole civilized world with regard to the stirring affairs of Europe and the fearful changes and catastrophes occuring so plentifully on the continent they out in Port Phillip neither read nor cared one fig about the entire matter and never would speak almost on the subject excepting to curse the French for spoiling the price of their wool and then they smoke and drink and drink and smoke. [...]  As to the huts in which they lived during the first years of their sojourning on their runs why no language could almost give you an adequate idea of some of them. Some are still living in those primitive substitutes for houses as Mr. and Mrs. Patterson of Lake Bolak within 9 miles of Robert's place. [42] I stopped twice there and slept but you never in all your life saw or perhaps imagined such queer rum places and another far worse 8 miles from Muirhead's where the Archibald family lived near the base of Mount William a most strange locality and as to the hut it was what they call a slab hut that you could shoot easily through between every two slabs plenty of fresh air you see. [...]  Now as to people going out I decidedly think young people are the right sort who will have their habits to form and not have to break up old habits or long contracted associations. They will fall into the ways manners habits customs and so forth of the colony with ease and get soon to relish the new mode of life but to older people the change in many respects is excessively unpleasant miserable and depressing. In fact you would become quite ennuyed unless you drink and smoke etc etc although I must say some do not smoke at all nor drink much [...] There are many nice people and some highly respectable but many who are very coarse and who had come out without a stiver.   June 17th 1850. - To-day though in mid-winter we have a glowing sun modified by a balmy breeze. All the deck is confusion for the emigrants who go no further than Adelaide are getting out their baggage. I at the request of the passengers drew out a testimonial for the doctor which was unanimously signed; and he deserves this mark of attention for professionally he has been most assiduous and socially he has behaved as a gentleman should. Many of the surgeons on board of emigrant ships are disreputable characters in every way. [183] In the course of the day I went with two passengers to Adelaide. We travelled in a public conveyance which was a Whitechapel cart drawn by two horses tandem fashion. The drivers of these vehicles carry as many passengers as they can get. We were said to be lucky for there were only six besides us three. The road which passed through a desolate tract of country was full of large holes which by recent rains had been converted into round ponds; these ponds we had to coast round making a great half circle so that instead of travelling seven miles the distance between Port Adelaide and Adelaide we travelled at least ten miles. On our way we met and passed innumerable bullock-drays drawn by eight or ten or twelve patient hard-tugging bullocks. We also saw several of the aborigines clothed in dirty blankets and kangaroo and opossum-skins; they looked half-starved like the dogs that followed them and were hideously dirty and ugly. Adelaide strikes me as a very miserable squalid place. Wide streets are laid out but there are few houses in them and those few are mean and wretched: the roads are full of holes receptacles of dust in summer and mud in winter; public houses abound and drunkenness seems everywhere prevalent. There is a substantial Change for the merchants to congregate in but all the business of Adelaide seems done at a noted public-house kept by a man called Coppin or Choppin. Here is to be seen a strange mixture of merchants newly-arrived immigrants squatters bullock-drivers shopkeepers loose characters trafficking blaspheming laughing singing yelling and drinking innumerable nobblers. Everybody goes there for every business rendezvous is made at Choppin's. As I could get no conveyance to the port in the evening I slept at an inn there. Each bed-room has three very plain sofa-couches; and I was told that if I didn't wish companions I must pay for all three. The guests here live table d'hôte fashion and their breakfasts dinners and teas are served with a monotonous prodigality. At every meal there are beef sausages mutton chops beef steaks roast mutton and boiled beef good potatoes and most delicious bread; and of these three substantial meals the guests partake with the most persevering elasticity. The table-talk is of bullocks highly-flavoured with oaths and each person seems bent on making his fortune as quickly as possible. [184] I can imagine the early Puritan settlers in North America to have been a very different set of persons. A young person at table speaking contemptuously of some newly-arrived immigrants ('Jimmy Grants' I think was the slang term she applied to them) I asked her how long she had been out herself? 'Oh' she said 'I have been out six weeks and I feel quite colonial already.' I told her I could well believe her. But the affectation and pretension of these people is to me very extraordinary. To hear them talk you would suppose they had held important social positions in their fatherland instead of which three parts out of four have been driven out of it by hunger or by crime.  July 8. - Steamed up the Yarra Yarra whose banks are very ugly. They are low covered with sad-looking short scrub and studded with boiling-down establishments which circumfuse most fetid odours. In about a couple of hours arrived at Melbourne a considerable town sufficiently well situated on two hills and the intervening valley. The main streets are wide - too wide if anything - and the drainage ought to be perfect. The river is spanned by a handsome stone bridge of one arch. The streets are infested by enormous dogs who thrive here on the cheap butchers' meat. Went to a very excellent hotel called the Prince of Wales where I dined and slept.  July 11. - Received an intimation from the Melbourne Club that I was received as an honorary member. Dined there with my introducer an old member and six others. We sat down at six o'clock at a well-appointed table lighted by many wax-lights and we were waited upon by two men-servants one in dress livery the other out of livery. At night as I lay on an excellent bed at the hotel I could not help making the following reflections. Here am I after a voyage of thirteen thousand or fourteen thousand miles through the great ocean arrived on a vast continent the existence of which was unknown to the world until two hundred years ago and which was not inhabited by white men until sixty-two years ago. [185] More than that I have been partaking of an excellent repast served in a way which would be considered creditable in London or Paris in the society of educated and wealthy men in a portion of that continent which was only discovered seventeen or eighteen years ago and in a city which sixteen years back was a savage waste trodden by savage men in chase of the emu and the kangaroo. In this city there are 25000 inhabitants surrounded by all the necessaries and comforts of life; there are well-built houses; shops filled with everything one can require; two churches besides chapels; active Ministers of all denominations; a well-managed custom-house gaol and post-office; numerous colonial trading vessels clustering at the river quays; while at the mouth of the Yarra by William's Town lie at anchor fourteen or fifteen full-rigged ships. What wonderful civilising tendencies the Anglo-Saxon race seems to have! Instruments are they of an All-Wise Providence to substitute in the remote extremities of the world humanising Christianity for savage Paganisos a pure cods of morals for abominable impurities government for anarchy peace for bloodshed industry for idleness the certain fruits of agriculture for the precarious yield of the chase! An Englishman is never content to do anything that he undertakes by halves; he will pull up all surrounding influences to his level; he never descends to them. It is the genius of the British colonist to reproduce in the most distant regions and under the most unfavourable auspices the minutest details of early associations to surround himself at the antipodes with the atmosphere of home. With dogged energy he never rests till he has reduced to practice the great theories necessary to the births and existence of commonwealths which have been familiar to him from his childhood. And this imitation of 'Home' is carried into all the details of private domestic life even down to the furnishing of a house or the arranging of a dinner. And why has Providence chosen England from all other nations to carry Christianity and its offspring Civilisation into the faraway wildernesses of distant lands inhabited by savage men devouring one another? How does this come to pass? If we may without presumption canvass the designs of Providence the question would be capable of the following solution. [186] It is then that every Englishman is brought up from his earliest infancy to read learn and digest the pure and undefiled word of God. He early forms a habitude of judging for himself in religious matters biased perhaps but not peremptorily dictated to by any man or any body of men. And this independence of judgement once formed extends naturally to secular matters and prevents the growth of vacillation of character. And more than this he learns within the book of life that every man should consider himself a responsible being gifted with certain talents by his Creator of which he is to make use. This gives him early an idea that he has an object in life and that he must not run to seed down here; and though the religious part of the matter is alas! often lost sight of yet the mural tone remains kneaded into his character and begets in him a ceaseless activity and a tenacious perseverance in carrying out all that he begins. To this I imagine must be attributed the superiority of the English national character over all other national characters; and this is why he is called upon by Heaven to accomplish that in which other nations from want of moral ballast - fixity of purpose would fail.  July 14 (Sunday). - Waded to church through mud four inches deep. St. James's is the first church that was built in Melbourne. Its external architecture is very hideous; internally it is if anything worse.  Sept. 4. - We have weather the like to which for beauty I have never experienced. Mountains at sixty miles' distance seem but twelve away and the air is so pure and fresh that one feels as if he were inhaling laughing gas. Took a long walk in the environs the other side of the Yarra. All is beautiful but the parched-looking green colour of the trees is a great drawback. Attended a government land sale. The land is put up in lots varying from two roods to six hundred acres at prices varying from one pound to three hundred pounds an acre. It is a strange sight to see the rough-looking bushmen mixed up with tradesmen and gentlemen eagerly bidding in a room blocked up with stores some sitting upon others straddling across barrels cases chests and boxes. [187]  Sept. 28. - After breakfast started for Gishorne.  Sept. 30. - Started for Melbourne after lunch and rode there in four hours stopping for twenty minutes or half-an-hour at the house of a rich importer and breeder of rams situated on a plain of wonderful fertility. The last fifteen miles we rode in an hour and twenty minutes without distressing the horses at all. Thus ends my tour in the Mount Macedon district in which I was first initiated into the mysteries of squatting. In my childhood I always pictured squatters as a party of dirty people squatting and lying round a large cauldron full of inexpressible things suspended from three sticks and simmering over a fire. That idea has I confess a little haunted me since. At all events I never thought until I went to Australia a squatter's life to be an agreeable one; but now I am quite undeceived. I find well-educated and wealthy gentlemen squatting in the midst of their flocks and herds surrounded by every comfort and luxury and enjoying a delicious climate. They have nicely furnished dwellings; their dining-tables sparkle with glass and plate and they ride the best of horses. Some of them are married and the bush ladies make excellent managers especially those that are gentlewoman by births. They have good gardens which yield them flowers and vegetables; and they are permitted to cultivate as much land as their home consumption may require. As they have vast tracts of fertile land given them by the Government for sheep and cattle-runs at almost a nominal yearly rent it would not be just towards the farmers who buy land at a high price that they (the squatters) should be allowed to sell the product of the soil. But every squatting has its drawbacks; the sheep are liable to three diseases one troublesome and noisome called the foot-rot the curs of which is one of the most disagreeable operations that one can imagine; the other two mortal and ruinous - scab and the terrible catarrh. Sheep with foot-rot and scab can be dressed with mercurial preparations and turpentine. Loss and trouble enough supervene with these; but for catarrh there has been no remedy - no alleviatory course of treatment discovered. The only plan is to cut the throats of those sheep that show any symptoms of the disease and draw off the unaffected ones to a distant part of the run leaving that part tabooed for many a long day. [188] If there be a boiling-down establishment near the bodies of the victims can be converted into tallow; if not they must be burned or buried and then the loss is total. Thus squatters - particularly those whose runs adjoin the high roads - have always the sword of ruin hanging over their heads. They are subject too to drought when the stock dies from the drying up of the water-holes. Their sheep also get rushed and worried by the wild dogs; and some times Government steps in when the lease of the run is up to take possession of the land that it may be surveyed and sold in lots for the purposes of cultivation. In that case the squatter receives just compensation for the buildings he has erected.  Oct. 11 1851. - Walked about Melbourne which owing to the auri sacra fames has quite a deserted appearance. Many of the shops are shut the occupants having given up sure and profitable trades that they may have a chance of getting rich suddenly.  Oct. 13 - People mad about the Mount Alexander Diggings. Four hundred Van-Diemonians have just arrived from Tasmania on their way to them. Dined with a Mr. B -  one of the first merchants here. He takes a great interest in the religious and social progress of my district and highly approved of my scheme of making every important head sheep-station a nucleus from which religious knowledge might be diffused.  Nov. 1. - On my way back to my district rode through the Black Forest to Kyneton where the large inn is full of people going to and returning from the diggings eighteen miles off. People drinking and making a great noise all night. No talk but of gold and of the great yield of the mines. The maid-servant an Irish girl as savage as the surrounding aborigines pulled out of her dirty pocket three or four nuggets of gold to show me worth at least 12£ which a digger had given her.  Nov. 3. - Visited the Mount Alexander Diggings accompanied by a mounted policeman. [189] Rode along a mountainous road until we came to the locality where the gold was found. In a narrow valley between two ranges of lofty volcanic-looking hills were assembled on the borders of a nearly exhausted stream about three thousand men some digging earth from pits êight feet square; others washing the earth in what are called 'cradles;' and others washing the bottoms of the contents of the cradles in tin dishes. In the background away from the stream were an infinite number of tents and shelters of every description. Looking by chance into one of the numerous pits I recognised a friend of mine a young gentleman from Tasmania who with five others were come here hoping to make their fortune. After digging through four feet of gravel they had come to a stratum of decomposed slats which they were washing to great advantage. I saw my friend pick with his penknife into a tin box from the sides of the pit a great number of small bits of very pure gold about four times as large as a pin's head. On Friday last they got two ounces; on Saturday three; and to-day they had already got five when I was there. It is a very exciting occupation. The sight of a quantity of rich virgin gold just taken from the surrounding mould agitates the nerves strangely.  Nov. 8. - Arrived in my district across the Murray. Found a mob of drunken men and a conjurer in the public room at Marsden's Inn. This vice of drunkenness prevails to a frightful extent everywhere here. And thus it comes to pass. It is rarely the custom to keep wines or beer or spirits at the sheep-stations. So people when at home whether masters at the chief hut or shepherds at the remote outstanding hut drink nothing but raking green tea which I believe would be poisonous if this effects of the copperas were not neutralised by an enormous quantity of sugar. Drinking several times in the day of this liquid they get their stomachs into such a nervous sensitive state that when they have occasion to visit a public-house requiring some tonic they drink madly of spirituous and fermented liquors. And to drink moderately of wholesome drink would be advantageous to them but as the rum is strongly tinctured with tobacco the beer embittered with strichnia and the wine is some odious fabrication into which juice of the grape enters not those who drink with comparative sobriety earn a headache those who drink to excess subject themselves to delirium tremens. [190]  Dec. 16. - Arrived at Deniliquin having employed yesterday and to-day in travelling on horseback from Moolamon a distance of seventy miles. Found all in confusion at the inn: the landlord and landlady are in bed ill; the other is tipsy; the whole population seems to be on the point of leaving for the diggings. And it is not to be wondered at; for I know to a certainty that a labouring man one of a party at the diggings has gained for his share twenty ounces of gold in eight days.  Newlands  1st November 1850   My dear Mother   I promised Mary when I left her yesterday I would write to you and tell you all about the down lying and your little Australian [granddaughter]. I went to Woodlands ten days before the event occurred as I was anxious to be on the spot and was becoming rather tired but we managed very well. Poor thing she had a long labour very much like I was with Prid. She first complained on Monday afternoon so I dispatched Mr Hood about four o'clock to Belfast. He returned with Dr Hume about twelve at night. She did not become very bad until about three the next day and baby was born soon after twelve at night. The watch was where I could see it and I was watching every minute that it should be over on the Tuesday but it was a quarter of an hour too late. [182] She was sorely tried towards the last and quite lost heart but there was never the slightest danger only she never thought 'it would be so bad'.  I laughed when baby was born and told her it was truly 'the mountain bringing forth the mouse' such a little thing but very strong and healthy and growing so rapidly. The Dr said Mary was the strongest woman he had been with many a long year. Indeed she had not had a days ailment during her pregnancy which is saying a great deal though I was glad to see she was losing flesh. Indeed dear Mother when I consider her age and fat I cannot tell you how thankful I feel to the Almighty that she is so well and the baby spared to her. All the time she was ill it was the baby feared for and she feels repaid for what she suffered. I don't know whether Father or Mother are most taken up with it. Surely never baby was so much admired before.  I have been going by the name Mrs Gamp. Mr Hood says that I don't look fat and comfortable enough. He thought I ought to be lying in bed and Mary going about as she was much more the figure experience told him nurses should be. Mary has recovered very well. She will be an excellent nurse but unfortunately her supplies are rather sore cracked. I do not know that we could have avoided it however in a few days I trust they will be all right as they were much better.  I must question if she would have found a man - could she have had her choice of all she ever knew - so thoroughly devoted to her as Henry is. She said 'he was not much of a lover' but he makes up for it now and would certainly spoil her had she not too much good sense. Indeed she ought to be a happy woman and I am sure she is though she does abuse the country. I of course take the opposite side and praise it and tell her when she has been here ten years she will do so too spite of all the petty annoyances the difficulty of getting servants being still about the greatest.  I was vexed at having to leave Mary so soon but my servant who had been with me eight months and was just married when she came sent me word she was not able to do the work anymore so I had no choice as she had only staid to oblige me an extra month that I might leave home comfortably. She is a good girl but I wish she was not going to be bothered with a piccaninny. The worst is I don't know where to look for another and I have my neighbors in the same predicament. Wages are as high as ever and very few men or women either are good for anything.  George and I got wedding favours in the shape of Gloves and cards the other day from Mr Osborne so tell Kate it will be of no use her coming out for him. [183] I hope Kate won't break her heart. I don't know why she should it is merely from what Mary says I express that hope. I do not know what she may have written to her of the gentleman and his abilities but this much - she intends to threaten him with an action breach of promise of marriage - of course made through her. I hope she won't call rue as a witness for I really cannot recollect much about it. I only know that he was certain in his own mind that Mrs LeMann would bring out a single sister and he was determined to have her for a wife if he could. However I am almost as pleased as it is. I wish she were as well to do in the world as he is but he has a queer temper.  I have not said a word of my own household. They are very well going on much the same as ever always striving with little good. However I hope the time for rest will come.  I remain  Your affectionate daughter  Penelope Selby  June 17th 1850  My Dearest Annie  There are many things which I wish to say to you and which I ought to say to you which nevertheless are better put upon paper than spoken directly. Grave long speeches are not the kind of intercourse that I like any more than (I am sure) you would Besides it is not easy to be very sedate while sitting beside you with your beautiful sunshiny countenance and most pleasant smile and the delightful feeling of quiet happiness I have while talking to you. I am altogether too light hearted when beside you to put on a grave face and talk like - what I am - a philosopher. So I have been meditating about you (as usual) here in my attic for the last couple of hours and so I shove away the tiresome books and begin the agreeable task of talking to you on paper  That I do most truly and most entirely love you - as I never before loved a woman as I never again can love a woman - I know you believe.However surprised you may have been at first you fully believe this now You have accepted all the love I had to bestow - valueless as I feel the gift to have been - and I know you have given me the priceless treasure of your true love in return.If we were less formal and less dilatory inettling this most delightful business than others are at least we were fully as cordial and sincere as any others could be. Next to the happiness which I feel in possessing your affections is the happiness springing from the feeling that you bestowed them upon me spontaneously and most willingly. I am perfectly satisfied and happy. [316] The love of one such pure-souled and affectionate girl as you are was all I asked. I have found it and I am content and more than content. You are satisfied with me I know. You know me short as our acquaintance has been very thoroughly. You have seen all my character. There is nothing more to let you know and nothing concealed from you. I am simply the book-loving intellectual earnest man with fluent (sometimes eloquent) speech and high thoughts which you see me to be. I have no money no friends no "prospects" no hopes of a "situation under government". But I have a strong belief that a man's life consists in quite other things than fine house splendid dinner parties carriage and all that. I carry this idea so far that I don't care much about these things - nor about the people who have them. I have a soul and a Bible and a splendid sky above my head and a magnificent vision forever floating before my mind of a glorious Heaven where all is light and love and joy. I actually do believe in God and the Bible and in the immortal destinies of the human Soul. And I intend living - whether I am single or married - in the clear belief of all these things. I intend not merely to say I believe them and preach about them but I do really and actually mean to live every day in the fullest realisation of them.  Withal I believe that man being human and not angelic must live as a man and fight the Battle of Life bravely taking joyfully the blessings God sends him and bearing meekly the trials God sends him. In a word - and in all seriousness - I am a Christian and mean to live as a Christian with the help of God.  Now Annie Grant what do you say to that portrait of an actual Lover and possible Husband? Think over the whole affair seriously.  Look at both sides of the picture. And say whether you would choose to link your fortunes and your happiness with such a man than take the probable chance of a Life Companion much handsomer much younger much richer and much more what the world calls "respectable". For a thousand to one you will get that if you "wait a little longer". But I beg a thousand pardons for the bare supposition. I do most entirely trust in your faithful love for me. Only I write in a wild kind of way to awaken in you deeper thoughts and feelings than you might be disposed to cherish under the excitement of feeling produced by a fervent attachment (as I believe yours to be).  I have drawn a picture of my "inner man" which - upon looking it over again - is too flattering. I have faults - lots of faults. I know it well. But I do honestly say that I have no fault of a kind to mar the happiness of a lovely girl who trusts her all of earthly good to my keeping. I know that I am not capable of any meanness or pettiness of feeling - any paltry jealousy - any miserable personal vanity. I have no fault which would be the means of giving pain to a gentle and affectionate Wife. Where I loved I should be trustful tender and constant. I am sure I should be generous and tender even to the little failings - for we are all human - of the One I loved. [317] I never could be vindictive nor irritable about trifles nor morose or sullen to Her. O no! I would aspire to make the pure passion by which I was bound in heart and soul to Her a worthy and exalted passion as free as might be from all gross and sordid taint. I should try to live a noble and dignified life; happy myself and making others happy; and thus tasting in all its exquisite sweetness The joy of loving and of being loved.  To me all that life can give of peace and happiness and perennial comfort and consolation would be summed up in the one sweet word Wife. I should have Home however humble it might be the sanctified abode of Love and Peace and Purity so that (like the Patriarchs of old) I might be able to entertain angels if a stray one ever visited our quarter of the world again. This is my Ideal. O Annie Grant! how far could we go in making it the Real?  There is one point which I am somewhat dubious about after all. I don't think I ever told you - or you ever asked me - the important question which relates to my age. My conscience gives me a fillip about this. I ought to have told you: for I think you think I'm younger than I am. Don't be startled still less shocked - least of all awfully frightened - if I tell you honestly that I have reason to believe I am - guess! - no not 26 nor 27 nor 28 nor 29 but - actually 30!!! That's - too bad isn't it? But really I'm not to blame. In the first place I can't help my age In the second place I thought - forgive this very ungallant avowal - I really did think you were more than 18 3/4. I thought - from your beautiful feminine grace - your thoroughly developed womanly beauty - that you were about 21. And I thought (thinks I) "well 9 years are not so frightful"; but eleven is too bad. However I can only say - as I said before - that that's your business If you take me you must just take me as I am "with all my imperfections on my head" (as somebody says somewhere.) You can't reasonably expect an angel complete can you now? In fact you have all of the angelic kind that there is in both put together: there's none left for me to have: you have your own share and mine (or what should be mine) also.  Well but you will say if I am so old a soldier why didn't I pitch my tent before now? There's the very point. Well you see Annie Grant I found it so difficult to carry the Ideal into actual everyday practice that I had to wait until the Beau Ideal - the beautiful Realised Ideal - should come. To say truth - what with my lecturings and verse scribblings I have more than once had meaningful glances from bright eyes in the heads of pleasant countenanced young ladies cast upon me. Nay I have even sat at tea or at supper or gone to picnic parties with decidedly very loveable young ladies - who were so very condescending as to smile when I spoke to them and to talk of my "talents" and all that and to wonder why I was so very self-absorbed a bachelor and so forth. [318] But somehow there was sure to be something or other that whispered me that here I could not give my heart safely and there it would not be altogether wise to plunge lip-deep (by the bye that's just the depth people do go) in love. (Note: if people went deeper than lip-deep in love how could they manage to speak to each other never to speak of kissing each other?) So I have escaped Scotfree from England. And here in Surry Hills I find the true living Ideal-Real at least. All that I ever dreamt of loveliness and all I ever sighed for in pure affection and innocent-heartedness I find summed-up concentrated embodied personified realised in the pleasant attractive agreeable delightful lovely fascinating bewitching enchanting Annie Grant!! And so good night my sweet love! I kiss you a thousand times. God for ever bless you!  Ever your faithful and devoted  D.B.  Jolimont Sunday November 11th 1850  At dinner Mr Harding was telling us about plantain leaves used for plates in India when there came the sound of wheels grating on the carriage-way followed by the noise of at least two sticks hammering on the door. Mr La Trobe sent his servant to answer the summons and while he arranged his neckerchief hinted at the possible arrival of a new governor in search of a night's lodging! Enter the mayor Nicholson the grocer also the ex-mayor Augustus Frederick Adolphus Greeves.. . Nicholson with one of his fingers tied in a rag holding an Adelaide newspaper.  "Your Honour allow me to draw your attention to the fact that the Separation Bill has passed through both Houses. The news is spreading quickly and I shall be unable to restrain the people - "Here Augustus Frederick coughed as though he would like to add something when Mr La Trobe quizzically remarked "The Bill is incomplete until it has the Royal Sign Manual." Nevertheless he gave the required permission to celebrate that night and the mayor scuttled off to light his private bonfire which is to be the signal for general jubilation.  12th  The Prince's Bridge to be opened on Friday; the ball to take place on this day fortnight. [374]  13th  Another sitting from Charlie but not a good likeness. Indeed I fear the excitement of the Separation doings has had an unsettling effect upon me. Also Master Charlie himself has grown restive since he heard that a royal salute is to be fired at one o'clock and jumped about like a mad thing when his papa invited him to come and "see the smoke!" Arrangements for the illuminations are well in hand stands are being built and a hundredweight of candles has been ordered from Jackson and Rae's and now it is whispered abroad that one of the Bishop's men-servants has composed an ode - or is it only a congratulatory address? - to be read to "The First Governor of Victoria".  14th  A sitting from Charlie who has assumed the airs of a man-about-town since he was allowed to eat the mustard Mr Bell had put upon his plate!  16th  A day full of surprises and excitement. At 6 a.m. the saxhorn band began to play a reveillée outside "The Chalet": a performance which had been kept secret even from Mr La Trobe himself who now appeared in a flowered dressing-gown straining his eyes at the window. He held my sleeve while some of the gentlemen put down their horns to sing "Hark Hark the Lark!" in a key that was too high for them; yet it sounded better than the French aubade which immediately followed. After this they recovered their instruments and gave us stirring polka tunes although poor Madame who had one of her neuralgic headaches would gladly have forgone that part of the programme. Mr La Trobe then walked out on to the veranda to put an end to the music but with the opposite effect for no sooner did the performers behold him than they joined some with voices some with saxhorns in a tremendous rendition of the national anthem. His Honour bowed and they would have gone through it again had I not led him into the house. . . . So they marched away still playing polkas.  Upset by the saxhorn band and fearful of any cannonading Mrs La Trobe appointed me her deputy at the opening of the bridge an arrangement hardly completed when Mr Edward Bell blew a bugle to announce his arrival in a carriage and pair.  Behold me now equipped in Madame's black satin polonaise jacket trimmed with Australian swansdown (a present from Mr Cowper of Sydney) and my own grey silk bonnet! The Superintendent having first of all handed me into the carriage entered it himself followed by Agnes Nellie Cecile Charlie and Mademoiselle Beguine. [375] Adolphe de Meuron sat on the box beside Mr Bell and thus snugly packed together we came to the Treasury where Mr Bell changed places with His Honour who drove us more slowly than his predecessor to the corner of Swanston and Collins streets and thence after a view of the procession to our proper stand - beside the Bishop's barouche - in front of the Prince of Wales Hotel. From this point of vantage we had a clear sight of the hill with its tent and a few field-pieces opposite while constantly moving banners very small in the distance glittered and went out again according as the phalanxes changed places in the sun. Horsemen had hard work to keep onlookers from trespassing on the field and we witnessed many rushes but none which broke the line For want of control the cheer mg was ragged and no doubt if the two lots of instrumentalists that followed the saxhorn band had been more d accord the music would have been better.  At 12 a m Mademoiselle Beguine who had been observing the hill through her lunette d'approche exclaimed that she saw smoke and on the instant there arose a prodigious noise of guns the signal for us to set out for the bridge. Mr La Trobe gathered up the reins and we proceeded at a majestic pace until we reached the middle of the arch 75 feet from either bank here His Honour stopped and merely saying I declare Princes Bridge open drove to the opposite side During our progress thither we were passed by a procession of Freemasons and each man as he went forward ducked his head to Madame whose double in the black satin jacket replied with the most gracious salaams At the summit of the hill Mr La Trobe alighted and standing by the flap of the tent spoke a few words suitable to the occasion Mayor Nicholson said something supplementary after which the Superintendent proposed the Queens health this being drunk off in small ale drawn from a barrel under a cart where it had been placed to keep cool.  His Honour then returned to us and we accompanied him (walking) to the Botanic Gardens where two thousand buns were distributed to children of all denominations; deduct from these two begged by Mr Eyre Williams for his little boy and one each to Charlie Cecile and Nellie La Trobe.  Mademoiselle and myself were so hungry we felt we could have eaten the whole two thousand between us!  The Superintendent drove us back to Jolimont Charlie beside him carrying the ceremonial sword. On the journey a few spots of rain made me anxious on account of Madame's best jacket which had already been stickled by Nellie's saved-up bun. Then when we arrived at "The Chalet" the wind blew through the house throwing the doors open and the children made so much noise shutting them again that poor Mrs La Trobe retired to her bed. [376] The servants were still absent but the gardener's old helping-man who had stayed at home brought in a round of beef with vegetables and on these we dined en famille most heartily.  17th  Yesterday's procession is said to have been three miles long and Mr La Trobe estimates the number of people assembled on the hill at twenty thousand. (Mr J.B. Were informs me that a ship was to sail from London on August 10 by which time the Act of Separation would probably have received the royal signature.) 