 Dear Sir  I have the pleasure of sending you some Seeds & would gladly have sent a larger quantity but the person employed either neglected collecting them at the proper time or we were too late in the Season. In the Kanguroo which is stuffed not to alarm Lady Banks you will observe the feet to be different to what is described in your voyage. These Animals are very numerous but after being fired at grow very shy The Stones w.ch I send on account of the appearance of Metal & the Ochre were found in the bed of a river which in the rainy Season runs thro' a Slate quarry. The Slate is according to the information of a Slater not fitt for any use as it is rotten & will not split for the Skin of a Bird which I send to Ld Sydney may merit your attention it differs from the Ostrich & from the Emu. I have seen several but it is very difficult to get within shot of them. Black Swans are seen frequently but only one has been killed. The situation of the Penis in the Kangurroo appears to me uncommon between the Anus & the Testicles & very close to the former. This Animal grows to a great size one has been killed that weighed very near to Two hundred weight & one was found dead in the Woods the Tail of which I have that measures Eighteen inches in circumference. The procuring Shelter & Security for ourselves & provisions has giving full employment but I have made some excursions in order to examine the Country around us the difficulty of which you My Dear Sir can form a just Idea of. inland there is a Country in which the Timber grows as you observed about Botany Bay at such a Distance that the Ground may be Cultivated with little trouble but our situation does not permit us to go from the Cove in which I have fix'd the Settlement. The carrying Stores & Provisions inland a single days journey would be impossible. Mr Nepean will tell you my reason for settling here & such particulars respecting the Country as I have been able to inform him of. The Natives are far more numerous than I expected to find them. I have seen two hundred & twelve men in one Cove near Botany Bay & reckon fifteen hundred in Botany bay this Port & Broken bay (a good harbour) including those who live on the intermediate Coast. I have traced them thirty miles in land & having seen Smoke on Lansdown Hills which are fifty miles inland there cannot be the least doubt but that there are Inhabitants in interior parts of the Country. [11]   [...] almost all the men wanting the front tooth in the upper Jaw (which is pulled out) & most of the Women wanting the two first joints of the little finger on the left hand are circumstances not observed in your voyage. I have seen a female Child of five years of Age that had lost the two Joints & I have seen young Children whose fingers were perfect. I have likewise seen two Women with Child & one Old Woman who had not suffered the operation so that it is not in my power at present to say at what Age it is performed or on what account. We have unfortunately lost all our Cows & a parry is just returned after being out eight days they say that they saw a very large Lake or river of fresh water & which I shall visit as soon as the Ships have sailed.  I have taken the liberty of saying that if Lord Sydney or Mr Nepean wish any Seeds you will let them have them. a good Botanist in this Country would find full employment unfortunately I have not even a good Gardner. The flowering Shrubs & Trees of which I have sent seeds grow in light black mould & appear to thrive equally well in a Sandy & very Stony Ground. In a few months I hope to be able to attend a little more to the Natives with whose customs & manners I wish much to acquainted. They are now much distressed for food few fish are caught & I am told that many of them appear on the Beach where the Boats go to haul the Seins very weak & anxious to get the small fish of which they make no account in the Summer nor can we give them much assistance as very few fish are now caught & we have many sick. These people never come amongst us tho' they have several times gone along with the Sirius but when I or anyone that is known go down the Harbour they join us very readily. Mons.r La Perouse having been obliged to fire on them & the bad behaviour of some of our people have made them avoid us more than when we first came & which they have reveng'd by killing three of the Convicts one was found with four spears in him one of which had entered at the back and the point appeared below the breast bone. They throw these spears with great force a few plants are put into some Spirits of Wine & there are a few dried plants.  You will Sir be so obliging as to make my Compliments acceptable to Lady Banks & to the Ladys of your family. The hurry in which I write you will excuse & do me the honor of believing me with great esteem  DEAR SIR / YOUR OBLIGED / & MOST OBEDIENT / HUMBLE SERVANT / A. PHILLIP  Latd obsd 34°.30'S  Stood along the shore at 4 or 5 Miles Distance from it ill 6 oclock when we saw the entrance of Botany Bay bearing NNW Stood off & on all night - 20th [Jan. 1788] Fresh Breeze from SSW at 5 Stood for the Bay it than bearing North 3 Leagues. at 7 We were between Point Solander & Cape Banks. Saw the Supply and Transports which parted Company on the 25 of November. the Supply's boat came on board. informed us they were all well on board that the Supply had been in the Bay only two days & the Transports only one Day. At 8 we Anchored bringing Pt. Solander to bear SSE Cape Banks ESE. Got immediately Grass on board for the Cattle.. on the Passage we were so unfortunate as to loose two of the Cowes.. Suppose they must have died chiefly for want of Provisions & the frequent falls they got by the motion of the Ship -. The Entrance of Botany Bay is rather Narrow as a reef of rocks runs out from a small round bare Island which in coming in you leave to the Northward of you keeping in Mid Channel or rather inclining towards the Southern Shore & Steer about WNW Cape Banks is on the North Shore & is very Rocky you must not by any means go near it as the Water is Shoal but there is a low rocky point which runs out to the Eastward of it which you may pass within a Quarter a mile of.. Point Solander cannot be seen from the Sea but there is a Bluff head which lies to the Southard of the entrance which you see. it has scarce any Trees on it Point Solander is rather Low has a Number of Trees on it and the Distance from this Point to Cape Banks I judge to be rather better than a Mile. on the South side of the entrance there is four & five Fathoms Water within a hundred Yards of the Shore. B. Bay is very spacious and has several sandy Beaches in it & goes far to the Southward of Point Solander to the Southwd of Point Southerland (which is only a small Rockey Point that runs off from a Sandy Beach) is very Shoal Water and not fit for any Vessals to Anchor not having at low Water above 5 or 6 feet. [66]   Within half a Mile of the Sandy Beach on the North Shore the Water is Deeper after you pass Bare Island. there is 6 7 or 8 Faths Water within a Quarter a Mile of the Shore. There are two Leguna's one in the NW the other in the SW part of the Bay the NW Leguna I beleive is only navigable for Small Vessals & Boats. the SW has Water enough for a Sizeable Ship. there is a Bar lies off the SW Leguna which has not above 12 or 14 feet Water at Low Water. The Shore all round is like a thick Wood & the Soil very Sandy the Grass in most places is about 2 feet high but not thick. here & There is spots of underwood The Trees are in General about 20 Yards Distance from each other In the Afternoon of the 20th Sent a Party of men on Shore on Point Southerland to clear away a Run of Water which is rather scarce here Capt. Cook mentions cutting the Ships Name & the month Year &c on one of the Trees but it never could be found. the Tree may still be Standing the Bark is very thick and if he did not cut through it it in time will Disappear as some of the trees Shed a thin coat of their Bark Yearly I suppose some have this thin coat very loose and quite sundried so by the least touch it will fall off.  this tree is called the Sanguis Dragonis on account of the red juice not unlike Port Wine that comes from it when cut down. I tasted some of it it had a very rough bitter taste. The Govonor and other officers employed in different boats searching about different Creeks for fresh Water. a Lance was thrown at Mr King. but did no hurt he afterwards landed & they were very friendly he gave them several trinkets. The Govonor immediately the Supply Anchored went in one of her boats to Land. several of the Natives gathered to the Place where the boat was to Land on his approaching near the Shore they Brandished their Spears & seemed to dispute his Landing. he immediately put off and pulled round a Low Point & landed at a small distance from the Natives.  he approached toward them. they would not come near him till he had laid down a Gun he had in his hand which I think plainly shows they must remember to have seen some of Capt. Cook's People do some Execution with Guns. however they had an amicable intercourse & they parted very friendly.  January 21 The Govonor accompanied by Capt. Hunter & some other officers went in Boats to examine Port Jackson which lies 9 miles to the Northward of B. Bay. Mr King went up the S W Leguna where he found a very good soil but no signs of any Fresh Water had a party of men on shore to clear away Ground in readiness for Pitching Tents &c against the return of the Govonor if his intentions where to make the Settlement here; Saw a number of Natives who came to the boats just at Sunset when the People were going on board all of them have a Spear made of hard Wood & Sharpened by scraping it with a Shell. It is about 12 feet in Length and joined in Several Places with Gum. they can throw them about 70 yards. this sort of Spear we afterward found to be the War Spear another sort they have for fishing which is about the same Length having four prongs at the end & at the end of each prong is a fishes tooth very nicely fastned with Gum & bearded with the same. this they use by throwing it with their hand and only at fish. the other they throw' with a Stick about 3 feet long that has a crook at one end which they hook in the end of the Spear & throw it with great exactness. at the other end is a Shell they use for scraping their Spear & opening Oysters. they speak very Loud and mostly all together very often Pronouncing the Words Worra Worra Wea & seemed quite surprized at not being answered. one of the Ships sent a Boat to haul her Sceine. when the Natives saw the fish come on the beach they immediately ran in the Net speared the fish & carried them away. they were not stoped for fear of a disturbance The next day one of the Part took a fife on Shore played several tunes to the Natives who were highly delighted with it espetially at seeing some of the Seamen dance. [67]   Sirius Port Jackson 5 June 1788  We Arriv'd at Botany Bay the 20th Jany. Last after a Passage of 10 weeks from the Cape of Good Hope. the Dificulty we find in Getting store houses Erected for Discharging the Transports Hutting the Troops Convicts &c has put it out of our power to make any Discoveries in the Interior part of the Country. the only Discovery made is Contiguous to Botany & where we are Settling our Little Colony. its Cal'd in Cooks Voyage Port Jackson. by a Survey of Captain Hunters. it is found to be the Most Commodious perhaps in the World the Latitude of it is 33.51' South Longitude 151.10 East & is 8 Leagues North of Botany. The Day we sail'd from thence Two French Frigates arriv'd from making Discoverys Round the World. they have been out above 3 Years & put in for Wood and water to build Boats. they have been at Most of the islands that Capt. Cook was at. At one them (Navigation Island) they Lost Two Boats with their Cruis & 8 officers Including Mons De Langle Capt. of the Astrolabe all massacred by the Natives They had 4 Boats on Shore but Luckily 2 Got off at another place they Lost Two Boats with there Cruis not a man Escaping.  We see many of the Natives Dayly with No More Covering Than what Nature Affords them. They Seem Not to be possessed of the Smallest Curiosity or Sensibility Whatever. They take us all for women owing I suppose to our not wearing Beards When we haul the Nett they Assist no Doubt with a View of being Gainers by it Yet Notwithstanding the Time we have been here they are as Distant as ever with us. they Never come to our Camp Nor Suffer Their Women Near us ... [69] four convicts have been found kil'd by them & 6 or 7 more are Missing who we suppose have Shared the Same fate. The Govr'. has Sent our 2nd Lieut. Mr. King with one Mid. one Surgeons Mate a party of Seamen 7 Men & 6 female Convicts to Settle a Colony at Norfolk Island (which abounds with Firr Trees of an Enormous Size it is about E. N.E. 300 Leagues from Hence & is only 15 Miles in Circumference. We have Great Difficulty in Clearing the Country as we are badly assisted by the Convicts the Govr. has adopted the Most Lenient Means but to no purpose & finds that Nothing but Rigour will bring them to ordr. they are without Exception the most Incorragible Villians Breathing & the Women the Most Obscene Creatures Imaginable. for Robberies Committed by the men 5 of them have been already hung. flogging has Lost its Effect.  It is a Charming Climate & will no doubt in Time be a fruitful one. the Gangeroo Mention'd by Cook are very Numerous & are the only Quadrupeds we find Worth Mentioning they Correspond with his Discription in Every Respect Except our finding that the female has a false Belly or pouch Similar to the Opossum in wch. their Young take Shelter when Closely pursued. this we found by Shooting a Dam for as soon as she fell the Young one ran into its Asylum. [70] [71]   There are a Great Number of Birds & many Like our Game in England of a Most Beautiful Species Of Parroquets. There has been a Bird of Enormous Size kild Something Like the Ostrich but more Resembling the Emu (Described by Goldsmith) a Native of So. America it was 7f 2in high & weigh'd 104 pound.  It is Suggested we are to sail from hence in 2 Months to Explore the Coast & then proceed to Otahaite & the Islands Contiguous. if it Should be so it Will Make the time which begins to be irksome appear Less Tedious as it will be Novelty. We Learn from Lt. Ball of the Supply Arm'd Tender just Arriv'd from Norfolk that on his passage from thence he Discoverd an Island in Lat. 31. 23 wch. he Cald Lord Howe Island. it Abounds in Turtle Many of wch. he has Brought here wild pidgeons Abound there also (if the Expression may be Allow'd & a Fowl very much Resembling the Guinea Hen. As they Suffer themselves to be taken from off the Trees wth.out Attempting to Fly away & the former the men Run Down without any Difficulty.  This brings the Anniversary of H.M.y Birth Day it was Celebrated with Great pomp when the Country was Named Cumberland & the City Albion.  The Buildings will make a formidable Appearance in a Short Time. people are Employ'd in Making Brick &c. & here is Stone as fine as any Portland Stone. the Govr. & Lieut. Govr. are building Magnificently. but more Artificers are wanted An Officer of Marines & myself went a few Days since A Circuit along The Coast. on Landing the Natives Appeared very friendly to us But on our putting off the Boate they threw a Large Spear wch. providentially missed us but Came with Great Violence against the Side of the Boate this would not have happened had we a Musquet in the Boate the Dread of wch. is so Great that with one you might drive a Thousand before you. [72]   The women are very Dexterous in fishing in their Canoes & their Lines are made of the Bark of Trees & the Hooks of Shells Astonishing what a Length of Line they will continue undr. Water.  In the afternoon the Govonor Returned found Port Jackson to be an excellent harbour got everything in readiness to Proceed there 24th Saw Two Ships in the offing Working up for the Bay but the Wind being to the N.W. & a Strong Current setting to the Southward they were soon out of sight 25th [January 1788] The Supply with the Govonor on board Sailed for Port Jackson where he intends to make the Settlement 26th the two fr Ships which were seen in the offing on the 24th Arrived this morning. they proved to be the Boussole & L'Astrolabe two French Ships on Discoveries they were commanded when they left France by Monsieur De La Perouse & Monsieur De Langle the latter of whom was killed by the Natives of one of the Navigators [an island] with 12 men 8 of whom were officers. They were on Shore in two of their Boats for Water their ships were under weigh & had dropt out of the Bay.  The Natives before had been very friendly to them and at this time one of the Boats was a ground and when they came down to murder them the French Supposed their intent was to assist them in launching the Boat that was a ground. it was supposed upwards of 500 Stones was thrown in the first Shower The French immediately discharged a Volley of Small Arms at them & it is Supposed above 20 of the Natives must have been killed - Several of the French were also Wounded. those who escaped Swam off to their other Boat which lay off at a small distance the reason of this we could not learn. the French at first say'd they supposed it must have been done for the sake of keeping the Boats but afterwards some hints dropt that it was one of their Sailors had behaved very ill to some of the Natives. [73]   Monsieur Clunard was afterward given the Command of the Astrolabe M. Pérouse on being asked what discoveries he had made paid Capt. Cook a very great Compliment by saying he had left nothing undone which was very handsome of him.. he (La Perouse) commanded the Squadron that destroyed our Settlements in Hudsons Bay. at 11 We got under Weigh & worked out of the Bay with all the Convoy. Stood for Port Jackson in going from B. Bay to Port Jackson You Pass seven bluff heads. The entrance of Port Jackson is narrow but you may pass within 100 yards of South head. The North head projects out near a Mile to the Eastward of the South head which is quite Perpendicular from the Waters Edge. in Working in [sic] saw several of the Natives who called to us but as we approached the shore they retired to the bush. at 5 we anchored in a Small Cove where we found the Supply laying. all the Convoy by sunset were all at Anchor within us. here you are intirely Land Locked and it is impossible for any Wind to do you the least damage. the next day got on Shore some tents & Landed some of the Convicts & some of the shore division of Marines who were employed clearing Ground. 28 Capt. Hunter Mr Bradley & other proper officers were employed Surveying the Harbour. Landed the remainder of the Convicts & Marines the former of whom were employed clearing the Ground the Latter pitching the encampment. the convicts were constantly employed in clearing & enclosing Ground. [74]   30 [Jan] Land all the Cattle which was 5 Cowes 2 Bulls 6 Horses which came from the Cape in the Lady Penrhyn Several Sheep & Hogs. Sunday February 3d Divine Service was performed on Shore for the first time. There has been a great deal of Thunder Lightning & heavy rain since our first Arrival here. on the night of the 6th Several trees were shivered with Lightning one in Particular which had several very Large Branches broke entirely off and several Sheep which were in a Pen under the Tree were killed. The next Day the Govonors Commission and Code of Laws for the Colony were read in which he is Stiled Captain General & Govonor in chief of the Settlement in New South Wales & all the Adjacent Islands in the South Seas. he afterwards had a cold Dinner for the Officers at which I was. several Bumper Toasts was afterwards drank and we immediately broke up - 8th Capt Hunter finished the survey of the harbour. he says it contains a Number of very good Coves fit for any Vessel to Anchor in with the greatest safety. indeed he says it is the finest harbour in the known world. the Cove in which we are is called Sydney Cove. none of the rest is yet named. the Chart of the Harbour is kept very secret for fear it may get into some persons hands who might have it Publish'd in England before the Chart that is going to the Admiralty but as soon as it is made Publick I shall get a Plan of it. 9th Mon. Clunard came round in a boat from Botany Bay with their dispatches which are to go to Europe with ours. he returned the same Night he would by no means go on Shore altho the Govonor rather pressed him. 12 Some People went to Botany Bay by land but the French Ships were gone while they lay in the Bay they buried one of their Abbeys over the Place where he was intered was a Latin Inscripsion Painted on Board this very luckily was taken off in a Pocket Book by one of the officers who went over there but in a few days after the Natives took it down. here the Govr. had an opportunity of returning Mon. Clunard's civility by having a Sheet of Copper with the same Inscripsion engraved on it. as was painted on the Board the Natives took down and having the Copper Screwed to a tree. Mon Clunard when at Kamscatksa erected a very fine Monument over the remains of Capt. Clark and took down some Remains of an old one that Capt. Cook built. he likewise got the Natives to promise not to let any person take it down. While in the Bay they (The French) built two boats dug & sowed a very good garden in hopes it might be of some service to us. this they could not get the Natives to promise not to pull down for I was over there a few days after they sailed & found it all the fence tore in Pekes and the Ground trampled all over. so we may expect but very little good from it. 14th Lt. King. Mr Jemeison Surgeon's Mate & Mr Cunningham Masters Mate with 4 seamen 2 Marines & 12 Convicts went on board the Supply to go to Norfolk Island & make a Settlement there which is to Supply this Colony with Pine as no light wood can be got here. Sent with them 6 Months Provisions A Boat equipt with every Necessary Article A Sceine Tools of all sorts. it is likewise expected to find flax there so a Weaver & a Loom was sent. Richard Widdicombe was one of the men Mr King chose to take with him so I took the opportunity of mention him to Mr King. one day at the Govonors they both spoke very much in his favour and I dont doubt but he will do well if he pleases. the next day the Supply sailed. so things went joging on till the 25 when Richard Bennet one of the Convicts must steal some provisions for which he was hung. the Convicts were constantly employed clearing Ground building Store houses for the Reception of Provisions &c. which were built by putting trees about 2 feet in the ground so as to touch each other & thatched over with rushes. there are likewise a number of hovels built of Cabbage Tree for the officers & the Batallion. they are chiefly thatched with rushes but some are covered with Wooden tiles. the wood of which these tiles are made of Splits something like the Ash but in any other respect is not the least like it. [75] [76]   Some of our People were employed in making a Garden on an Island which was Named Garden Island. On the 20th of March the Supply returned they found much difficulty in Landing Mr King & his Party as the surf ran so very high. in most places the Rocks are perpendicular they at last landed in a small inlet that a reef of rocks surrounds the mouth of. only here & there a small passage for boats which as soon as you are past you get in Smoothe Water & Land on a Sandy beach. within these rocks some Turtle were seen.   Norfolk Island abounds with great Quantities of Pine some of which were measured to be 45 feet from the bottom of the Trunk to the top of the tree and about 40 feet of which had not a knot. the diameter was from 8 to 10 feet I have heard some people say they are 170 feet in height & 100 feet clear of knots but that I think is quite out of all reason the Island is Situated in Latd.. 29.02 S Longitude 168.16 East of Greenwich. on their Passage there & on the 17 of Febry. At day Light in the morning they discovered what they thought to be two Islands bearing ESE Stood towards them all day but it proving little wind did not near them much. on the Evening the Breze freshned they kept a press of sail directly for them till Midnight & then Shortned sail till day light expecting to be near them. as the day broke saw the Land which was seen indistinctly during the night & at the same time saw a high Pyrimidical Rock which as they had not seen it before it seem'd very near them made it prudent for them to lay to till the day was a little advanced They then made all sail possible and it was not before Noon they were able to get to the Northward of this Island so as to secure a good Meridional observation which however was obtained & they had every reason to beleive they were the first Navigators who had ever seen this Island. Lieutenant Ball named it Lord Howe Island in honour of the Present first Lord of the Admiralty. It is situated in Latitude 31.36 South and Longd. 159' 02" East of Greenwich It lays in the form of a half moon its convex side towards the NE. The two Supposed Islands that were first seen proved to be two high mountains on the SE end of the Island the Southermost of which is called Mount Gower the other Mount Lidgbird between which is a deep Valley called Eskine Vale The SE point Is called Point King the N.W Point Philip these two points form the concave side of the Island facing S.W and is lined with a Sandy Beach. on the Island which is guarded against the Sea by a reef of corral rocks at the Distance of about half a Mile from the Beach. through this reef there are several small openings for Boats but it is much to be regreted that the depth of water within this reef does not exceed any where more than 4 Feet [78] Innumerable Quantity of very fine Turtle frequent this Island in the Summer Months but they all retire to the Northward during the Winter Season there was not the Least difficulty found in taking them nor would they quit their intention of Landing on the Beach tho they [the seamen] were busily employed in Turning & carrying into the boats as many as they could stow On the Shore are many of Gannets There are found here A dusky brown bird with a long bill & feet like a Chicken are remarkable fat & very good food but rather tough Many Pidgeons which are very Large a white fowl something like the Guinea hen with a very Strong Red thick & Sharp pointed Bill legs like a Stout barn door fowl. they are thought Carniverous. they hold their food between their hind claw & the Bottom of their foot & lift it to their mouth without stooping so much as a Parrot does. [77]   some of them which are supposed to be the Male have some blue feathers thinly interspersed on the Wing the Tail & Slope of the rump very much resemble the Guinea fowl. here is also a Species of Webfooted fowl in general of a deep blue with a bill of about 2 inches Long Strait but suddenly bent downwards at the end & very Sharp & Strong a fine eye like a dove. its wings do not seemed formed for a long flight having only 6 long feathers in each Wing. its breast is covered with a very thick long down from the breast bone to the Lower part of the Belly. & what is very extrodianary [sic] this down proceeds from the tips of very strong feathers with witch the whole Brest & Belly is covered. its length from the tip of the bill to the extremity of the tail is about 22 Inches & Breadth from the tips of the Wings 25 inches. they were found & took burrowing in holes like Rabbits. there is also the Jay of the Long bill kind with a few white feathers intermixed in the Wings & tail. The Sandy Beach before Mentioned forms three distinct Bays the Northermost of which is called Callum Bay. in Respect to the Surgeon of the Supply the Middle one is Named Hunters Bay the other is Named Prince Willm. Hen Bay which begins at Mount Gower & ends at Blackburne Island which stands about 2 Miles from the Shore near which there is not above 4 feet Water. The Island itself is Rockey but abounds in Cabbage Palms Mangroves & Mangenele Trees to the very tops of the Mountains. There was not seen the least sign or mark of any Quadruped whatever. The Island may be from 2 Miles to 2 1/2 miles in Breadth and about 7 or 8 in Length the Soil Sandy & rockey abounding in great Quantity of underwood. but it is supposed the Island can be of no use in respect to Agriculture but it may be a Valuable Acquisition in the Summer Months to this Settlement [Sydney Cove] for Turtle fowl & Fish. The Anchoring Ground on the North Side is but indifferent being a hard Rockey Bottom & if your Ship drives you must immediately cut your cable should the Wind be on the Shore.. There is no danger in Approaching the Island from the Sea. [79] The Pyrimidical Rock may be seen at the Distance of 20 Leagues. it lays about 4 Mile to the Northwd. of Lord Howe Island through Which is a Passage for any Ship. to the Northward of the Pyrimid lays 5 Distinct Rocks which are called the Admiralty Rocks This Discripsion of Lord Howe Island I got from one of the Gentlemen of the Supply who is going to England by whom I shall a Short Letter which he has promised to deliver himself to my Brother James.   The Natives passed the ship [the Sirius anchored in Sydney Cove] daily but never came close to her. we could often see them strike fish. I have often gone to them & given them things which they readily axcept but will never part with anything particular their fish which is their only Subsistance & I beleive they have little enough for themselves.   On the 11 of April the Govonor & Capt Hunter went down the harbour to have a Conference with the Natives. in one of the Coves they found out a small Narrow Channel of about 100 yards [the Spit?] which led up to a Large Arm. they did not that day go to the head of it this new discovery took up his attention so much that he paid very little attention to the Natives. he returned the same Night. 15th The Govonor accompanied by several officers went from the New Discovered Arm into the Country for a few Days.. they returned on the 19th [April] having found a very fine country when he was about 3 Miles from the waterside but near the water it was very rockey [Middle Harbour and its environs?] 21st [April 1788] Capt. Hunter employed Surveying the New Discovered Arm. 23rd The Govonor with several other officers & a Party of Marines went from the head of the harbour to Travel in Land. they Took with them 6 Days Provisions some Tents & some Hatches. 25 Capt. Hunter finished the Survey. he found it very Spacious but at some places very shoal. the Cove it runs out of is rather Shoal just at its entrance having at low water only 2 Fath at some places. but when you pass this which is not very broad you have 10 Fathom Water. 28 saw the Govr. who went further up the harbour in a boat to examine A River they had found out at the head of which was a Slate Rock. found it Navigable to within about 2 Mile of the Head. he Supposed he had been about 40 mile in Land & that it was all the Way like a Park with Trees about 20 yards Distance from each other. the country in General quite a Plain. the Grass about 3 feet high & pathes all the Way that Natives had made. [80]   at about the distance of about 20 Miles from them when furthest in Land they saw Mountains the very tops of them can be seen in a clear day from the head of the harbour. Water in Land is in great Plenty. they saw Several Ponds. some of them 200 Yards wide & several Widgeon in them. the soil in land they found very good.  May 1 Willm Bennet was hung for thieving. 4th went among some of the Natives. they seemed very friendly. all of them have long beards which is very troublesome to them. one of the Party Shaved one of them with a Penknife which must have been very painful to him yet he was very glad to get rid of it. [81]   5th. Sailed the Supply for Lord Howe Island & the Lady Penrhyn for China. it is Supposed she is going to Kamscatksa for furs which she means to dispose of at China should She get clear of the Coast for the Russians have Ships Cruizing here the same as Ships on the English Coast looking after Smuglers. She [supply] is deemd as such by them as the fur trade is a Counterband (contre?) Trade & as she has cleared out from this port [Sydney Cove] for China She may be made a prize to any Man of War that should happen to fall in with her of what Nation soever.. I should not have the least objection to fall in with her as she would be a very good prize when Loaded. 6th The Charlotte & Scarborough sailed for China 19 Another Store house being finished began clearing the remainder of the Ships. 24th For the first time 2 Natives in Canoes came alongside the Ship they were as usual very noisy & Seemed Surprized at many things he saw. they had some fish given them & after Staying near an hour they went on Shore. Could not perswade them to come on board. [82] [83]   and I think what enticed them to come Alongside was some fish' some of the People showed them. it is their only food & they have very little of it particular in the Winter Months. they have been sometimes seen chewing the root of a ferne which they have roasted over a fire till it was so smoaky it might be smelt a Mile. 25th the Supply Arrived from Ld. Howe Island. she had been caught in a Gale of Wind when at Anchor and very near driven on the reef of Rocks (which I have before discribed laying half a Mile from the Shore) and was obliged to cut her Cable & proceed for sea as fast as possible. The Three Transports which were bound for China touched at the Island but the Turtle were all gone to the Northwd. this being the Winter Season. but the Birds were as usual. 30th Three Natives came alongside in their Canoes & Stayed near two hours. they were very much Surprized at the Ships head which is an Image.  In the Afternoon two Convicts who were sent to cut rushes were found murdered by the Natives who had thrown Several spears in them. one of them had a large peice of Scull cut out of his forehead Supposed to have been done with an Axe which they [convicts] carried with them to build a Hutt. The next Day the Govonor went up the Harbour attended by some of the Officers & some Marines to try & find out the Natives who had Murdered the Convicts. this might be very easily known as they [the natives] took from them [the murdered duo] An Axe 2 Bill Hooks & 2 Sithes. and of course the people who are found with these tools are undoubtedly the Murderers Several Scouting parties were sent out wherever any Natives were seen to see if they have any of these tools. [84]   June 1st  the Govr. Returned said he had seen a party of Armed Natives to the Number of 211. he immediately Advanced towards them & one of them seeing him unarmed gave his Spear to another and met the Govonor. after a few Motions on both sides a Man presented himself who had a Deep cut on his Shoulder which must have been either from an axe or Sword. they at last parted very good friends. indeed the Natives are a very quiet sort of people when a Gun is near them for one Gun will frighten 40 of them. if you are not armed they will take the advantage of it for tho they are described as a set of people without the least curiosity they have a great deal of Cunning.   on the 4 [June] being the Kings birthday we fired 3 Royal Salutes & a Dinner was given by the Govonor to all the officers. he than Named the intended Town Albion. the County Cumberland which extends from the Head of Botany Bay to the Head of Broken Bay which lays about 7 Mile to the Northward of this & as far in the Country as the Mountains which I before mentioned. that part of them which is nearest Botany are Named Lansdown Hills the other part is called Carmathan Mountains very Large Bonfires were made on Shore by the Convicts & several of the Officers Mar were Robed. one man was taken in the fact. another as soon as he heard he was found out disappeared. the same day all the Cows that was brought out in this ship were lost & it was Supposed he had driven them off Several scouting Parties were sent out with orders to Shoot him if he attempted to run away. he held out till the 26 when he was taken within 2 Miles of the Encampment. at the same time the other Man lay under Sentence of Death he was immediately tryed & condemned & the next day they were both executed.  On Sunday the 22d Three distinct shocks of an earthquake were felt by several people I was on board one of the Transports & felt two of them very forcibly the other was rather fainter. it did not the least damage. it happened about 4 OClock in the Afternoon wch was & had been for some time very fine. when I told it to some on board this ship for it was not felt by any person here they supposed I must have mistook it for something else as earthquakes always happens when the weather is very bad. it was exactly like a Ship running on shore. [85]   I forgot to mention in the proper place that when the man was taken he denied ever seeing the Cowes even to the last & we have not seen them since nor do we ever expect to hear of them again. this is a very great loss to the Colony as we must go a long way before we can replace them. either to the Cape of Good Hope or the Philipine Islands"; I am of opinion the Natives have killed them as once before they threw a spear at one of them calling them Kangooroo at the same time.  These animals are peculiar to this Country none of them is found in any other place their head very much resembles that of a fox. their fore legs very Short with a hand like a Monkeys its hind Legs are remarkable Long having only two Claws on each them they have very large Tails. some [tails] have measured 18 Inches Circumference & Weighed 140 Pounds.  They have likewise a false belly. this is no more than a Bag that inside their Skin in which they serene their Young either from the Cold or the Game Keeper. they sit on their Breech & jump forward without their forefeet toutching the Ground about 3 Yards at each jump. I am of opinion their tail must be of great service to them in the Spring. [86]   They are very shy that it is very hard to get a Shot at them so hard that I have not been able to get any their Colour is a fine Grey over the Back the Belly quite white their fur very fine & not above an Inch long. they are very good food & taste like a Deer & to give you a better idea of it have sent you a sketch of it.  The other sort of Quadrupeds ate the Opossum. these are the same or nearly as the Mongoose in the East Indies they have likewise the false belly are of a brown colour. their head something resembling the Kangooroo in Shape & are about the size of a Rabbit. their Tail Long by which they can hang round a Branch of a Tree. they are very good food not much unlike a Hare. there are I beleive several different sorts of them they mostly live in Trees & feed on the Leaves or any small Berry they can get. there is likewise several different sorts of Squirrels Particular the Flying Squirrel. these are in every respect like the English Squirrel but have Square Wings which reach from the shoulder to the Hind Leg & when shut lay close along the Belly & are very like the wing of a Bat they cannot fly above 60 Yards at a time & then they descend very much. very few of those have been taken.  There are several Guanas just the same as them in the west Indies. of Birds there are vast Numbers & of various Sorts but the Bird that we look on as the Greatest Curiosity is the Emew of which there has been only one Shot. it in every respect answers the discripsion of an Ostrich but in the Feathers of which two Grow from the same Quill the Quill is as small as the quill of a Small bird. the feather is very fine about 8 Inches long & very small. I had not an opportunity of seeing it as it was put in Spirits as soon as it was brought in the Camp. I beleive [sic] it is going home in one of the Transpts.. several of them (emus) have been seen since. they do not fly but run faster than any Greyhound whatever. they are not very plenty but are mostly found near Swamps this Weighed 104 Pounds & when it stood upright was about 7 feet. there are hawks Kites Crows Wild Ducks & Widgeon the same as in England. there are some Black swans but they are rather Scarce only one of them have yet been shot. The handsomest Birds here are the Loreyquets they are of different Colours but the Plumage of them are very Brilliant so much so that Paint cannot discribe their Brilliancy. however I have sent one of them Stuffed to give you an Idea of it. There are different sorts of them but all of them are very handsome. there are the Green Parroquets which are common on the Coast of Guinea & are very often brought to England but the Lorey I never heard of in England. there is the quail exactly the same & in England & a Bird about the size of the Thrush and not much unlike them. they feed on Berries and are very good food as are most birds here. there are several small birds one in particular very like a Goldfinch. the rest are unknown to me. [87]   Of Reptiles there are Several different sorts of Snakes but none I beleive venimous. they have been caught 9 feet Long are very beautiful Colours & scaled like a fish.  Of Trees there are many sorts the Sanguis Draconis I have already described & can say no more of them than that they are very Large in general they are mostly decayed in the heart & if the Sun gets on any of the Boards they immediately Warp & is very short Grained. another sort that looks very like the Fir Tree when Growing but the Grain is like Ash to look at but very Short. a kind of Mohoganay is to be found but not very plenty The Cabbage Tree is plenty wherever there is a run of fresh Water & good soil These are in Circumference about 26 Inches & grow to be about 20 or 25 feet high I have seen some 40 feet but these are not very common. [88] [89] [90] their Cabbage is at the top where some broad leaves spring out and the cutting off the Cabbage effectually ruins the tree for you can get but one Cabbage from one Tree the Cabbage is very good eating either as a Sallad or just as it comes out of the Tree & I beleive very good for the Scurvey there are several other sort of trees. the wood of them are not worth much as the Grain is so very short they snap with a very little Weight most of the Trees have been burnt about the root & some are quite hollow that you might stow half a Dozen hogsheads inside them there is a small Tree from the Top of which grows a light Stick about 6 or 8 feet Long with which the Natives make their Spears these Trees are about 4 feet high & are all burnt from these the Natives get their Gum with which they join their Spearhandle together when it is quite hot & Boiling out of the Tree. I have often seen two Trees grafted together & very often two sorts of wood proceed from the same root. of underwood there is a great Variety but I am not Botanist enough to distinguish one from the other except a Bush on which grows some small green Berries or currents of So. Wales which have a very pleasant strong tartness & are very good for the Scurvey. they grow in great Quantities make very good tarts but destroy a great deal of Sugar another sort is very like the furze in every other respect but it has no thorns & does not grow quite so thick but higher. there are a great many other sorts which I can give no account of.  Now I will attempt to give some Accounts of the Natives they are in General about five feet seven or eight are very lean especially about the Arms & Legs. their hair is always kept Short & is not very Coarse. They have fish bones claws of Birds or a Dog's tail tied to their hair & gumed that it might not come off. Their Colour is dark brown but they appear quite black as their skin is constantly covered with Gum. in other respects they are like the East Indian Blacks. They go quite Naked and I beleive have no proper place of abode they all have Canoes which is just the bark of a Tree with both ends tied up & spread open with 2 or 3 Sticks in the Middle. They have a small paddle in each hand with which they paddle their Canoes which will not carry above 3 People they (the canoes) sometimes are to be seen 18 feet but their Genl. run is from 12 to 14 feet & about 2 feet Wide in these canoes their whole Subsistance depends they are always fishing. their lines are made of part of the Cabbage Tree & their hooks of some shell & I beleive in the Summer they catch a great Number - they are all given to theiving that if you lay any down & turn your head it is off if any of them are near [92] [93]. one day when our boat was hauling the Sceine A kettle was taken by one of the men to boil some fish for his breakfast. a Native observed him put the fish in the Kettle as soon as his back was turned A Native wipt both his hands in the kettle (not having any idea of boiling Water) to steal the fish but before he got his hands to the fish was glad to take them away again & walk off with himself. [91]   They shelter in Cavities in the Rocks & make a large fire. But about Botany Bay there are none of these Cavities so they get the Bark of a Tree about 10 feet tong bend it in the middle & place the two ends of it on the Ground at about 6 Feet Distance & filling up one of the entrances this makes them a hutt.  They have a number of Dogs belonging to them which they call Tingo. they do not bark like our Dogs but howl. the Govonor has one of them that he intends Sending home in one of the Transports. they are the Wolf Dog - are the Colour of a fox & have a brush tail. at first would eat nothing but fish that being his constant food. [94]   Several of the Natives have one of their teeth out of the Upper Jaw. what this means I could never find out but they are respected by the rest & seem to have some authority over them. some people say it denotes their being Married which gives them this Authority. As for their Spears I have sent you a scetch of them with a Discripsion & use of each they have some of them a bone go across their Nose through the Middle part of it which parts the two Nostrils - about 6 Inches Long they look on it as a great Ornament. some of them paint themselves about the face are very fond of painting round their Eyes White. they have a Number of Scars about their Breast & Shoulders they at our first Arrival seemed to wish very much for our hats which plainly shows the sun hurts their head. None of them ever came in the encampment to Stay any time & I think it will be a long time before they will be of any Service in the Colony.  The Climate is exceeding fine & healthy much more so than I expected for since the Landing we have lost only 39 Convicts 3 of the Marines one Man from the Supply & one from us. at the first Landing most people had a Slight touch of the flux but that soon Wore off. it was owing to the confinement some of the Convicts had as they have lain in a Gaol some 3 some 4 Years.. they are at present prety healthy. in respect to Vegetables we have here are very few. there is a Plant very like the Spinage in England which afford us a most excellent repast with a piece of - I was going to say Pork but will call it Bacon. there is a sort of beans which are very good but not very plenty. Samphire here is in great Quantities the only thing Wanted is Ingredients to Pickel them with. there is likewise a sort of Kidney Bean which grows on the Rocks which are very good Pickled but no other way.   So much will I say for the Country Birds Beasts &c & now for myself On Mr King's going to Norfolk I was appointed to act as Junior Lieutenant until further orders. Now you most likely will know my fate before I shall myself that is whether they will continue Mr King as Govonor of Norfolk or no. Some People must constantly be kept there for the Pine which is a very great Acquisition to this Colony as no wood here is fit to build any vessal of that I have seen. it is so very short grained it will break off very short. if Mr King continues I shall be confirmed if not I must wait for another opportunity at all events I think it will be for my good to Stay out till something is done for me now I wish your opinion on that head. [95]   I am very well off for all sorts of Clothes except Shoes of which I have only 2 Pair left & what I shall do till you can send some out I dont know However I should be very much obliged to you to send me a Dozen & a half pair of Shoes & some of them of the Shooting Sort just such as I left behind me another sort thick & a few pair thin. I beleive my foot has grown much since the last shoes were made me so pray tell Huskin they were rather stinted in the upper Leather. the length of my foot at present is 10 Inches so he is may make them in every way Proportionable.   When I was at the Cape of Good Hope I was rather in want of Money & drew a Bill on Mr Coombes to the Amount of Ten Pounds. I wrote a short Letter which I left unsealed with the Person who gave me the Money. for that as well as the good fitting out I got in England I again return you my thanks & hope I shall not be any more expence to you for at least 5 or 6 Year except for a very few articles such as Shoes. I should likewise be very thankful for a Couple pair of buckles and a few Pocket Handkerchiefs & some soap of which I brough about a Half Hundred Weight from England but that will be out I am afraid before you will be able to assist me. some Towels very coarse and some large table cloths I shall want very bad if they are sent out in the Peice I can get them made here.  The Govonor Continues his kindness for me & I dont doubt but he will do all in his power to get me Confirmed. There are two young men come out of Merchant ships that have passed but I beleive they will not stand so good a chance as the Gentlemen who came out of England in the ship. One of them is Son to the Agent of transports.  I dare say you must remember Mr Collins who was at Brent & quarreled with Mr Aymeatt. he is going to England & is to carry this Letter. he promised to deliver it himself which I have taken Very kind of him & likewise that it will be a great Satisfaction to you to see a person who came immediately from me. He has been very ill since he has been here & finds the Climate or the Living not to agree with him. The Latter I think is as bad as any person need live having only Salt Provisions. Now the Winter Months are Set in very few fish to be got. [96]   all the Transports are not going home now as there are not Store houses enough to receive their Cargo but I hope soon we shall have Brick houses as Bricks are making very Fast & a good Brick Kiln built & they have burnt several Thousand. The Agent Lieut Shortland is to carry home the Dispatches & I dare say will be home about March (1789). you will know that before me so I might have saved myself the Trouble of Mentioning that. The Reason of my giving the Different Variations of the Compass is that if any of my Acquaintance Should come out in the next fleet they will be of some service to him. I forgot to mention among the birds the Cockatoo. they are about the size of a large owl. quite as white as Milk all over except a few Yellow feathers on the top of their head which have a pretty effect. they are very indifferent food & make a disagreeable Noise so the only handsome thing belonging to them is their Plumage.   I dare say the News Papers have lost us in many Gales of Wind & have been Split on many Rocks Run away with by the convicts Several Times & many other ways Destroyed.. I should be glad if you would take notice of all these Reports & send me an an Account of it. I fancy I must now Conclude by desiring my Respectful Compliments to Capt. & Mrs Ourry & Palmer Dr & Mrs Birdwood & to make Short all my friends near & about the South Hams my Love to my Brothers My Duty to my Mother & Aunts Pauncefort & Digby I hope my Cousin Henry is now in the West Indies or in Some Smart Cruizing Frigate and I dont doubt but he will make a good Seaman if I might guess by what little I could see of him when at Portsmouth. I must again remind you how very Short I am of Shoes & then Subscribe myself as  Your dutiful Son  Newton Fowell.  Sydney Cove in  Port Jackson  July 12. 1788  The Ships Sail the 16th 1788  I take the first opportunity that has been given us to acquaint you with our disconsolate situation in this solitary waste of the creation. Our passage you may have heard by the first ships was tolerably favourable; but the inconveniences since suffered for want of shelter bedding &c. are not to be imagined by any stranger. However we have now two streets if four rows of the most miserable huts you can possibly conceive of deserve that name. Windows they have none as from the Governor's house &c. now nearly finished no glass could be spared; so that lattices of twigs are made by our people to supply their places. At the extremity of the lines where since our arrival the dead are buried there is a place called the church-yard; but we hear as soon as a sufficient quantity of bricks can be made a church is to be built and named St. Philip after the Governor.  Notwithstanding all our presents the savages still continue to do us all the injury they can which makes the soldiers' duty very hard and much dissatisfaction among the officers. I know not how many of our people have been killed.  As for the distresses of the women they are past description as they are deprived of tea and other things they were indulged in in the voyage by the seamen and as they are all totally unprovided with clothes those who have young children are quite wretched. Besides this though a number of marriages have taken place several women who became pregnant on the voyage and are since left by their partners who have returned to England are not likely even here to form any fresh connections.  We are comforted with the hopes of a supply of tea from China and flattered with getting riches when the settlement is complete and the hemp which the place produces is brought to perfection. Our kingaroo [sic] rats are like mutton but much leaner; and there is a kind of chickweed so much in taste like our spinach that no difference can be discerned. Something like a ground ivy is used for tea; but a scarcity of salt and sugar makes our best meals insipid. The separation of several of us to an uninhabited island was like a second transportation. In short every one is so taken up with their own misfortunes that they have no pity to bestow upon others. [4] All our letters are examined by an officer but a friend takes this for me privately. The ships sail tomorrow.  Sirius Sydney Cove Port Jackson  June 12th 1788  Dear Richard  I think I hear You saying "Where the D-ce is Sydney Cove Port Jackson?" and see You whirling the Letter about to find out the Name of the Scribe: Perhaps You have taken up Salmons Gazetteer if so pray spare your Labour and attend to Me for half an Hour - We sailed from the Cape of Good Hope on the 12th of November 1787 - As that was the last civilised Country We should touch at in our Passage to Botany Bay We provided ourselves with every Article necessary for the forming a civilised Colony Live Stock consisting of Bulls Cows Horses Mares Colts Hogs Goats Fowls and other living Creatures by Pairs. We likewise procured a vast Number of Plants Seeds & other Garden articles such as Orange Lime Lemon Quince Apple Pear Trees in a Word every Vegetable Production that the Cape afforded. Thus Equipped each Ship like another Noah's Ark away we steered for Botany Bay and after a tolerably pleasant Voyage of 10 Weeks & 2 Days Governour Phillip had the Satisfaction to see the whole of his little Fleet safe at Anchor in the said Bay.  As we were sailing in We saw 8 or 10 of the Natives sitting on the Rocks on the South Shore and as the Ships bordered pretty near thereto we could hear them hollow and observe them talking to one another very earnestly at the same time pointing towards the Ships; they were of a black reddish sooty Colour entirely naked walked very upright and each of them had long Spears and a short Stick in their hands; soon after the Ships had anchored the Indians went up into the Wood lit a Fire and sat Around about it as unconcerned (apparently) as tho' nothing had occurred to them. [5] Two Boats from the Sirius were now Manned and armed and the Governor accompanied by Captn. Hunter and several other Officers went towards the Shore where they had seen the Natives who perceiving the Boats making towards the Beach came out of the Wood and walked along some distance from the Water-side but immediately on the Boats landing they scampered up into the Woods again with great Precipitation. On this the Governor advised that we should seem quite indifferent about them and this apparent Indifference had a good Effect for they very soon appeared in sight of Us When the Governor held up some Beads Red Cloth & other Bawbies and made signs for them to advance but they still were exceedingly shy & timid and would not be enticed by our allurements; which the Governor perceiving He shewed them his Musket then laid it on the Ground advancing singly towards them they now seeing that He had nothing in his Hands like a Weapon one of ye oldest of the Natives gave his Spears to a younger and approached to meet the Governor but not without discovering manifest tokens of Fear and distrust making signs for the things to be laid on the Ground which the Governor complying with He advanced tooke them up and went back to his Companions; Another came forth and wanted some of the same kind of Presents which were given to Him by the same Method at length after various Methods to impress them with the Belief that We meant them no harm they suffered Us to come up to them and after making them all presents which they received with much the same kind of Pleasure which Children shew at such Bawbles just looking at them then holding out their Hands for more some laughing heartily and jumping extravagantly; they began to shew a Confidence and became very familiar and curious about our Cloaths feeling the Coat Waistcoat and even the Shirt and on seeing one of the Gentlemen pull off his Hat they all set up a loud Hoop one was curious enough to take hold of a Gentlemans Hair that was cued and called to his Companions to look at it this was the occasion of another loud Hoop accompanied with other Emotions of Astonishment. In a Word they seemed pretty well divested of their Fears and became very funny Fellows.  They suffered the Sailors to dress them with different coloured Papers and Fools-Caps which pleased them mightily the strange contrast these Decorations made with their black Complexion brought strongly to my Mind the Chimney-Sweepers in London on a May-Day. - They were all Men & Boys in this Tribe.  I should have told You that the Governor left the Sirius soon after we sailed from the Cape of Good Hope; and Embarked on Board the Supply Brig & Gave up the Command of ye Convoy to Captn. Hunter in order that he might proceed on before the main Body of the Fleet but he arrived in Botany Bay only two Days before Us. [6]   In this Time He had obtained an Intercourse or two with some Natives on the North Shore but as the Means which he took to gain their Confidence and effect a Parley were much the same as those I have given you an account of I shall only mention a few singular Circumstances that occurred in these Intercourses. The Supply Brig arrived in ye Bay about 2 °Clk in the Afternoon of ye 18th January and at 4 °Clock The Governor attended by several Officers went in two armed Boats towards a part of the Shore where 6 of the Natives were and had been sitting the whole time the Supply was entering the Bay looking and pointing at Her with great Earnestness; When the Boats had approached pretty near this Spot two of the Natives got up and came close to the Waters-Edge making Motions pointing to another part of the Shore and talking very fast & loud seemingly as if the Part to which they pointed was better landing for the Boats they could not however discern any thing unfriendly or threatening in the Signs and Motions which the Natives made. - Accordingly the Boats coasted along the Shore in a Direction for the Place to which they had been directed the Natives following on the Beach. In the mean Time the Governor or somebody in his Boat made Signs that they wanted Water this they signified by putting a Hat over the Side of the Boat and seeming to take up some of the salt Water put it to his Mouth the Natives immediately understood this Sign and with great Willingness to Oblige pointed to the Westward and walked that Way apparently with an Intention to show their Visitors the very Spot. The Boats steered towards the Place and soon discovered the Run of fresh Water opposite to which they landed and tasting it found it to be very good. The Natives had stopped about 30 Yards from ye Place where the Boat landed to whom the Gentlemen made signs of thanks for their friendly Information at the same time offering Presents and doing everything they could think of to make them lay aside their Fears and advance towards them but this point was gained only by the Methods that I have mentioned: and when they did venture to come and take the things out of the Governor's & the other Gentlemen's Hands it was with evident Signs of Fear the Gentlemen now having distributed all their Presents among them returned on Board.  Thus was our first Intercourse obtained with these Children of Nature. - About 12 of the Natives appeared the next Morning on the Shore opposite to the Supply they had a Dog with them (something of the Fox Species); The Governor and the same Gentlemen that were of his Party Yesterday went on Shore and very soon came to a Parley with them there were some of their Acquaintances among the Number and these advanced first (leaving their Spears with their Companions who remained behind at a little Distance) as they had done Yesterday; [7] They all of them in a short time became Confident Familiar & vastly funny took anything that was offered them holding out their Hands and making Signs for many things that they saw laughed when we laughed jumped extravagantly and grunted by way of Music & Repeated many Words & Phrases after Us. The Gentlemen having passed about an hour with them returned on Board but could not induce any of the Natives to accompany them there. A Party of Us made an Excursion up an Arm in the North part of the Bay where we had not been long landed before we discovered among the Bushes a Tribe of the Natives who at first did not discover such an inoffensive & friendly Disposition as those I have spoke of above; for these rude unsociable Fellows immediately threw a Lance which fell very near one of the Sailors and stuck several Inches in the Ground we returned the Compliment by firing a Musket over their Heads on which I thought they would have broken their Necks with running away from Us. About an hour after we in our Ramble fell in with them again they stood still but seemed ready for another Start. One of Us now laid down the Musket and advanced towards them singly holding out some Bawbles and making Signs of Peace; In a little time they began to gain Confidence and two of them approached to meet the Gentlemen who held out the Presents the Introduction being amicably settled they all joined Us and took the Trinkets we offered them; The same Emotions of Pleasure Astonishment Curiosity & Timidity appeared in these poor Creatures as had been observed in our first Acquaintances - There were some Old and young Women in this Tribe whom the Men seemed very jealous & careful of keeping them at Distance behind some young Men who were armed with Spears Clubs & Shields apparently as a Guard to them. We could see these curious Evites peeping through the Bushes at Us and we made signs to the Men who were still with Us that We wished to give some Trinkets to the Women on which One of their Husbands or Relations (as we supposed) hollowed to them in an authoritative Tone and one of these Wood-Nymphs (as naked as Eve before she knew Shame) obeyed and came up to Us; when; we presented her with a Bracelet of blue Beads for her obliging Acquiescence; She was extremely shy & timid suffering Us very reluctantly even to touch Her; Indeed it must be merely from the Curiosity to see how they would behave on an Attempt to be familiar with them that one would be induced to touch one of Them for they are Ugly to Disgust in their Countenances and stink of Fish-Oil & Smoke most sweetly. - I must not omit mentioning a very singular Curiosity among the Men here arising from a Doubt of what Sex we are for from our not having like themselves long Beards and not seeing when they open our Shirt-Bosoms (which they do very roughly and without any Ceremony) the usual distinguishing Characteristics of Women they start Back with Amazement and give a Hum! with a significant look implying What kind of Creatures are these?! [8]   As it was not possible for Us to satisfy their Inquisitiveness in this Particular by the simple Words. Yes or No We had Recourse to the Evidence of Ocular Demonstration which made them laugh jump & Skip in an extravagant Manner. - In a Tribe of these funny curious Fellows One of them after having had His Curiosity gratified by this mode of Conviction went into the Wood and presently came forth again jumping & laughing with a Bunch of broad Leaves tied before Him by Way of a Fig-leaf Veil. - Before we took our leave of the Tribe that threw the Lance; they endeavoured to convince Us that it was not thrown by general Consent and one of them severely reprimanded the Man who threw it and several of them struck him but more to shew Us their Disapprobation of what he had done than as a Punishment for it.  During our stay at Botany Bay the Governor had made himself well acquainted with the Situation of the Land Nature of the Soil etc. etc. which he not finding so Eligible as he could Wish for the Purpose of forming a Settlement He determined before he fixed on it to visit an Inlet on the Coast about 12 Miles to the Northward of this Bay which our great Circumnavigator Captn. Cook discovered and named (in honour of one of the then Commissioners of the Navy) Port Jackson accordingly the Governor attended by a Number of Officers went in 3 Boats on this Expedition and the third day they returned gave it as their Opinion that Port Jackson was one of the most spacious and safe Harbours in the known World and said they had already fixed on a Spot on which the Settlement was to be formed. In Consequence of this Success the Idea was entirely given up of establishing a Colony at Botany Bay and three days after the Wind favouring our Designs the Fleet sailed for Port Jackson and in the Evening of the Day of our Departure We arrived and anchored in one of the many beautiful Coves which it Contains which Cove Sir the Governor has (in honour of Lord Sydney) named Sydney Cove.  Though the Description given by the Gentlemen who first visited this Port was truly luxuriant and wore the air of Exaggeration Yet they had by no means done its Beauties and Conveniences Justice for as an Harbour None that has hitherto been described equals it in Spaciousness and Safety. the Land forms a Number of pleasant Coves in most of which 6 or 7 Ships may lie secured to the Trees on Shore. It contains likewise a Number of small Islands which are covered with Trees and a variety of Herbage all which appears to be Evergreens. The Whole (in a Word) exhibits a Variety of Romantic Views all thrown together into sweet Confusion by the careless hand of Nature. [9] Well Dear Dick now I have brought you all the way to Sydney Cove I must tell you what we have done since our arrival in these Seas & in this Port - what we are doing what has happened etc. etc.  On the Evening of our Arrival (26th January 1788) The Governor & a Number of the Officers assembled on Shore where they Displayed the British Flag and each Officer with a Heart glowing with Loyalty drank his Majesty's Health and Success to the Colony. The next Day all the Artificers & an 100 of the Convicts were landed carrying with them the necessary Utensils for clearing the Ground and felling the Trees. By the Evening they were able to pitch a Number of Tents and some Officers and private Soldiers slept on shore that Evening. In the Interval of that time and the Date of this Letter the principal Business has been the clearing of Land cutting Grubbing and burning down Trees sawing up Timber & Plank for Building making Bricks hewing Stone Erecting temporary Store-houses a Building for an Hospital another for an Observatory Enclosing Farms & Gardens making temporary Huts and many other Conveniences towards the establishing of a Colony.  A small Settlement has been established on an Island which is about a Fort-night's sail from this place and named by Captn. Cook Norfolk Island the Intention of this Settlement I believe is on account of the fine Pine Trees of which the Island is full and to try what the Soil will produce.  We have discovered an Island in these Seas never before seen by our Navigators We have named it Lord Howe's Island. It affords Turtle in the Summer Season and the Supply Brig brought away 18 very fine Ones on which we feasted most luxuriously it also abounds with Birds of the Dove Species which are so stupid as to suffer us to take them off the Bushes with our Hands. As this Island is not above 4 or 5 Days sail from Port Jackson we hope to have Turtle Feasts frequently: if this be the Case I suppose We shall have a Shipload of Aldermen coming out to New South Wales.  As I mean to annex to this Letter a kind of Journal of each Day's Transaction and Occurrences I shall pass over many things in this Narrative and enter immediately on a rough Sketch of the Country of New South Wales its Inhabitants etc. etc. as far at least as We have been able to learn. Botany Bay Port Jackson  and another Inlet (8 Miles to the Northward of Port Jackson which Captn. Cook calls Broken Bay) lie between the Latitudes of 350 & 40° South. This Part of the Coast (which is as much as we have been near enough to judge of) is moderately high and regular forming small Ridges Plains easy ascents and descents. It is pretty generally clothed with Trees and Herbage Inland; The Shore is rocky and bold forming many bluff Heads and overhanging Precipices. On approaching the Land which forms Botany Bay (but I shall speak more particularly to that which forms Port Jackson ) [10] It suggests to the Imagination Ideas of luxuriant Vegetation and rural Scenery consisting of gentle risings & Depressions beautifully clothed with variety of Verdures of Evergreens forming dense Thickets & lofty Trees appearing above these again and now & then a pleasant checquered Glade opens to your View. - Here a romantic rocky craggy Precipice over which a little purling stream makes a Cascade - There a soft vivid-green shady Lawn attracts your Eye: Such are the prepossessing Appearances which the Country that forms Port Jackson presents successively to your View as You sail along it.  Happy were it for the Colony if these Appearances did not prove so delusive as upon a nearer Examination they are found to do; For though We meet with in many parts a fine black Soil luxuriantly covered with Grass & the Trees at 30 or 40 Yards distant from each other so as to resemble Meadow Land yet these Spots are frequently interrup. in their Extent by either a rocky or a sandy or a Swampy Surface crowded with large Trees and almost impenetrable from Brush-wood which being the Case it will necessarily require much Time and Labour to cultivate any considerable Space of Land together. To be sure in our Excursions Inland which I believe have not exceeded 30 or 40 Miles in any Direction we have met with a great Extent of Park-like Country and the Trees of a moderate Size & at a moderate distance from each other the Soil apparently fitted to produce any kind of Grain and clothed with extraordinarily luxuriant Grass but from its Situation and the Quantity of Wood though in a moderate Quantity in Comparison with that in other Parts. It is the general Opinion here that it would be a great Length of Time and require a vast Number of Cultivators to render it fit to produce Grain enough to supply a small Colony. About 50 Miles to the West and North West Inland there appears to be some mountainous Country and from our having seen Smoke on it now & then We are led to suppose that it is Inhabited. The Governour intends to visit these Mountains shortly and I have his permission to accompany Him in this Excursion but I don't think he will go before he has discharged and despatched all the Ships for England.  It is now so long since we have heard from home that our clothes are worn threadbare. We begin to think the mother country has entirely forsaken us. As for shoes my stock has been exhausted these six months and I have been obliged since that time to beg [and] borrow among the gentlemen for no such article was to be bought. [51] In this deplorable situation famine is staring us in the face. Two ounces of pork is the allowance of animal food for four-and-twenty hours and happy is the man that can kill a rat or crow to make him a dainty meal. We have raised some excellent vegetables but such food without the mixture of the animals does not supply strength but keeps us lax and weakly. I dined most heartily the other day on a fine dog and I hope I shall soon again have an invitation to a similar repast. The animals that were meant to stock the country are almost all butchered. Hunger will be appeased while any eatable remains.  Several of the convicts have perished by the hands of the natives by rambling too far into the woods. I accompanied two of our gentlemen on a shooting party. We penetrated near thirty miles in two days over a delightful country free from underwood when we arrived at a rapid river [the Nepean] that was not fordable. On the other side the country seemed to be in a state of romantic and uncultivated nature The landscape was finished by a range of hills that rise one above another in a very grand style to a considerable height.  The loss of the Sirius was the first cause of our being put to such short allowance being obliged to supply the party a second time from the common stock. To prevent murmuring officers and men share alike.  Our births have far exceeded our burials; and what is very remarkable women who were supposed past child-bearing and others who had not been pregnant for fifteen or sixteen years have lately become mothers.  I seize this opportunity of letting you know by a vessel that will sail very soon our wretched situation which has been occasioned by the miscarriage of our supplies and that perhaps you have not yet heard of. To give a just description of the hardships that the meanest of us endure and the anxieties suffered by the rest is more than I can pretend to. In all the Crusoe-like adventures I ever read or heard of I do not recollect anything like it; for though you may be told of the quantity of salt meat that is allowed us its quality in boiling does not make it above half as much besides other inconveniences I cannot now mention and which I think make so many of the children very unhealthy. On the same account I believe few of the sick would recover if it was not for the kindness of the Rev. Mr. Johnson whose assistance out of his own stores makes him the physician both of soul and body. All our improvements except our gardens have lately been quite at a stand neither do I think they will go on again till we have more assistance from England. God only knows what our Governor thinks of it or what word he has sent home; but for my part from the highest to the lowest I see nobody that is so contented as they were at first. We fear the troops and they are not contented with seeing those who live better than themselves nor with us who live worse; and I think if the savages knew that we were as short of powder as we are of provisions they would soon be more daring than they are. We have heard that some convicts at home who might have been pardoned for capital crimes have chosen their former sentence rather than come here; and which though it was contradicted we cannot help thinking is true. We cannot tell if they have heard of our Situation how it could be unless from the Cape or Norfolk Island which we hear no more from than from England. We had some Jews and Dutchmen from thence that would have settled if they had thought it worth while. I should now be very glad of the things I refused to take with me when I came from London and hope you will venture to send Some needles and blue thread; for as the cloaths are all wore out that we brought from home we are mostly in our Woolwich dresses and the women look like gypsies. But to be serious. We have had so many disappointments about arrivals &c. that the sullen reserve of superiority has only increased our apprehensions; and some of the most ignorant have no other idea than that they are to be left by the troops and the shipping to perish by themselves! [54] And really if you was to see with what ardent expectations some of the poor wretches watch an opportunity of looking out to sea or the tears that are often shed upon the infants at the breast you must have feelings that otherwise you never could have any experience of.  Would I could draw an eternal shade over the remembrance of this miserable part of our voyage - miserable not so much in itself as rendered so by the villany oppression and shameful peculation of the masters of two of the transports. The bark I was on board of was indeed unfit from her make and size to be sent so great a distance; if it blew but the most trifling gale she was lost in the waters of which she shipped so much; that from the Cape the unhappy wretches the convicts were considerably above their waists in water and the men of my company whose berths were not so far forward were nearly up to the middles. In this situation they were obliged for the safety of the ship to be pen'd down; but when the gales abated no means were used to purify the air by fumigations no vinegar was applied to rectify the nauseous steams issuing from their miserable dungeon. Humanity shudders to think that of nine hundred male convicts embarked in this fleet three hundred and seventy are already dead and four hundred and fifty are landed sick and so emaciated and helpless that very few if any of them can be saved by care or medicine so that the sooner it pleases God to remove them the better it will be for this colony. [...]. The irons used upon these unhappy wretches were barbarous. The contractors had been in the Guinea trade and had put on board the same shackles used by them in that trade which are made with a short bolt instead of chains that drop between the legs and fasten with a bandage about the waist like those at the different gaols; these bolts were not more than three-quarters of a foot in length so that they could not extend either leg from the other more than an inch or two at most; thus fettered it was impossible for them to move but at the risk of both their legs being broken. Inactivity at sea is a sure bane as it invites the scurvy equal to if not more than salt provisions; to this they were consigned as well as a miserable pittance of provisions altho' the allowance by Government is ample; even when attacked by disease their situations were not altered neither had they any comforts administered. The slave trade is merciful compared with what I have seen in this fleet; in that it is the interests of the masters to preserve the healths and lives of their captives they having a joint benefit with the owners; in this the more they can withhold from the unhappy wretches the more provisions they have to dispose of at a foreign market and the earlier in the voyage they die the longer they can draw the deceased's allowance to themselves; for I fear few of them are honest enough to make a just return of the dates of their deaths to their employers. [111] It therefore highly concerns Government to lodge in future a controlling power in each ship over these low-lifed barbarous masters to keep them honest instead of giving it to one man (an agent) who can only see what is going forward in his ship.  My feelings never have been so wounded as in this voyage so much so that I never shall recover my accustomed vivacity and spirits; and had I been empowered it would have been the most grateful task in my life to have prevented so many of my fellow-creatures so much misery and death.  We arrived here safe after a long voyage in very good health thanks to our good agent on board and the gentleman in England who sent us out as we had everything that we could expect from them and all our provisions were good. We landed here 223 women and twelve children; only three women died and one child. Five or six were born on board the ship; they had great care taken of them and baby linnen and every necessary fro them were ready made to be out on.  The greatest part of the women were immediately sent to Norfolk Island a place about 100 miles from here but very bad for shipping; there is no place to land but in fine weather. The Sirius man-of-war was lost at this place about six or seven months ago when she carried some men and women from here. She landed them all safe but lost almost all their provisions.  This place was in a very starving condition before we arrived and on allowance of only 2lb. of flour and 2lb. of pork for each man for a week and these were almost starved and could not work but three hours in the day; they had no heart and the ground won't grow anything only in spots here and there. There is a place called Rose Hill about twenty miles from this where they say there are four cornfields but it does not grow much wheat; we are now much in want of almost everything; we have hardly any cloaths; but since the Scarborough Neptune and Surprize arrived we have had a blanket and a rug given us and we hope to have some cloaths as the Justinian a ship that came from London with provisions [is] bringing some cloth and linen and we are to make the cloaths.  Oh! if you had but seen the shocking sight of the poor creatures that came out in the three ships it would make your heart bleed; they were almost dead very few could stand and they were obliged to fling them as you would goods and hoist them out of the ships they were so feeble; and they died ten or twelve of a day when they first landed; but some of them are getting better. [6] There died in their [this] way on board the Neptune 183 men and 12 women and in the Scarborough 67 men and in the Surprize 85. They were not so long as we were in coming here but they were confined and had bad victuals and stinking water. The Governor was very angry and scolded the captains a great deal and I heard intended to write to London about it for I heard him say it was murdering them. It to be sure was a melancholy sight. What a difference between us and them. God bless our good agent (I don't mean the captain). We had no reason to complain against him for anything; all our provisions and cloaths were good.  I don't think I ever shall get away from this place to come again to see you without an order from England for some of the men's times were out and they went and spoke to the Governor of it and told him that they would not work. He told them he could not send them home without orders from London and if they would not work they should have nothing to eat so they almost all went again to work except ten who were saucy and the Governor ordered then a good flogging; but all that came from London in the First Fleet time will be out in less than two years' time. I hope that you will try to get an order for me that I may once more see you all.  The Rev. R. Johnson to Mr Thornton  THE LADY JULIANA brought out from England two hundred and twenty-six women convicts out of which she had only buried five though they had been on board for about fifteen months. The case was much otherwise with the other three ships.  There were on board - Died on board Sick landed  The Neptune 520 163 269  The Scarborough 252 68 96  The Surprize 211 42 121  The short calculation or account given me will account for what I am going to relate.  Have been on board these different ships. Was first on board the Surprize. Went down amongst the convicts where I beheld a sight truly shocking to the feelings of humanity a great number of them laying some half and others nearly quite naked without either bed or bedding unable to turn or help themselves. Spoke to them as I passed along but the smell was so offensive that I could scarcely bear it. I then went on board the Scarborough; proposed to go down amongst them but was dissuaded from it by the captain. The Neptune was still more wretched and intolerable and therefore never attempted it. Some of these unhappy people died after the ships came info the harbour before they could be taken on shore - part of these had been thrown into the harbour and their dead bodies cast upon the shore and were seen laying naked upon the rocks. Took an occasion to represent this to his Excellency in consequence of which immediate orders were sent on board that those who died on board should be carried to the opposite north shore and be buried.  The landing of these people was truly affecting and shocking; great numbers were not able to walk nor to move hand or foot; such were slung over the ship side in the same manner as they would sling a cask a box or anything of that nature. Upon their being brought up to the open air some fainted some died upon deck and others in the boat before they reached the shore. When come on shore many were not able to walk to stand or to stir themselves in the least hence some were led by others. [20] Some creeped upon their hands and knees and some were carried upon the backs of others.  The next thing to be considered was what was to be done with all these miserable objects. Besides the sick that were in the hospital previous to the arrival of the fleet there were now landed not less than four hundred and eighty-six sick; but the hospital erected here is not sufficient to hold above sixty or eighty at most; what then must be done with the rest? It was fortunate that a new hospital was brought out in the Justinian. This was set up with all speed; a great number of tents in all ninety or a hundred were pitched. In each of these tents there were about four sick people; here they lay in a most deplorable situation. At first they had nothing to lay upon but the damp ground many scarcely a rag to cover them. Grass was got for them to lay upon and a blanket given amongst four of them. Have been amongst them for hours may say days together going from one tent to another from one person to another and you may imagine that what I here beheld was not a little affecting. The number landed sick were near five hundred most at site hospital and some few dispersed here and there throughout the camp.  The misery I saw amongst them is unexpressible; many were not able to turn or even to stir themselves and in this situation were covered over almost with their own nastiness their heads bodies cloths blanket all full of filth and lice. Scurvy was not the only nor the worst disease that prevailed amongst them (one man I visited this morning I think I may say safely had 10000 lice upon his body and bed); some were exercised with violent fevers and others with a no less violent purging and flux. The complaints they had to make were no less affecting to the ear than their outward condition was to the eye. The usage they met with on hoard according to their own story was truly shocking; sometimes for days nay for a considerable time together they have been to the middle in water chained together hand and leg even the sick not exempted - -nay many died with the chains upon them. Promises entreaties were all in vain and it was not till a very few days before they made harbour that they were released out of irons. The greatest complaints by far were from those persons who had come in the Neptune. No wonder that they should be so afflicted; no wonder to hear them groaning and crying and making the most bitter lamentations. Endeavoured to comiserate them under their afflictions pitied them encouraged them to hope many of them would soon recover; that every indulgence every attention would be paid to them; prayed with them and gave some books amongst those of them that were able to read.  You will perhaps. he astonished when I tell you a little of the villainy (If these wretched people. Some would complain they had no jackets shirts or trowsers and begged that I would intercede for them. Some by this means have had two three four- - nay one loan not less than six different slops given him which he would take an opportunity to sell to some others and then make the same complaints and entreaties. When any of them were near dying and had something given them as bread or lillipie (flour and water boiled together) or any other necessaries the person next to him or others would catch the bread &c. out of his hand and with an oath say that he was going to die and therefore it would be of no service to him. [21] No sooner would the breath be out of any of their bodies than others would watch them and strip them entirely naked. Instead of alleviating the distresses of each other the weakest were sure to go to the wall. In the nighttime which at this time is very cold and especially this would be felt in the tents where they had nothing but grass to lay on and a blanket amongst four of them he that was strongest of the four would take the whole blanket to himself and leave the rest quite naked.  These three last ships have now been here about six weeks. In this time you may suppose there have been great alterations among the sick: a good many are so far recovered that they have got to work: a great number have died; have buried not less than eighty-six since they landed - eighty-four convicts one child and one soldier.  Mary and Ann transport Plymouth  2nd March 1791.  Our departure from Newgate was so Sudden it was utterly impossible to leave you even a single word. We had not the least notice of it till four o'clock in the morning; and before we could well get the better of the shock three hundred and nineteen of us were conveyed to the river-side. Dreadful reflection! The unfortunate wretches were all of them loaded with irons and chained together except me who was permitted to walk unfettered between the Sheriff and Mr. Akerman whose humanity to me will long be remembered.  You may be sure I have often pictured to myself the state of your mind upon finding me dragged away without our seeing one another at parting! But such are laws of our country! It has however given me infinitely more pain and misery than the punishment itself. [56] The many years' endearment the fond affections of a father and all the flattering hopes of a reclaimed life in case I had been fortunate enough to have excaped on my hate trial crowded before me and made me anxious indeed to have remained with you and my dear child and to have continued an useful member of society - at least to have bid a short adieu to you and the public. With respect to the prospect before me sad and distressing as it may appear all may ultimately be for our good. With the best of hearts and best of dispositions there is God knows an overbearing fate that counteracts our best designs and makes us act (that is pickpockets) in spite of ourselves. But no more of that. It is now too late for me to reason.  Sydney Port Jackson N.S. Wales March 7th 1791. At length we have a prospect of communication once more with our friends by letter. The Gorgon so long wished for and so long expected is not yet arrived and by her unaccountable delay has involved us all in the most mysterious uncertainty and clouded our minds with gloomy apprehensions for her safety. I hope you will have rec'd my letter dated August 1790 which I sent by the Scarborough transport by way of China.  I told you of the unfortunate loss of the Syrius a King's ship that had been stationed here from the first settling of the Colony. She was wrecked on Norfolk Island. The ship's company who all escaped with life but not altogether without hurt remained on the Island and the Supply a small brig that sailed from this place with the Syrius returned with the news of her sad fate.  The provisions of the Colony at that time being at a very low ebb it was deemed necessary to take some step lest supply might not arrive from England in time to prevent a threatened famine. Every individual of this Colony was reduced to a very short allowance and the little brig was dispatched to Batavia under the command of Lieutenant Ball there to take up a Dutch ship and purchase a certain quantity of provisions for this place with which it was to be freighted and dispatched hither with all possible expedition. A few weeks after the Supply sailed the first ship Lady Juliana arrived and brought an account of the loss of the Guardian occasioned by falling in with islands of ice. The ship arrived on the 3rd June and came timely to prevent very great distress. [121]   On the 21st June the Justiana arrived a store ship and on the 29th our fleet was safely anchored in the Cove. As all these ships were under contract to return by way of China to take home Tea for the East India Company and there being at that time no ship stationed here no way was left to convey a relief to the inhabitants of Norfolk Island but by ordering some of those ships to touch there on their way to China. The Justiana and Surprize received orders for that purpose reimbarked a certain proportion of provision for the island. We had every hope that the supplies might arrive in time to prevent any fatal consequences; yet as we could have no certainty of that and till some ship should first arrive here that might be dispatched to know the particulars of their fate our minds were never perfectly easy on their account. At that time there was with the Syrius's company the Marines and convicts near 700 persons on the Island and I can truly say that for upwards of six months I never passed a day without reflecting on them with pain and anxiety. Week after week stole away and month after month with little diversity. Each succeeding sunset produced among us wild and vague conjectures of what could be the cause of the Gorgon's delay and still we remained unsatisfied - indeed all our surmises have nearly worn themselves out and we are at a loss for new ones - time the great resolver of all events alone can determine this seeming mystery to us.  On the 20th October a general cry prevailed through the Garrison of the Flags being hoisted (which is a signal of a ship appearing off the Harbour). I was preparing myself to receive Mrs. Grose and Mrs. Paterson being fully persuaded it was the Gorgon however I was soon undeceived as it proved to be the Supply from Batavia; she had a very quick passage but had experienced a very sickly one.  On the 21st of January the Supply was sent to bring hither the Syrius ship's company and learn the state of affairs at that place. She returned on the 25th of February with the officers and men in health and brought a good account of the health of every individual left behind. This circumstance removed some considerable anxiety from our minds; but it proved our fears had been but too well grounded as when the Supply arrived they had not more than ten days' provisions in the store at a full allowance and from the 14th of last May till the 18th of July they were reduced to the scanty pittance of 3 lbs. of flour and 1.5 lbs. of beef for a week. [122] At this time a most merciful relief came to their assistance. It had been observed on a high hill in the island (which they have named Mount Pitt) that many seabirds frequented it. An endeavour was made to take some of them which was successful and by attending more particularly to the time of their appearance and their favourite haunts they were discovered in the greatest abundance. It was the season in which they laid their eggs and both birds and eggs were taken in such quantities as occasioned the small allowance of meat they had issued before to be stopped and however wonderful it may appear to you yet true it is that those birds for many weeks were the chief subsistence of seven hundred men and they were so easily taken that after sunset it was impossible to walk on the Mount without treading on them and sometimes towards evening they have been observed hovering in the air in such innumerable flocks as considerably to exclude the light from admiring spectators. But now the melancholy truth of their decrease became more and more apparent. Their flights were directed to other quarters and at length few remained. But before hope was quite extinguished a ship appeared and brought them a long expected supply. Believe me my dear friend that in writing these faithful traits of the pitiable situation of the inhabitants of Norfolk Island a chill seems to overpower my faculties; my mind has so truly entered into their distresses that a dread comes over me which I am unable to describe but it is succeeded by so firm a reliance on the merciful dispensations of an Almighty whose hand I think we may here trace without presumption that I can only admire in silence.  I shall begin my relation now of things more immediately occurring to myself.  We passed our time away many weeks cheerfully if not gaily - gaily indeed it could not be said to be. On my first landing everything was new to me every Bird every Insect Flower etc.; in short all was novelty around me and was noticed with a degree of eager curiosity and perturbation that after a while subsided into that calmness I have already described. [123] In my former letter I gave you the character of Mr. Dawes and also of Captain Tench. Those gentlemen and a few others are the chief among whom we visit. Indeed we are in the habit of intimacy with Captain Tench that there are few days pass that we do not spend some part of together. Mr. Dawes we do not see so frequently. He is so much engaged with the stars that to mortal eyes he is not always visible. I had the presumption to become his pupil and meant to learn a little of astronomy. It is true I have had many pleasant walks to his house (something less than half a mile from Sydney) have given him much trouble in making orreries and explaining to us the general principles of the heavenly bodies but I soon found I had mistaken my abilities and blush at my error. Still I wanted something to fill up a certain vacancy in my time which could neither be done by writing reading or conversation. To the first two I did not feel myself always inclined and the latter was not in my power having no female friend to unbend my mind to nor a single woman with whom I could converse with any satisfaction to myself the Clergyman's wife being a person in whose society I could reap neither profit or pleasure. These considerations made me still anxious to learn some easy science to fill up the vacuum of many a solitary day and at length under the auspices of Mr. Dawes I have made a small progress in Botany. No country can exhibit a more copious field for botanical knowledge than this. I am arrived so far as to be able to class and order all common plants. I have found great pleasure in my study; every walk furnished me with subjects to put in practice that Theory I had before gained by reading but alas my botanical pursuits were most unwelcomely interrupted by Mr. Macarthur being attacked by a severe illness. In December he got better and in January we removed into a more convenient house.  I shall now tell you of another resource I had to fill up some of my vacant hours. Our new house is ornamented with a pianoforte of Mr. Worgan's he kindly means to leave it with me and now under his direction I have begun a new study but I fear without my Master I shall not make any great proficiency. [124] I am told however that I have done wonders in being able to play off 'God Save the King' and Foot's minuet besides that of reading the notes with great facility. In spite of musick I have not altogether lost sight of my botanical studies. I have only been precluded from pursuing that study by the intense heat of the weather which has not permitted me to walk much during the summer. I have seen very little rain since my arrival indeed I do not think we have had a week's rain in the whole time the consequence of which is our garden produces nothing all is burnt up; indeed the soil must be allowed to be most wretched and totally unfit for growing European productions though you would scarcely believe this as the face of the ground at this moment when it is in its native state is flourishing even to luxuriance producing fine Shrubs Trees and Flowers which by their lively tints afford a most agreeable landscape. Beauty I have heard from some of my unlettered countrymen is but skin deep. I am sure the remark holds good in New South Wales where all the beauty is literally on the surface but I believe I must allow it has symetry of form also to recommend it as the ground in all the parts that have been discovered is charmingly turned and diversified by agreeable vallies and gently rising hills; but still these beauties are all exterior.  Of my walkes round Sydney the longest has not extended beyond three miles and that distance I have I believe only ventured upon twice: once to a farm which Captain Nepean has for his Company to which we sent our tea equipage and drank tea on the turf and once to a hill situated between this and Botany Bay where I could command a prospect of that famous spot. Nor do I think there is any probability of my seeing much of the inland country until it is cleared as beyond a certain distance round the Colony there is nothing but native paths very narrow and very incommodious. The natives are certainly not a very gallant set of people who take pleasure in escorting their ladies. No; they suffer them humbly to follow Indian file like. As I am now speaking of the natives I must give you an account of how we stand with them. In the winter 1789 (which you will recollect is summer in England) a dreadful small pox was discovered amongst the natives. Amongst the unhappy objects that were discovered was a Boy and Girl. [125] These were brought in and from the humanity of the Clergyman who took the Girl and of the principal surgeon Mr. White who took the Boy they were both saved. After they began to learn English and to make us understand them it was immagined from their communication that if a man or two could be brought to reside with us that some valuable information might be obtained respecting the interior parts of the country. With this view the Governor left no means untried to effect an intimacy with them but every endeavour of that sort as before proved ineffectual. They accept of his presents as children do playthings; just to amuse them for a moment and then throw them away disregarded. Despairing to gain their confidence by fair means the Governor ordered that two men should be taken by force. This was done; the poor fellows l am told exhibited the strongest marks of terror and consternation at the proceeding believing they were certainly meant to be sacrificed. When they were taken to the Governor's house and immediately cleaned and clothed their astonishment at everything they saw was amazing. A new world was unfolded to their view at once. For some days they were much dejected but it soon gave way to cheerfulness. They were then admitted to the Governor's table and in a little time ate and drank everything that was given them. They now walked about the settlement as they liked only with a man who was appointed to attend them that they might not escape into the woods but as they showed no apparent inclination to do that the vigilance of their keeper by degrees abated which the older of the two (named Coleby) soon observed and in a very artful manner one night made his escape. The one who remained and called himself Banoyloog till May 1790 and then took himself off without any known reason having been treated with the most uniform kindness and appeared highly pleased with our people and manners taking it a great compliment to be called White Man. On the 7th Sept. Captain Nepean and several other Gentlemen went down the Harbour in a boat with an intention of proceeding to Broken Bay to take a view of the Hawkesbury River. In their way they put in at Manly Cove a place so called from the spirited behaviour of the natives there at the Governor's first landing. [126] At this time about 200 natives were assembled feeding on a whale that had been driven on shore. As they discovered no hostile intentions our party having arms went up to them. Nanberry was in the boat and was desired to inquire fur Bannylong and Coleby when behold both gentlemen appeared and advancing with the utmost confidence asked in broken English for all their old friends at Sydney. The Governor lost no time but as soon as he was acquainted with the above circumstances ordered a boat and accompanied by Mr. Collins the Judge Advocate and a Lieut. Waterhouse of the Navy repaired to Manly Cove. He landed by himself unarmed in order to show no violence was intended.  Bannylong approached and shook hands with the Governor but Coleby had before left the spot. No reason was asked why Bannylong had left us. He appeared very happy and thankful for what was given him requesting an hatchet and some other things which the Governor promised to bring him the next day. Mr. Collins and Mr. Waterhouse now joined him and several natives also came forward. They continued to converse with them with much seeming friendship until they had insensibly wandered some distance from the boat and very imprudently none of the Gentlemen had the precaution to take a gun in their hand. This the Governor perceiving deemed it prudent to retreat and after assuring that he would remember his promise told him he was going. At that moment an old man advanced whom Bannylong said was his friend and wished the Governor to take notice of him. At this he approached the old man with his hand extended when on a sudden the savage started back and snatched up spear from the ground and poised it to throw the Governor seeing the danger told him in their tongue that it was bad and still advanced when with a mixture of horror and intrepidity the native discharged the spear with all his force at the Governor. It entered above his collarbone and came out at his back nine inches from the entrance taking an oblique direction. The natives from the rocks now poured in their spears in abundance so that it was with the utmost difficulty and the greatest good fortune that no other hurt was received in getting the Governor into the boat. As soon as they returned to this place you may believe an universal solicitude prevailed as the danger of the wound could by no means be ascertained until the spear was extracted and this was not done before his Excellency had caused some papers to be arranged lest the consequences might prove fatal which happily it did not for on drawing out the spear it was found that no vital part had been touched. [127] The Governor having a good habit of bodily health the wound perfectly healed in the course of a few weeks. Since then a convict game keeper has been killed by a spear but it seems in some measure to have been owing to his own imprudence. Bannylong came many times to see the Governor during his confinement and expressed great sorrow but the reason why the mischief was done could not be learnt since that period the natives visit us every day more or less.  My spirits are at this time low very low to-morrow we loose some valuable members of our small society and some very good friends. In so small a society we sensibly feel the loss of every member more particularly those that are endeared to us by acts of kindness and friendship. From this circumstance and my former letters you may be led to question my happiness but this much I can with truth add for myself that since I have had the powers of reason and reflection I never was more sincerely happy than at this time. It is true I have some wishes unaccomplished but when I consider this is not a state of perfection I am abundantly content.  THE FOLLOWING PARTICULARS ARE EXTRACTED FROM A LETTER OF A Convict at New South Wales and received a few days since by his Mother in this city.  "Rendering myself during our passage from England useful to the Captain by making several articles of Cloathes for him I had soon the good fortune to be released from my irons; and on my arrival at our place of settlement was appointed by the Captain's kind recommendation to the Governor Master Taylor over the rest of the convicts of that trade; and having made the Governor two coats he was well pleased with my work that he said he would be a friend to me and place a confidence in me from a good character given of me by the Captain of the transport ship; and which promise he has been good as to fulfil towards me.  In consequence of this good luck I work for all the Gentlemen here and made a coat for the Judge who resides at Sydney the situation of which place is fine and healthy but almost entirely covered with wood. Little will grow here for want of rain; for it has rained but very trifling for the last seventeen months; the corn therefore is scorched.  No fruit whatever grows here - when we arrived here there was not a sheep or cow in the Island; but now there are 30 or 40 sheep from the Cape and 18 or 20 cows. Every thing is very scarce. The people here before we came had only seven ounces of flour a day. Tobacco was sold from our ship on arrival at a guinea a pound and which was afterwards sold here at £3-10-0 per pound - flour at 1 / 6 a pound and soap at 7 / - a pound.  Our allowance at present is eight pounds of flour a week four pounds of pork one week and seven pounds of beef another.  I have got a good garden planted with Indian corn - potatoes - greens - pumpkins melons and tobacco; and Will Butler who is a settler here has got 40 acres of land and his wife 20 and is very well to do - he made me a present of three chickens. The price of a laying hen here is three dollars - a chicken a month old 1 / - - and the price of other things at this present time - pork 6d. per pound - potatoes 4d.  Barrington is made Head Constable here. I am fortunate to fall into so good a way; for the men in general who do the work of felling trees and burning them in order to clear the ground are obliged to work from sunrise till sunset excepting the interval of rest from eleven o'clock till two in the afternoon - but we have Saturday and Sunday to ourselves.  As to Botany Bay - it is given up as they can make no good of it the ground is so bad. At this place the town is a mile long - there is a house for the Governor and a great number of huts - We have four different settlements - viz; Sidney Cove - Rose-hill - and two back settlements which are not yet named. I am not in the least afraid but I shall come home again as some of the men are already going home in the ships that we came in. The Natives are pretty peacable here - but if they catch any of our people in the woods they will kill them.  The only thing we have to drink is sweet tea that grows in the woods - Rum is 24 / per gallon and porter 1 / 3 per bottle but very scarce."  "Rose-hill November 11th 1791."  octb 8th 1792  my Dear aunt  we arrived here on the 7th and i hope it will answer better than we expected for i write this on Board of ship but it looks a pleasant place - Enough. we shall but have 4 pair of trouser to make a week and we shall have a pound of rice a week and 4 pound of pork besides Greens and other vegetaibles. the tell me i am for life wich the Governor told me i was but for 7 years wich Grives me very much to think of it but I will watch every oppertunity to get away in too or 3 years / But i will make myself as happy as i can In my present and unhappy situation. i will Give you Further satisfaction when i Get there and is settled / I am well and hearty as ever I was in my life. I Desire you will answer me by some ship that is Coming and let me know how the Children is and all inquireing frinds. so i must Conclude because we are in a hurry to go a shore. remember My Love to my sister and aunt wamsley and My cousins so no more at pressent from your undutifull neice Mary Haydock. Mr Scot Took 2 Ginnues of me and said he would get me My Libberty. with my sister has been very ungood To me so I must never see you again /   I Ordd My Rum to be Stopd.  Saturday May the 19th 1787 at 3 Gills day  Serjt. Hume's Wifes Stoptd. Sunday 20th May & his Stoptd Sunday 27th May 87  by his Owne Order   54co Michl Redmans Wifes Grog Was Ordrd to be Stopt by Lieut Maxwell Monday  Tuesday - May 21st 1787 - Which Was Complyd. With the 22d. May 87.  ordd. to have her Grog 23d. June 1787  It was After the Centinals Was Relevd. for Eight OClock  That. Mr Maxwell Ordrd Michl Redman a Centinal to take his great Coat off Which Redman Repld. he Was Sentry [...] [1]   Monday 14th The Hyena Frigate Towed the Charllotte Transport into the Fleet. As She Was A Great Way a Stern All the Fleet in Sight With little Wind. But fare Down Channel  Tuesday 15th Seen the Ediston Light House Distance 3 Leaugs  Wednessday 16th at PM it began to blow fresh as Wee Cleard the Channel. & Contineud till Next Morning;  Thursday 17th Moderate Weather; Wind foul; - My Wife Was Sea Sick from the 14th to the 17th at. AM; A Great Number of the Woman on Board being Sea Sick -   Friday 18th At P.M. it began to blow fresh from the Southward  Saturday 19th Wind Contineud fresh With Rain; ye Fleet. All in sight. -   Sunday 20th Fare weather With a fresh Brees At. West Same day at P.M. the Hyena Friget parted the fleet & Returnd to England & Our Capt Was Ordrd to Send One Mrs Holt. a Midshipman Wife Belonging to the Sirus On Board the Hyena for a pasage to England - The Commadore Ordd 2 Male Convicts from the Scarbro Transpt. on Bd the Prince of Wales As the was the Ring leaders of a bought Number that intended to Rise & take the Ship -   Monday 21st Fare Weather 1787 [2] [...]   Monday 28th Do being in Latud 36°.8'. N Do   Tuesday 29th the having No Observation on Bd Ps of Wales The Commadore Ordrd the Supply to Go. A Head to Luck out for Land As Wee Ware About the Latud of Medara - Wind Fare   Wednessy 30th Seen the Island of Madera at. 6 A.M  Thursday 31st Seen the Island of Gomera Bearing S.W. 7 or 8 Leauges Dis - little Wind Gomera leys in North Latd 2815' Lon. 17°.8' Subd to Spain - [3]   1787 At. Sea  Friday June 1st At. 9 OClock AM. Owr Dms Wife Was Delevered of a Male Child - Little or No Wind   Saturday 2d Being in Latd. 29°.46' North. Had Little or No Wind  Sunday 3d Seen the land of Tenareef Erley in the Morning; - Came to An Anker at 7 Oclock in the Road Sted of Santa Cruse in the Eving & like Wise All the fleet After a pasage of three Weeks from England - At Tenareef -   Monday 4th The Long Boat Was Got Out. Nothg Extrordry; - peack Bearing W.BS. A 12  Tuesday 5th I And My Wife Went on Shore At Santa Cruse With leave from Governer Phillip -   Wednessdy 6th Nothg Ex  Thursday 7th The Spanards had a Rejoising Day & Fired Several Guns On the Occasion  Friday 8th Notg Ex.  Saturday 9th A Court Martial Was Held On Bd the Alexander; On A Marine - Conserg Liquor. Aquited -   The Fleet having Compld thier Watring &c. the Commadore Made a Signel A Blue Flag With a Yellow Cross At. the Main Topgalt. Mast head With a Gun for No Boats to Go On Shore On Ane Account - A Convict that Made his Escape from the Alexr Transpt At. this port. Was taken by a Corpl & Six prts   june 1787 Prince of Wales At Tenareef  Saturday 9th Got. Our Long Boat in. & Everey thing in Rediness for Sea -    I Wrought. to My Frend Mooney & to My Mother in law in England By A Brig Bound for London  Sunday 10th The fleet proseeded to Sea At. 5 OClock in the Morng  Prince of Wales at Sea With the Fleet. - Little or No Wind Remains Between the Islands of Tenareef & Grand Cannarey Which is About. 15 Leagues a part.  Monday 11th Between the 2 Islands  Tuesday 12th Fare Wind  Wednesy 13 Nothing Ex  Thursday 14 Do Do  Friday 15 Crossd. the Tropick of Canser About 2 Oclock in the Afternoon & the Usual Seremoney Was performd With those that had Not Crossd. The Line before - Which Was Ducking Lathering With tar Grase &c and Shavd.  N.B. the Seamen performd this Seremony But the Marines Would Not be Allowd to Do it ordr Mr Maxwell Our 1st Lieut of Marines -   Saturday 16 A Strong N.E. Trade Wind  Sunday 17 Nothg Ex  Munday 18 At. 8 OClock AM the Supply Brig [5]   June Munday 18th Made the Signal for Land - The Commadore Made the Signal for the fleet to prepare to Ankor At. P.M Seen the Island of May  Tuesday 19th Past. the Is of Mayo one of the Cape De Verd Islands - A.M Seen the Is of St Jago Came Close to the Bay of Prince Supert But. the Commadore Would. Not Go in Wee All Expected that he Would - At. P.M. Stood A Way to the Southward All the fleet in Sight. -   Wednessy 20th In Latd. B.O. 13°.17' N. Wind E.BN the Fleet Steering South. -   Thursday 21st Notg Ex.  Friday 22d. Do  Satarday 23d. Little Wind With Rain  Sunday 24th Mr Maxwell & I Went on Board the Sirrus; With Arthr Dougherty & Robt Ryan; Whome Lt. Maxwell Compld. of for being Insolent & Disobedience of Orders; the two Marins Was left on Board the Sirus as prisoners that Night -   Monday 25th Major Ross With proper Officers Came on Board the Prince of Wales With the prisoners for a Court Martial - Turn [6]   June 25th Monday Dougherty Was Aquited Ryan Was Sentinced to Receve 300 lashes Which Was Immeditly put in Exacution.  But he Recvd only 175 - By thier Accounts on Board the Sirus this Day the Was in Longatd 22°.50' West; - Latd. 8°.34' N  Tuesday 26th In those Latads Little Wind With Calms & Squals of Rain With Thunder & Litning At. Times -   Wednessy 27th the Cheef Mate Caught a Shark The Same Day A Young Kid that Was On Board Went. in so the Oven & All though the Oven Door Was Open it Did Not Come Out But Remaind till it Was Burnt to Death  Thursday 28th Squals of Rain With the Wind At South. - Latd. 7°.33'  Friday 29th Wind South. Latd. 7°.27'. the Comdr Spoke to A Portaguies Ship -   Saturday 30th The fleet. in Sight With the Portaguies Ship in Company Wee have Not heard on Bd the Pr of Wales Where the Portaguies Ship is Bound to As Yet. - Being the Last of the Month. parted Mesing With Serjt Hume On Acct of His Wife having Some Objection -   July Sunday 1st One of the Convicts Was Delevd of a Female Child at. 4 AM. [7]   Sunday July 1st Latd. B.O. 6°.49'. N. fleet in Sight. With the Portaguies Ship & Wind at. South Westerly  Monday 2d. AM she Portaguies Ship parted Compy With the Fleet; - Fare Weathr  Tuesday 3d Notg Ex Wind Fowle  Wednsdy 4. Latd. B.O. 6°.16'. N Fare Weathr One of the Seaman Struck 2 Dolphin Wind S.S.W. -   Thursday 5th Latd. B.O. 6°.l'. N. the Signal Was Made. for the fleet. to Bee put On An Allowance of three pints Water day  Friday 6th Latd. B.O. 5°.39' N. At. P.M. the Supply Spoke to A English Sloop Bound to Folkners Islands   Saturday 7th Nothg Ex Latd. 5?7'. N. Wind fowl  Sunday 8th Latd 4°-45'. N. Seen A Ship. Supposed to be from the Coast of Guinea Bound to the West Indies By the Course She Steer'd -   Monday 9th Latd 4°.5'. N  Tuesday 10th Latd 3°.34' Arthr Doughertys Wife Was Delevered of a Boy -   Wednesdy 11th Latd 3°.6' N. Cap! Ball of the Supply Brig Came on Board And took one of the Apprentices on Board the Brig for Stricking the Second Mate. -   Thursday 12th Capt Ball. Came on Board With James Porter the. Aprenticee after. [8]   Thursday July 12th Being on Board the Sirius Where he Recvd One Doz Lashes  Davis's Child that. Was Born May 9th 87 - Died - L. 2°.36' N  Friday 13th Latd 1°.22'. N - Wind SE  Saturday 14th Latd 0°.22'. N. Longd  Serjt Kennady being Disguised in Liqr And Abusing Seviral people in the Ship; About 4 or 5 OClock in the Afternoon he jumpd. Down the Main Hach Way Upon My Wife As She Sat at Work Just By the Lader. Which Caused a Great Fright. And Like Wise Hurted her Greatley. In Consaquence of this & other Abuses Serjt. Kennady Was Confd. With A Centinal Pleased Over him.  Same Day About. 10 OClock at Night. Wee Crossd the Eaquater. In About. 20°. West. Longd  Sunday 15th The Usual Seramoney Was paid By the Seamen On Crossg the Line; Latd. 0°.26'. South Mr Maxwell Wrought. for a Court. Martial for Serjt Kennady Respecting Corpl Goughf. And Other Irregularities; By the the Supplyes Boat. As the Surgon Came On Board to. [9] [...]   Friday 20th Latd 6 55' S. Our Ship Not Sealing So Well As When Wee Left. Englang. She Was so Leeward And a Stern With all; in Consaquence of this the Commadore Sent the Supply Brig to Let us Know that he was Greatly Displeased that. Wee Could Not Keep to Windward - In this part I seen An Extrordnery Fish the like I Did Not. See Before; - As I Sat on the Spritsale Yard this fish Represented its Self; - Which I. Expected to Strick At. With the Greans But. Could Not. Get a Stroke at it  Apereed to be about 9 foot. Long This fish I Could Not find the Name of All though Some Experienced Seamen See it that. had been often in those Sea's -   Saturday 21st Lard. 7°.59'. S. Wind E. Course South. -   Sunday 22d. Latd. 9°.3'. One of the Seamen Struck Three Beneta the Capt Sent. Me Half of One Which Made A Good Dinner for the Mess. - [10]   July. 23d Monday No Observation; Heavey Showrs of Rain. With fresh Breses. at. E.N.E Course South. BE Fleet in Sight  Tuesday 24th Latd BO. I 1°.51' S. Fair Weathr The Carpenter Being Imployd A Caulking the Jolly Boat on the Booms In Canting of Her She Slipt of & one of the Female Convicts Recvd. a Violent Blow on she Head. About one OClock PM of Which She Died 30th Inst.  Wednessday 25th Latd 13°.27' S. Longd 26°.15' W  Thursday 26 Latd 15°. 12' 5; - Longd. - Wind E.B.N. Course S 1/2 W. Squals Wish Rain At. PM the Alexr Transpt hove all Back in a Squall for She lost A Man Over Board; (Reptd by Suply Brig; 28th July)  Friday 27th Latd 16°.41' 5 Wind S.E.BE Cours S.B.W Squalls With Rain Fleet in Sight Verey Heavey Squals in the Night -   Saturday 28th Latd 18°. 10'. South. Commadore Bore A Way SW. for Rio; Supply Brig Sent By the Commadore to Let us Know that. thiere Was a Small Island in the track that Wee Was Gowing; - Fair Weather; -   Sunday 29th Latd 19°.35' S. Longd 33°12'. W Wind E.N.E. Course SW. Fare Haild the Supply for the Assistance of a Docter for the Woman that Was [11]   Sunday 29th Hurt; Tuesday the 24th July - Mr White Surgeon Was Ordrd to Come on Board Next Morning (But. prevented. By Carring Saile)  Monday 30th Latd 20°.37' 5 Wind N.E.BE Course S.W - Jane Bonner convict Died 1/2 p.2 P.M from the Hurt that She Recvd the 24th Inst. Buried At. 6 P.M  Tuesday 31st Lat 21°.50'. S. Wind N.E. - Longd by Sirius 36°.8'. West. Course W.S.W -   August.  Wednessy 1st At. 6 A.M the Commadore Hoist A Broad penant; & ship being Fresh painted  Latd 22°.37'. South. Course West. Wind N.E Longd By Sirius 37°47'. W  Thursday 2d The Commadore Spoke a Portaguies AM Ship that Had Lost Her Mizen Mast & Lost. Sight of her at. 11 AM. - Supply Brig Sent a Head to luck Out. for land   Latd B.O.23°.5' S. Wind N.BE Course W.B.N Longd 40°. Odd Supply Made the Signal for land at. 3 PM Steerd W.B.N. till 8. P M. then Sterd W.B.S. till Morning Cape Frio Baring West. 12 or 13 Miles Distance at = 5 P.M. [12]   Augt 3d Friday Little Wind As. AM. Steerd W.B.N.; a Long Shore Signal Made by Commadr to Ley too At. 5. PM. off the Entrance of the Harbour it Bearing N.W.B W  Saturday 4th Signal Made at. 5 AM so Make Sail With Larbourd tacks on Board - Light Breeses at. W.S.W.  Stood of & on. having little Wind & Being so Leward With All; -   Sunday 5th At. P.M. Brought. too In Side of Rasor Island & Round Isld; In 22. Fathom of Water - Roi Janero Road  Monday 6th Got. on our Way With the fleet & pasd the fort Opposite (the Suger Loaf) Where the Commadre Salluted With 13. Guns Which Was Returned By the Portagues (13 Guns) Brought too at. 8 OClock P.M  Tuesday 7th Shifted Our Berth & Went further Up towards the town the Night that Wee Came in the Commadore Was Honered With a Grand Elumination. at. the town Ankred in 20. Fathom Water Moored: by Signel [13]   Augt 7th Tuesday Arrivd. With the Whole fleet After a passage of 8 Weeks & one Day from Tennareef. & 12 Weeks & 1 Day from England On Our Arrival the fleet Immeditly proseeded so Overhall thier Riggen &c -   Augt. 15th Wednessday A Court Martial Was held on Board for the tryal of Michl Toulan & Jno Banisford. for Getting Drunk & Abusing the Officer (Toulan for Abusing the Officer Banisford for fighting With Toulan)  Saturday 18th Toulan Recvd. 175 Lashes Sentesd. 300. Banisford Recvd. 50 Sentinced 50  Friday 17th Orders Came on Board that. Thos Chapman privt Was Made Corpl in the Room of a Corpl that Was Reduced on Board the Frindship (Commencd pay the 15th Inst.)  Thursday 9th Serjt Kennaday Was Ordred on Board the Allexander Transp. By Major Ross: Serjt Clayfield from Allexander in his Room  Friday 10th I Went. On Shore for fresh Beef & Recvd a fall Just. onMy Landing Which Hurted My Arm -  Wedansday Febry the 6th 1788 Cleare weather all day att night very heavy Thunder and Lighening as ever I Saw this night a tree Split and 6 Sheep and 2 Lambs killed by the Lighening and Sevraill Centinals frightened but none herted the wemen Came on Shore [96]   Thursday Febry the 7th 1788 Clowday weather this had the Batallion under arms att 10 oclock the Governer read his orders and all the officers belonging to the Iland Displayed the Colours on west Side and the Marine Colours with Vollous of Small arms by the Detachment of marins the Convict men and wemen all Present this night Captn Lt Meridth read the Letter that his Majesties Sent to us att our first Entering on this Expidison  Sattaday Febry the 9th 1788  Cleare weather this day  A Cortmartiall held on Thos Bramble belonging Capts Camebles Conbpany [97]   Munday Febry the 11th 1788  this day a Criminal Court by 3 Navl officers & 3 batallion of & the Judge advocate this Evening the Sentence of the Cortmartal held on Sattaday put his Excetuion Brambell Sentenced 200 Lasshes recieved 100 Sent to the hospitall  Tuesday Febry the 12th 1788 this Morning the Sentance of the Crimanall Cort held yestarday put in Excution one Sentanced 150 Lashes for Mutany recieved itt one to be sent on a desolate Iland for a week upon Bread and water  Thursday Febry the 14th 1788 this Morning the Supply Sailed to the Iland of new norfolk with Some Convicts to settall a collaney thare [98]   this day a cort of Crimanals held  Friday Febre the 13th 1788  this morning the Sentanced of the Court held yesturday put into Excution 2 Wemen recievd 25 Lashes Each for theft att the Carts tail and one man 45 for theft att the Carts taill  Wedansday Febry the 27 1788 this day the Crimenall Corus adjurnd Cast for Death 3 men Thos Barres Excused this Evning the others repreved Henry Lovvel & Jas Hall to be Banished of the Iland for Life on a Desolate Iland  Sattaday March the 8th 1788 this Night about 1/2 pass 8 oclock I was Confined by Serjt Hume for bringing a feameale Convict into Camp [99]   Munday March the 10th 1788  this day Jno Easty Jno Calaytan tryed by a Court Martiall  Wedensday March the 12th 1788  this day Peter Dargan tryed for a breach of Trust this night att 5 oclock Easty & Cayton recieved 150 Lachess Each & Dargan 100  Tuesday March the 18th 1788  This day Jophef Hunt a marine Tryed by a court Martiall for Strikeing another marine the Court Satt 4 times when Major Ross would not Except of the Courtmartiall upon wich the Court Confined them Selfs  Captn Lt Tench 1st Lt Kellow 1st Lt Poulden 1st Lt Davey 1st Lt Timmins and Said that thay would go home to England [100]   Wedensday March the 19th 1788 this Day the Batallion of marin Turned out and Said that thay Could not work aney longer with out being Paid for itt   this afternoon the Supply Came in from Nesv Noffolk after Leave ing the Convicts thare and gave an account of finding an Iland about 2 or 3 days Sail from this Place wich thay named Lord Hows Iland Captn Ball of the Supply was the first that Ever Discoverd this Iland thar is a great many Turtle and Fowle the Iland rans about 18 miles in Cirmfernce the Supply Brought 10 or 12 Turtels with her  Wcdensday April the 30th 1788 this Morning Thomas Armsworth Departed this Life of a fever & flux att the Hospitall Lift a Wife and 2 small Children [101]   Fryday May the 2d 1788  This Morning Jno Bernett A Convict Recieved Sentance of Death for Robing the Charlottes sent of Bread and Sugar and was taking from the Court house to the Place of Excution and was hanged immeadateley  Tuesday May the 6th 1788  this day a court of Enquirey was held upon Wm Parr Convict and Jno Easty marine Concerning Provisions Parr Sentancd 200 Lashes  Sunday May the 4th 1788 this day the Scarborough and Lady Penryhn Sailed down the river  Tuesday May the 6th 1788  this Day the Scarbrough Lady Penryh and Charllotte Sailed from this Port for Chinea att the same time the Supply Brig saild to Convoy them Cleare of this Coast  [102]   Wedensday May the 22d 1788  this Day Patrick Burn A Convict was killid by the natives and another wounded  Sunday May the 25th -this Day arived the Supply from Lord hows Iland and had Lost her anchor and cable and Said that the Scarborough had Lost her fore top mast and top Sail yard  Friday May the 30 1788  this Day 2 Convicts ware killid by the natives in a horred manner [103]   Wedansday June the 4th 1788 this Day the Sirous and Supply fired a Roiall Salute att sun riseing att 12 oclock and att Sun Sets att 12 oclock the Batalion of marines marched over the water with thare Colours and freed 3 Volies and returnd again immeadately the Govener gave the marines A Pint of Porter Each man and the Convicts half a pint of rum Each man the officers all Dind with the Govener that Day  Friday June the 20th 1788 This Evining John Gannon A marine Departed this Life of a fever and was buried the next Day  Sunday June the 22d 1788 att 4 this afternoon an Earth quake so as to Shake the ground all round us the Same might Henry Pesry Serjant Died after a long Sickness and wass buried the next dav very handsomely. [104]   Wedensday June the 25 1788 this Day Sam Peaton and Edward Corbit Convicts was executed Paton for robing Captn Merideths Merque and Corbit for abcondon himsilf from Quarters  July the 10th 1788 this Day the Despaches was in closed for England Sent 2 Letters home  Sunday July the 13th 1788 this Day the Alaxander frindship Prince of Wailes and Borrow dale Sailed for England  Thursday the 17th 1788 July this Day the Suply saild for new norfolk with 6 mounths Provisions for the Iland [105]   Sunday Augst the 17th 1788 this Day the List was giving to the officers of all the men is a going to England att Expairation of the Station  Tuesday August the 12th 1788  this day the Ballion Marched from the Prade to the flags and fired 3 Volies   the officer all Dined with the govener this night Mr Wight thee Surgoen Genl and Mr Balmain the 2d asstant fired thier Pistrols att Each other and Slightly Wounded Each other  Thursday August the 26th 1788 this Day the Supply Arived from Norfolk Iland gave a very favorably account of that Place but that The had Lost 4 men from her Boat which was Drownded and 3 men belonged to the Iland Which Wm Batchler a marine was one [106]   Fryday Septbr the 5th 1788 this Evining the Eliment was very Red more so than Ever Saw in my Life which Lasted about an hour  Tuesday Sepbr 30 1788  Serjent Smith Embarked on bord the Golden Grove with 1 Corpl and 5 Prit belonging to the Sirous for New Norfolk  Wedensday october the 1st 1788 this Day the Sirous Saild for the Cape of good hope and the Golden Grove for Norfolk  Thursday octobr the 2d  this Day Cupper Handley a Convict was Barberasley Killed by the natives att Botany Bay where thay ware a going for greens  Friday october the 10th 1788 this Day John Jones A marine Departed this Life of a Concumtion and fever [107]   Sunday october 26 1788 James Roges A marine scent this Day into the woods and could not be found after  Sunday November the 2d 1788  this Day 1 Lieut 1 Serjt 1 Corpl and 8 Privt Marines with Some Convicts went up the harbour to Rose Hill and made A Settelment thare  Tuesday Novbr the 11 th 1788  This day Thos Bulmore Departd this Life of Some Blows that he recievd from James Baker when thay ware fighting on the 7 instant for which thay ware tryed by the Sevil Law and Sentancd 200 Lashes for man Slaughter  Sattaday Novbr the 22d 1788  this day Captn Cambell with 1 Lieut 1 Serjt 1 Corpl Drum and 12 Privt went up the harbour to govern the Party att Rose Hill which went up thare on the 2 instant [108]   Wedensday Decbr the 31 1788 this Day James Dealey A convict was Excuted for Roberrey  Monday Decbr the 29th 1788  this Day Thos Brimage was tryed by a courtmartial for Leavein the Camp without Leave for which we was Sentanced 50 Lashes Each but the Cortt Recommend us to the Commanding officeer for Mercy and we was forgiven  Sataday Janry the 10 1789  this Day Thos Saunderson A Convict was tryed by A Crimanal court for Robing the Store house and Absconding from Quarters and was out Lawed on Christmas Eeve and Recd Sentancd of death and was Exuted this Evining  Munday Febry the 2d 1789 this Night att 10 oclock Captn John Shea of Marines Departed this Life after a Long illness of a Concumtion and was Buried the next Day in Miliantary form very Neat and handsom [109]   Wedensday Febr the 4th 1789  this day Captn Lt Merideth was Apointed full Captn instead of Caps Shea deceased and 1st Lt George Go Jonstone apointed Captn Lt in Stead of Captn Lt Merideth and 2t Lt Ralph Clarke apointed 1st Lt in Stead of C Jonstone  Friday Febry the 6th  this Day Captn Lieut G Jonstone was orderd to Command Captn Sheas Company and the otherer Captns to Command the Same Compys as before  Sunday Febry the 8th 1789 this Day young Ross was appointed 2d Lieut of Marines  Sattaday Febry the 15th 1789 this day Captn Merideth went up to Rose hill with 20 Privt to Relace the party up att that Place Doing Duty [110]   Friday March the 6th 1789 this Day as a party of Convicts ware going to Botaney Bay the Natives attackted them in a great Number and killid one of them and Wounded Sevaral others in a Daingourous manner and them which Came home whare Confined and Punishd with one Hundred and fifty Lashes Each  Wedensday March the 18 1789   this Day a key was found Broke in one of the Locks att the Publick Store house for Which Joseph Hunt a marine was confined who was after taking as the kings Evidince and impeeched upon Luke Hines Richd asque James Baker James Brown Richd Dukes and Thos Jones Privt Marines who had been with him in Robing the Store house  Thursday  Wedensday March the 25th & 26th 1789  this Dai Luke Hines James Baker James Brown Richd asque Richd Dukes and Thom Jones Marines was tryed by A Criminall Cort for Robing the Storehouse when on the 26 about Past 2 oclock thay all Recd Sentanced of Death and the Galleows was Erected before the Sentance was Cast upon them [111]   Friday March the 27th 1789 this Day att 10 oclock Luke Hines James Baker James Brown Richd Asque Richd Dukes and Thom Jones was Excuted between the 2 Store housees when thay all Said that Joseph hunt was the ocation of all thier Deaths as he was the first that bagan the Said Roberry but he Recd a free Pardon thare was hardley a marine Present but what Shed tears offacers and men  Wedensday April the 1st 1789   this Day Wm Wall a marin Departed this Life after a Long Lingering illness and was Buried in Miliertry form  Thursday April the 30th 1789   this Day about one oclock in the after noon Edward odges Michell Towlien Marines which belonged to Rose hill and was doing Duty thare went out a Shoting and was Lost in the Woods and wear heard of Since although Search was made for 3 or 4 Days after them [112]   Friday May the 8th 1789  this Evining Arived his Majesties Ship Sirous from the Cape of goodhope Laden with flour for the Iland and gave an account of the Alaxander which Sailed on the 13th of July Last only arived att the Cape 3 days befor The Saild for this Place and she Sailed october the 1st Last the frindship was ooblidged to be Scettled and Sunk upon their being So violiont a Sickness So that all her hands Died Exept 6  Sataday May the 9th 1789 this Day Captn Lt Tench Repard up to Rose hill to Riveleved Captn Merideth with 15 Priveats  Wedensday May the 20th 1789 this Day Wm Goodall Privt in the 6 Com was appointed Corpl in the 29th Compy and to Receve Pay as Such Since the 4th of March Last in Steead of Jno Wixtead who was Reduced that day  Thursday Sepbr thee 10th 1789 this Day Henry Whright a marine was Tryed by a Criminal Cort for a rape on the Body of Elizabeth Chapman a Child of 9 years old for wich he was Sentancd Death but on Sataday he Recd Sentancd Transportation for Life to Norfolk Iland [113]   Sattaday October the 3d 1789  This Day Thos Scott A Marine Departed this Life after A Long Lingern Sickness  Sattaday the 17th   this Day Susanarh Allen Depard this Life of Child Berth & Left the infant Besterd  Sattaday Novbr 21 89  this day A Criminal Cort Held on Judah Jones a female Convict who Recd Sentance of Death and was hanged on the Munday after [114]   Friday Feberary the 19th 1790 this Day Major Ross was orderd to hold him Self in readynes to Embark on bord his M:S Sirous and Supply with 2 Companys on the 5th of March Next for Norfolk Iland  Munday Febriary the 22d 1790 this Day Thos Brimage Privt in the 53d and Jno Easty Signed and Sealed thiaer Last Wills and testamen to Each other / Febry 24  Wedensday March the 3d 1790  this Day Major Ross with Captn Lieut G Jonstone first Lieuts Kellow J Jonstots and Clarke and 2d Lieuts faddy and Ross with 3 Serjts 4 Corpls 3 Drums and 46 Privts Embarked on bord the Sirous and Supply to Join first Lieut Creswel and 1 Serjt and 14 Privt now Doing Duty att Norfolk  Sattaday March the 6th   this Day the Sirws and Supply Sailed for Norfolk Iland [115]   Wedensday March the 31 1790  this Day Richd Knight a marine was tryed by a Criminal Cort for Robing a Gardean for which he was Sintancd 200  Munday April the 5th 1790 this Day the Supply arived from Norfolk Iland and gave an ac count of the Sirous being Cast away upon the Iland of Norfolk on march the 19th Last but all hands and Stores Savid  Sattaday April the 17th 1790 this Day His Majistys Armd tender Supply Brig Saild from this Port for Norfolk and Batavie for Provisions for the Settelment  Tuesday April the 20th 1790  this Day Wm Chafe a Convict was Executed for House Roberry  Monday May the 3d 1790 this Day Wm Dowland a marine Departed this Life of a flux and fever att Rose Hill [116]   Thursday June the 3d 1790  this day arived the Mary Jula anne from London Laden with 225 female Convicts and Provisions and gave an account of the Guardien Store ship had Struck on an Iland of Ice she has been 10 mounths from England and yet only 9 Weeks from the Cape of goodhope  Friday the 4th  this Day the Detachment of marines fired 3 Voilies of Small arms in Honour of his Majesets Birth Day Recd 2 letters from home all Well  Wedensday the 9th  this Day a Sermon was Preached by the Revd Mr Jonstone on the occasion of his Majestys happy Recoverery from his Late Sicknes  Sunday June 20  this Day the Justann from England Arived hear Laden with Provisions The has been only 5 mounths from falmouth she Gives an account of 3 Ships being upon the coast with troops and Convicts [117]   Sataday June the 26th 1790  this Day the Surprise Transport arived hear with 250 men Convicts  Munday June the 28th this Day the Nepturn Transport Arivd hear with 500 Convicts and the Scarborough with 250 and 105 Soldiers of the new South Wailis Corps the Convicts all very Sickly Near 50 of them Died the first week after Landing  friday July 23d 1790 Last night Thom Harp Jno Wilkins Marines belonging to the Detachment and Jno Bates a marine and Mr fargerson midshipman belonging the Sirous went Down the harbour a fishing and this morning being a fishing a whaile over Set the boat when the 3 Latter was all drownded but Wilkins was Saved by Swiming [118]   Sunday this July 25 1790  this Day the Lady Jula anne Saild from this place for Norfolk and China and from there to England  wedensday 28 this Day the Justinnia Saild for the above places  Sunday August 1st this day the Suprise Transport Saild from this place with 150 Women and 30 men convicts for Norfolk Iland and to proceed from that to England by Chinea  Sunday august the 8th this day the Scarborough Trans port Saild from this on her way to England by China Salluted the place with 7 Guns the first Ship as Ever Salluted this place Sent a litter home by her  Tuesday the 24  this day the Nipturne Saild from this place for England by China a Criminal Court held on Hugh Low a Convict for Sheep Steeling brought in Guilty of Death [119]   August the 25th 1790   this day att 12 oclock Hugh Low was Excuted according to his Sentanc pased on him yesterday  Sepbr the 6th this day Patrick  McQuen a marine Departed this Life and buried in A milliantary form  Sep the 7th   this day His Excellency Arthur Philip Governec of New S Wailes was wounded by the Nativs in the Shoulder but not mortall  october the 4th 1790 this day James McManis a marine was tryed by a criminal court for house Breaking But was acquited  Tuesday october the 19th 1790 This day arived His Majestys armd tender Supply from Batavey with Stores and Provisions for the Settelment [120]   Tuesday octobr the 26th 1790 this day a Criminall Court was held on the Bodys of Jas Harris and Wm Wild Blood Convicts for assal ting Jno Roland and Roberry Wich Ended on Wedensday att Elven in the fore noon when thay both Reed Sentance of death wich Caried into Excution att rose Hill on Thursday the 28th att 12 oclock  Sunday Novbr 14 1790 this day the Boat belonging to the Hospitall went Down the harbour with 5 Convicts which was all the Convicts was Lost  Tusday Decbr 14th 1790 this day 2 Captns 2 Lieuts 3 Saj 2 Corpls with 40 Privt marched front Sidney on Command to the S West of Botany Bay in Search of the Natives wich has Wounded Some of the convicts that Same night A Privt Soldier belonging to the New S Wales Corps was tryed by a field Cort Martiall [121]   Bey order of Captn L of Marines Commanding of the Party the Day following Saw Sevaral of the natives but could not have any interview with them by Reason of thay taking to the salt water this day very bad off for fresh water when a pint of rum was gave for a pint water and on Thursday the 16th Returnd into Sidney again after a Troublesome Teadious March  Friday Decbr 17th  this Day A Duch Snow from Batavy which the Supply Brig toke up and bought Provisions arived here for the Settellment she has been 12 Weeks and 4 days from Batavy  Wedensday Decbr 22d this Day att 5 oclock the party under the Command of Captn Tench marines Concisting of 1 Leut and 1 Ensign 3 Sarjts 2 Copl and 30 Private marched from Sidney towards the SW of Botany Bay hallted att Eaight att night att 12 marched to the N West arms and Crosed itt att past 2 on the 23d in the morning up brieast high in water and att Past 3 Crosed over a Swamp of mud which seas up to the armpits and had Like to have Smothred Sevaral of the men in the mud and by 6 oclock Came up to the natives huts but thay had fled from thier huts So we returned back across the rivers as fast as Possible and arived att the Place we Startd from aut 10 oclock after A teadious Run of 14 or 16 miles fast as Posible we Could run all wet with Crosing the Rivers and halted thare and Dryed our Cloaths and Started again att 3 oclock and went to Botany Bay and halted on the North Shore untill 2 on the Morning of the 24 when we went Down the Beach for abought 3 miles whaare we Saw Sevaral of the natives by thier fires and then Marched Back to the Place from whence we Started and halted till 7 oclock when we returned to Sidney by 9 that morning after a most seadious march as Ever men went in the time [122] [123]   Tuesday Janry the 18 1791 this day att 12 oclock the Troops in garrison fired 3 Volies of Small arms in honour to her Majastyes Birth day this morning the Supply Dropt down to Sail for Norfolk Iland and took her Departure from this on the 22 with a fine Gail  Monday Febe the 14 1791 This day the Duch Snow which Came from Batavie with Provisions was taking into the English Service and is bound to England with the Sirous Ships Company  Sattaday Febrr the 26 1791 this day the Supply Arived from Norfolk Iland with Captn Hunter late of His Maj S Sirous with the Rest of the officers and men belonging to that Ship and gave A very good account of that Place its the first time that we have heard from that Place Since the Loss of the Surous in March Last the acount Says that att the time of the Short Allowanc that thay ware very bad off that thay had only 3 Lb of weatt with the flower Bran and 2 lb of Beef or 17 ounces of Pork per week and for 3 or 4 Weeks no meat was Searved that thay Liveed on Birds which thay caut in great number att A Place Callid . . . Mount Pit 4 or 5 miles from the Camp this Iland Lies in Latd about 14 or 15 South and 163 East Longtd its about 21 miles in Circumferance all round by the is on Continued Chain of rocks and no harbour or bay whareby a Ship may anchor with Safty the Place is a very frutfull Place and one continued Place of hills and [124]   Vallies thare is plenty of Palm tree and fine pine which runs to the haight of 250 o 60 feet with out any S Tops and is very fit for ards and masts for any Ships thare is the flax Plant grow hear wild which is by transplanting made to come usefull this Iland is alltogether a very fine Frutfull Place and and is Capable of of maintaining itself in the Space of 4 years all but for meat which must rely on England or Some other Hand for Cattel as thar is no four footed Beast nor any Qadruped [125]   Munday March the 21st 1791 this Day Captn Hill of the NSW Corps with Lieut Abott and Ensign Prentice with 1 Sarjt 1 Corpl Drum and 18 Privt Embarcked on bord His Maj armd Tender Supply for the relief of the Same number of marines att norfolk Iland and Saild the next day   friday March the 25 1791 this day Captn Hunter of His Maj Late Ship Sirous with the rest of that Ships Crew Embarked on bord the Succeess Snow for England when the marines went down oposite the Snow and gave 3 Chears which was returnd [126]   and on Suttday the 27 att day Light she waid anchor and ran down the harbour she was again Cheard by the marines which was returnd by the Ships Company and thar was two partys of men Saparated which had Spent 4 years together in the greatest Love and frindship as Ever men did in Such a distant part of the globe  Both by officeers and men she was than accompanyed down the harbour by the Governer and all the Marine officers which when thay parted The Saluted them with 9 Guns which was the Last Honour as Could be Confirrd on them and on Mundaay att 6 in the Morning The went to Sea and may god Send them a good voige I Pray  on the munday night of the 28 8 men with 1 woman and 2 Chrildren Convicts toke a kings boat of 6 oars with a large quantity of Provisions which thay had got from time to time by work and a new Seene for fishing with us large quantuty of Carpinters tools of all Sorts for Enlargeing the Boat with beds and Mathackmattick instruments and Cumpus New Sails and Masts and oars and 6 stand of Arms and Evrey thing that was nesarry for Making thare Escape which was Excuted betwen the hours of 9 and 12 [127] it was Supposed that thay intended for Bativee but having no vessell in the harbour thare was no Persueing them so thay got Clear of but its a very Desparate attempt to go in an open Boat for a run of about 16 or 17 hundred Leags and in pertucalar for a woman and 2 Small Children the oldest not above 3 years of age but the thoughts of Liberty from Such a place as this Enoufh to induce any Convicts to try all Skeemes to obtain it as thay are the Same as Slaves all the time thay are in this Country allthough thare times are Expired for which thay are Sentanced by Law thare is no differance between them and a Convict that is jest Cast for transportation [128]   Munday May 30th 1791  this day arived his Majesties armd tender Supply from Norfolk with Captn Lt Jonstome and Lt Creswell and one Serjt Corpt 1 Drum and 21 Privt and Lieut Kellow under an arrest The has been 10 Weeks Since The Left this Place wich is Longer by a mounth than any time Ever she was before  Sattaday June the 4 1791 this day being his Majestys Birth day the marines was Drawn up att 12 oclock and fird three volies of Small arms and in Honour to itt the Governer  Gave Evry man one lb of Pork and one of Rice and to Each woman one of Rice and of Pork and to Each Child of Rice and Pound of Pork [129]   Munday June the 20th 1791  This day William Summons A marine Departed this Life after a Long Sickness and Buried in the Evining in a milertary form  Sataday July the 9th 1791 this Morning att 7 oclock the Signal was made att the South Head for the mary anne a ship from England with 144 Wemen Convicts who anchored in the Cove out Sun day att 2 oclock and gave an account of the Gorgon of 44 guns with 10 Sail more being on the Passage for this place she has beets 4 mounth and 10 days from England Landed the women munday  Sunday July the 17 1791 this Morning Wm Godfrey A marine being Sentry att the wine Siller opened the Lock and drew off Some wine and was taking Prisoner By the Patroles and was Confind and on munday he impeached on Wm Roberts and Wm Norris marines as being accomplicis with him for 3 mounths Past in Robing the Celler for which thay ware tryed by a Criminal Court on Tuesday but not being Sufficuan Everdence thay ware acquited all Though Every Person thought them Gulty and Godfrey was tryed by A Court Martial when he was Sentanced 800 Lashes and to be Drumed out of the Corps as A Scandle to the Corps he belonged [130]   Wedensday July the 27th 1791  This day James Chsapman Joseph hatten and Jno Cross Convicts whare tryed by A Criminal Court for House Brakeing when Hatten was Sentanced 500 Lashes Chapman Death Cross was acqquited Chapman was Excuted the next Day  Munday August the 1st 1791 This day arived the Matilda Transport from England with 250 Convicts and 18 of the NSW Corps and one Subaltan The has been 4 Mounths and 4 days The Saild with the fleet [131]   Munday August the 8th 1791  this day Saild the Maryann for Norfolk Iland with Convicts and Provisions   Sataday August the 20th 1791   This day Arived the Atlantic Transport with 200 men Convict and Privt and 1 Serjt of the NSW Corps and on Sunday arived the Sallamander with 200 men Convicts and 18 Privt of the NSW Corps  Sunday August 28th  This day Arived the William and Ann with 200 men Convicts and 16 Privt and 1 Sarjt and 1 Corpl of the NSW Corps   September the 4th this day Saild the Sallamander with Convicts and Provisions for Norfolk Iland and on the 8th ariveed the Maryann from Norfolk  Sepbr the 20th this Morning the flag att South head was hoisted and A Large Ship Seen but the wind being contrary The putt out again [132]   Wedensday Sepbr the 21st 1791 this day the Colours whare again hoisted For the Same Ship which was Seen yesterday which proved to be HM Ship Gorgon of 44 Guns The anchored with in the Heads and Came into the Cove the next day The brought Governer King Passenger and Stores and Provision for the Settelment  Sunday Sepbr 25th 1791  This day the Colours was hoisted for the Queen and Active Transports with Convicts and Souldiers for the Reel and arived in the Cove the Next day  Munday october the 10th 1791 This day the Colours was hoisted for the Albermer Laden with Soldiers and Convicts she has been 8 Weeks from the Cape of good hope and arived in the Cove the 13th the Same day Arivd the Britainaic with Soldiers and the Convicts and the Barronton hove in Sight but was Drove off by A Strond west wnd  Munday october the 13th 1791 This day the Non Commisoned officer and Privates in the Detachment gave their answer who would Settel in the Contry of New South Wailis when A great Many tured out [133]   Sunday october 16 1791 This day arived the Barronton Transports with Soldiers and Convicts the day following arived the Sallamander from Norfolk all well  Munday october 24th 1791 This day 29 Marines was discharged from the Kings service to be Settelers att Norfolk Iland the same day Saild the Matilda & Maryanne & Wm & ann when some Convicts made their Escape the day following Sailed the Britainair she Saluted with 7 guns and was returnd by the Gorgon with 5 att one the Gorgon Salluted with 21 Guns in Honour of his Majisties ascescion to throne  Wedensday october 26th 1791 this day Saild the atlantic with Govnr King and Captn Partison with Some Soldiers of the NSW Corps and the Settelers and to Procied from thence to Bengall for Provisions for this Settelment  Munday octbr the 31st 1791 this day Embarkd on bord HM Ship Gorgon Lieut Creswel of Marines with 1 Serjt 1 Corpi 1 drum and 20 Privt to do duty [134]   Wedensday Novbr the 2d this day Saild the Qsseen for Norfolk Iland with Ships to Relieve Major Ross and Return the this Plase with the Marines with all Expidition  Thursday Novbr the 10th this day arived the Britainaia from a Cruis havein cawght a whale the first that was Ever Caught on this Coast  She was intiteled a 1000 Bownty for the first fish  Sattaday Nvbr the 26th 1791  This day saild His M armd Tender Supply Brig for England Lieut Creswell of Marines on bord with the Dispatches  Monday decbr ye 5th 1791 this Morning Arived the Queen from Norfolk Iland with Major Robert Ross Commandant of Marines and the Troops from that place and Landed the following day when a Company of Marines Concistawn of 1 Captn 3 Lieuts 4 Serjts 4 Corpls 2 drums and 50 Privt was detained to Stay in this Crountry until the arivall of the Remainder of the NSW Corps [135]   Tuesday decbr the 13th 179 this day the detachment of Marines doing Duty in this Coleny over and above the Company detaind and the Settlers Emdarked on bord HMS Gorgon for England  Sunday decbr 18th this day Saild HMS Gorgon for England with the Above mentioned People on bord  Trhursday Janry thee 5th 1792 this Day Sailed the Barrinton & Queen for Norfolk and from thence to lndiea on their way to England att the Same time Sallamander and Britainaia Saild on the fishing trade  Tuesday Febry the 14th 1792 this day ariveed the Pitt Indiman with Major Gross of the NSW Corps 1 Captn 2 Leiuts 1 Ensign 1 Adjunt and I CompY of men and 400 Convicts Saluted the town with 13 guns [136]   Sataday Febry 18th this day a soldierir belonging to the New S Wailes going to bath in the Salt water was unforteateley Drownded and Was buried the Next day  Sataday March 17th 1792 this Morning att 6 oclock thee Troops in garrison was under arms whin Slap Fran Grosses Commision for Lieut Governer of this Iland was Read and the Troops was Revieued by his Exiclenecey the Governer the Colours of the N S Wails was Displaeyed for the first time on this Ground  Satarday April 7th 1792 this day this Pitt Sailed for Norfolk Iland and from thince to India on her way to England  Thursday April 5th 1792 This day Captn Lieut George Johnstomte of the Marines began to Enlist out of the Company of Marines into the NS Wailes Corps for 5 years hee was to Raise 35 men for A full Captns Commission  Munday June the 4th 1792 This Being His Majesties Birth Day the New South Wailes Corps fired 3 Volies in Honour thareof When His Excellincy the Governeer gave Evry man on the Iland Half a Pint of Spirits and Every Woman A gill Bond and free alike  Wedensday June the 20th 1792 this Morning the atlantic Transport Arived att this Place from Calcuter in Bengali Laden with Provisions The has a great deal of Bad weather  she Givs an accoumt of Brian and the people that Left this in the Kings Boat on the 28th of march 1791 that thay arived att timor A Duch Settelment that thay ware taken put in Irons and sent so England Prisoners whence its Likely thay will be all Excuted I have not leart How long thay ware on thare Passage [138]   Thursday July the 26 1792  this day Arived the Britaina Captn Raven from London Laden With Provisions and stores for the settelment she has been 6 mounths on her Passage  Sunday August the 19 1792 this day Atlantic Saild for Norfolk Laden with Provision and Stores for the settelment.  Sunday Sepbr 30th this Day Arived the atlantic from Norfolk she gave a very unfavourable account of that Place Thar is no Indian Corn been thar Last Season thay have been on very Short allowence some time Sevaril of the Marines settelers Came from that Iland to Enlist into the NSW Corps thay say that sevaral that Staid behind had not Indian Corn sufficient to plant thier Ground that thay have Clear and the Convicts have not had A Pound of flower for Near 6 month allthough the Soldiers have had 2lb per Week the Convicts have been allwais forced to take 2lb of Weett so that Iland wich was Reconed the most flourishing of any Iland in the World all most turns out to be the A Pore Mersable Place and all manere of Creuelties an opresion uesed by the Governer floging and beeting the people to Death that its better for the pore unhappy Creatures to be hanged allmost then to come under the Command of such Tyrants and the Govner behavs more like a mad man then a man in trused with the Govrment of an Iland Belonging to Great Bretain. [139] [140]   Sunday octbr the 7th 1792 this day arived the Royal Admiral Indiman Captn Bond Leden with Convicts Provisions and Stores for the settement she had 4 mounth Passage from England and 5 weeks only from the Cape of good hope.  Wedensday the 24 this day Saild the Britaina from this Place for Riojanario and the Cape of Good hope to fetch a Cargo of Provisions and Stock for the Gentelmen an officers of the Settelment taken up att their own Expence  Thursday the 25 this day Henry King a Child of 20 mounths old the Son of a Soldier in the NSW Corps was unfortuneately Drounded in a sawpit which was Left open.  Thursday Novbr 8th 1792  this Day Arived the Phealadelpha a amarican Brig Laden with Provisions for Sale which was Bought for Goverment [141]   Sunday the 11 this Day the wind Blowing hard the atlantic Parted her Cabel and Drove A Shore on the Rocks but happyly was got of again without any Damage after Lying 2 or 3 hours  Tusday the 13 this dey Saild the Royall Admiral for Chinea and England  Sunday the 18 Arived the Kitty Store Ship Leden with Provisions and stores for this Settelment 27 Wemen 2 men on bord.  Wedensday Decbr the 5th 1792 this day the Remainder part of the Detachment of marines under the Command of Lieut Jno Poulden Embarked on bord the Atlantic transport for England Amidst all the Acclamaitions of a large concours of People when Evry mark of Joy and Respect Shown by the NS Wa Corps after being 4 years and 10 mounths and 8 days on Shore in this Crountey when we have been 3 parts of our time on Short allowan and hardships very much has been undur gone as must be Expcted by Settelen a new Colleny [142]   Friday the 7th this day bent Sailes and getters Every thing tn Readyness for Sea  Munday Decr the 10th 1792 This day His Excelencey Arther Philip Governer and Commander in Chief and Captain Genaral in and over his Majste Terrotoryes of New South Wailes Embarked on bord the atlantic for England when the NSW Corps was undur arms and Paid him all the Marks of honour  Tuesday the 11th this Morning att 3 oclock began to wheay anchor and att 7 undur way Sailed out of the Cove accompanyed by all the Principels officeers of Settelment the wind att SW a light Brease [143]   att 9 oclock between the heads officers Parted from us and gave 3 Chears and Returnd the Same past 9 the Revt Mr Johnstsns boat Came along Side with Some things and unluckily got Staved which Greved me to the hart to See the boat of my frind So hurt as not to be Sarcely able to Reach to the harbour att 10 filled with a pleasent Brease att Night fresh Gates Split the Main top Sail as to the State of the Colliny att this Present time Seemes far Better than att any time Since the Settelment was made as Sevaral Ships has lately arived from Europe and Likewise haveing had a good Season very good Crops of Corn are Expected the weat was fit for Cuting and the Indian Corn Looked very Promising the Crountey is Evry whare Coverd with Wood whare fit for Cultivation and by a Great Deal of troble of and fatige that its Cleard as Evrything must be done by men as thare is No Cattel in the Crountey  fine Clay for Bricks so that Buildings are Carried on hear fast all the Convicts are in Brickt [144]   Huts but not a place Didacated to Divine Worship amidst all the work  Wedensday thursday and friday Prety Clear weather with fresh Breases the wind att SW Steard SE by S  Sattaday and Sunday the 15 and 16 Clear weather with Light Breases Wind att S by w Steard SE by E  Monday 17 Clowdey with Rain in the Morning fresh Winds att WSW Steard S by E after Noon Clear the wind att SW att 4 in the afternoon Split the Gib in Latt 39 South  Tuesday 18 thick Clowdy weather with Rain the wind att SW Steard S by E in Lattd of 43:7  Wedensdey Cleare weather with fresh breases the wind att w Steerd S by E until 12 oclock in Lattd of 47 South att 12 Steard E by S the wind att W by N with Rain [145]   Thursday Decbr the 20th 1792 Thick Hazy Weather with Rain Steard E by S thee att W by N  Friday 21 Sattarday 22 Hard Gales the wind att W Steard E by S Clowdy with Rain unbent the fore top sail bent another in Lattd 50 South  Sunday 23 Cleare with Light Breases the wind att W Steard E by S unbent all the Stay Sails and unreved all the Riggen Rain and Squally att Night  Munday 24 Squally with Rain the wind att North Steard E att Night the wind att NE s. ESE in Lattd of 53:23 South  Tuesday Decbr 25 Cleare in the Morning with Light ares att SE this being Christmas day His Excellency the Govrr gave Evry Mess in the Ship a joint of fresh pork and some punkin and 1/2 a pint of Rum to Each man Rain in the Evening the wind att N Steard E by. . [146]   Wedensday 26th Hazey with Rain fresh Breases the wind att WSW Steard E by S in the Evening Clear with Lighte Breases att West Steard E by S   Thursday 27 and friday 28 Clowdy with Rain and Squally the wind att West Steard E by N friday Night Caried away the fore topmast Standing Sail boom  Sattaday 29 Sunday 30 Dark haz . with Rain the wind att N by. Steard E by N day breaks now att a Quarter past 12 att Nights and does not Close untill within a quarter of Eliven So that we have att this time 22 and daylight out of 24 but all waes Rain thare is 17 hours Sun  Munday Decbr 31 1792 Dark Hazy weather with Rain fresh Winds att N by E Steard E by N  in Lattd of 54 28 South [147]   Tuesday Janry 1st 1793 Dark Hazy weather with Hard Gales the wind att NW Steard E by N this Morning att 4 oclock a very Heavy Squall att 1/4 past 5 Saw at large Rock of Ice to the Southerd very high very Cold Heavey weather all day Shiped Sevaral very heavey Seas duren site day att Night att 1/2 pass 9 Saw a very Large Iland of Ice Lay to all Night att 2 oclock Nax Morning Made Sail Saw the Iland Runing from N to S for 30 or 40 Miles  Wedesday the 2d Clear with fresh Breases the wind att WSW Steard E by N this Morning saw a great many Ilands of Ice att least 60 or 70:23 being in Sight att one time was forced to run Right in amoungst them to get away from them Steard ENE in Lattd of 57 48 South  Thursday the 3rd Clear with fresh Breases the wind att WSW Steard E by N saw Great marty Ilands of Ice in Last of 55 38 South [148]   friday Janry 4th 1793 this day Clear in the Morning with Light Breases the wind att West Steard E by N att Night site wind att NNE Steard East with Rein very Hazy saw Saverall Ilands Ice  Sattaday the 5 Hazy with Rain in the Morning with fresh Breases the wind att North Steard ENE att 12 oclock the wind att west Steard ENE in Lattd of 55 20 South  Sunday the 6 Clear weather with Light Breases the wind att west Steard ENE Saw no Ice the Lest 24 hours Light Shours of rain all night  Munday the 7 Clear weather and Calm in the morning att 10 oclock Light winds att South Evry day Mending the Sails of the Ship  Tuesday the 8 Hazy weather with Storms of Haill and Snow Light winds from South to SE by E Steard from E so NE dureing the Last Mounth we run 4500 miles [149]   wedensday Janry 9th 1793 Clear with Light Winds att SSW Steard E by N att Night heavey falls of Snow in Lattd of 54 24 south we Recone ourselfs 1300 miles from Cape horn  Thursday the 10 Clear with Light Breases the wind att SE by S Steard ENE att Night Squally with Showrs of Snow in Lattd of 54 7 South  friday the 11th thick Clowdy with Showrs of rain and snow the wind vearing from SE so East Steard from ENE to NNE att 9 att Night fresh Gales of wind att SW Steard E by S  Sataday 12th thick Clowdy weather with fresh Gales of wind att wSW Steard E by S Squally with rain and Snow 290 Leages from Cape Horn  Sunday 13 Munday 14 Cleare with fresh breases the wind att WSW Steard E by N the munday 570 Miles distant from Cape Horn Squally will Rain and Snow [150]   Teusday Janry 15 1793 Clowdy with fresh Gales of wind Steard ENE E Squally with Rain Haill and Snow made A Run of 220 miles the Last 24 Hours which brings within 350 miles of Cape Horn  Wedesdav 16 Clowdy with fresh Breases the wind att WSW Steard ENE 1/2 E bent the Gib and foretop mast stay sail and Drivn within 180 miles of Cape Horns in Lattd 55 47 South 150 mles distant by obrsavtion  Thursday Janry the 17th 1793 Clear Morning att 1/2 past 2 made the S west part of the Iland of Terry dele fugo very high mountainous Rockey barren place although in the Midts of Summer yet the Land was Covred with Snow att 5 oclock the wind att NNE with Rain Steard ESE att 1 oclock fresh breases the wind att Wast Steard NE att 10 att night [151]   Cleard Cape Horn att 11 very Heavey Squalls with Rain and Wind Cape Horn is Sutiated in Lattd of 55:52 south and 67:37 West Longitude  friday Janry 18 1793 Hard Gales of Wind att WNW Steard NE by N att 4 in the Morning very Heavey Squall Hended the topsails being Her majesties Birth day the Govr gave Evry Mess a joint of fresh pork and 1/2 a pint of Spirits per man  att 3 oclock made States Iland on the Larboard bow att Night Came up with it  Sataday 19 Clear weather with fresh Breases the wind att WSW Steard NNE 1/2 E in Lattd of 54:10 South  Sunday the 20 Clear weather with Light breases the wind att WNW Steard NNE 1/2 E att 5 in the morning Saw a Small Iland bareing E by S att 9 Saw the Ilands of Jaspan Concistain of 7 or 8 in Number Saw a Sea Eliphant Lying on the Shore with a great Numbr of Seales thease Ilands lie A Small distance to the Southerd of the fauklands Ilands [152]   att 1 oclock Saw the faukland IIand Sailing along Shore all the afternoon the Iland seems very Leavel with hand Some Hilllochs and green patches very Pleasent this Iland is Sutuated in the 52d Degree of South Lattd and 63d Long West  Monday the 21 Clear with Light Breases the wind att West Steard N 1/2 West Saw great many wild fowl vry smothe water  Tuesday the 22 Clear in the morning with Light Breases the wind att NW Steard NNE in lattd of 47:42 South att Night Rain and Squally  Wedensday the 23 Clear with fresh Breases in the Morning the wind att WSW Steard N by w att 10 oclock Calm att Night the wind att NW by N Steard N by E  Thurrday 24 thick Hazy Wind with Light breases -the-att NNW Steard N  friday 23 Hazy in the moring with Light winds att West Steard N by W in Lattd of 42:36 South Calm att night  Sataday 26 thick foggy weather with Light Breases the att East Steard N by West [153]   Sunday Janry 27 Munday 28 1793 Clear with Light Breases the wind from NE to NNE Steard from NNW to NW  Tuesday 29 Wedensday 30 Thick dark Squally weather with very heavy Rain thee wind att North hove the Ship two under the main Topsail and maide Sail Sevarall times in the 48 hours in Lattd 37:59 South  Thursday 31 Morning very heavey Rain with hard gales of wind att North Steard ENE att 12 Clear with fresh Breases wind att WSW Steard N 1/2 E very heavey Sea from the Nward  friday Febry 1st 1793 Cleare weather with fresh Breases the wind att SW Steard N 1/2 E in Lattd of 34:46 Calm all night  Sattaday Febry 2 Clear with Light aires form south East steard N 1/2 E in Latd of 34:00 South att Night with fresh Breases the wind att ESE Steard N 1/2 E  Sunday 3d Hazy with fresh Breases att ESE Steard N 1/2 E att 9 oclock Saw a Ship on the Leabow att 1/2 past 10 Came up with her she proved to be the favouret of Nanticket in amearicaa she has been 17 mounths from amaricaae been on the Cost of parru on the South Sea fishing trade [154]   She was well Ladan with oil she had 90 tons of palmacity oil on bord she gave an count of the Sallam ander the willm and ann and mary anne and Britainaia wailers from port Jackson being all well on the Cost of Parru in august Last and Like snide of the Matilda being Lost on an Iland Near otheitea the Ships Company being in their boats for 10 days and then taken up by ship bound to the Cape of good hope and Likewise of the Britainare Captn Raven he spoke to him 14 days past Near the River plate bound to St Catherines she had put into the Iland of New Zealend for 3 weeks  she Landed 12 men with the 2d mate to Secure Seales Skins and furs against the time of the Return of the Ship to New South Wailes this day in Lattd of 32 South and 42:15 Longtd West  Munday 4 Tuesday 5 Wedansday 6 Cleare weather with fresh breases the wind att ESE Steard from N by E to N by W  Thursday Febry 7th 1793 Cleare with Light winds att ESE Steard NW by N att 4 Saw the Land the Easterd of Riojanaro att 10 made the mouth of that harbour att 2 oclock Came to anchor Near this town  friday 8 Clear weather this day began to water the Ship [155]   Sataday Febrd the 9th 1793 Cleare weather this day sarvd fresh Beef at 2lb per man per day watering the Ship  Munday Febry the 11th this day Arived the St Andrewe brig from bristol bound to faullands Iland a fishing and on the Sataday following was joun by a Ship her Companion been 10 weeks from England  Thursday 14 being on Shore ashwedensday by Reason of our gaining a day by Comeing Round Cape Horn I went a Shore on Leave and had the pleasure of going through all the Romish Churches which are very Grand and Magnficient in one was 4 alters and in Each alter the virgin mary with our blessed Savour in her arms with 7 Candlesticks and 7 Candles burning att Each alter and Round the Church Stood all the Heads of the Patrichs of old the Church Gitted with gold and Savaral Elegant Branches and it being the first of Lent thay went in Possesion Through the town with all the images in statu the first was our Savour on the Cross and in front walked 8 young Lads dressed Elegant in Silks and Sattans with Diamonds and Jewels with wings on their Shouldars in Imatation of the Blessed angils in Heaven Each Image being 10 or 12 or some 15 feet in Heiaight and Each Caried by 18 or 20 men after him Came St Peter St Paul and all thee Saints which thay Hold Sacrad in thare Church to the Number of 15 Different Stands and between Each Stand went one or two of the Immaganary angils of which was 30 in Number and in the Rear was an arning of Crimson velvet Carried by 8 or 10 men with Stands on poles under which went 2 or 3 pressts and in the Senter was one with Personates the pope of Rome and on Each Side of the Street went 2 or 300 men with Large wax tapers 3 or 4 feet in Leanth and about the bigness of my resst but so Great is thier Idolatry thay kneel down when Ever any Images Pass them in the street and att Every Corner of the Street is the vergin mary with our Blessed Savour up against the Housses att the Sight of which thay Cross themselfs across their breasts with thier Hands and worship them and in Stead of Looking to Jesus Christ as A Compleat Savour of the world thay Look to the virgin mary as in a manner for her to Incest upon him to Save them which is a thing so absurb that is Enough so make a prodstant Shuder att the Thoughts of and So much Prosumtion I Saw wen on Shore as I Never Saw in my Life and the Ignorance of the Lower Class of people makes me to pity them for the preasts in still it to their minds that Let them do what Ever thay please and Come to them and give them Such a Sum of money thay will give them absolution and forgive them all thier Sins but if thay Have no money to give to fee them thar is No absolution for them and so thay must Die in their Sins such absurdity it must be to think that any Mortal on Earth can Have Power to forgive anothers Sins when thay have not Powr to forgive thier own or to Live without itt in the world for I may Say with the aposstal Paul that we all have Sined and Come Short of the Glory of god So I may quort the Same Apostall in another place that there is No other name Given under heaven amoungst ware by we Can be Saved but by in and Through Jesus Christ of Nazereth O that the trew knowledge of his Blessed Gosspel may be Spread abrord through the world and all popish Ignorance be done away is my Herty With and Sincier Prayer (the whole of this place is only a kind of a prison for Neaither Merchant nor tradesman is allowed to go but Such a distants from thee town under pellenty of being Sent to the mines for Life and an English man is not allowed to go 20 yards from the water Edge without a Soldier to gaurd them for fear thay go beyound thee Limits allowed what a diffrence is there between this place and old England whare any person may go to any parts of the kingdom without being Called to an account for it [156] [157] [158]   Sattaday Febry 23 this day arived the Rattler Captn Colnett of London gave an accunt of Great disturbensers in England and Every Prapareation of war with the french Shee had 6 weeks from England she was bound on discovry and a fishing  Tuesday 26 this day arived the Meadeator of London Captn Glasspoole she has been on the water fishing on the Cost of Brasell and Sprung a Leak and all her people very bad with the Scurvey and was greatly distressed  Sattarday March 2d att 4 this morning whieaid anchor and droped down to the Roards the Same Evening the 2 boats got adrift and Sent to the Portegease Ship to get thm next day the agent bought 6 guns 12 poundrs  Monday March the 4 this day wheaied anchor and Saild got out side of the Sugar Lofe but being Calm droped anchor till night and then whead again and Run out the wind Light att ESE Steard South [159]   Tuesday March 5 1793 Clear weather with Calm att 12 Light winds att ESE Steard NE by N att 4 tacked Steard S . . in Sight of Riojanarro harbour  Wedensday 6 Calm all day att Night Light winds att NE Steeard ESE  Thursday 7 Clear weather with fresh breases the wind att NE Steard SSE this day att 1/2 past 12 Departed this Life Mr Samuel Brown third Mate of this Ship of a Dropsy he was aged about 40 years and buried att 6 in the Evining when Mr. Thomson Surgoen read the Buriel Cerremoneys this day Saw Some dolphin and flying fish  Friday 8th Clear with Light winds att NE Steard ESE att Night tacked Steeard N by E the wind att E by N  Sattaday 9 Clear with fresh Gales att E by S Steeard NNE Clowdey att Night  Sunday 10 Clear with Light Breases the wind att SE by E Stieerd NNE in Lattd of 23 :34 South Longtd 40 West  Munday 11 & Tuesday 12 & Wedansday 13  Clear with Light Winds ESE Steard NNE Wedensday James Gable [160]   Latly A Convict att Botany Bay was punised With one dozen Lashes for Neglect of duty and disrespet and Contempt to Mr Probett 1st Mate of the Ship and afterwards both Legs in Irons and on Bread & Water to England  from Thursday March 14 to Munday the 18 very Squally with fresh Gales of wind from NNE to NNW Steard from East to NE a deal of Rain  Tuesday the 19 Clowdy with Light Winds att NE by N Steard E by S and Continued with the wind from the Northerd untill Sunday the 24 with Squally weather Steearing to the Easterd  Munday March 25 Clear weather with Light Breases the wind att E by N Sterd N by E this day Spoke the flora of Boston bound to the Pascific oscean she Saild from Boston on the 16 of Decbr Last Commanded by Captn Mayo she has had the winds from the Southerd all the way and we have had the wnds from the N thease 3 weeks past in Latd of 19:22 South and Longtdd of 17:40 West [161]   Tuesday March 26 1793 Clear with Light Breases the wind att East Steard N by E aut 12 in Lattd of 17:21 South this day Patrick Mr McMahan a marine was confined by Lieut Pouldon for Repeated irregurlar behavour Drunkenness and unsoldier Like bahaivour  Wedensday 27 Clear with Light Breases the wind att E by S Steard N by E att 12 in Latd of 15:47 South afternoon Wind att NE Steard NW by N  Thursday 28 Clear weather with Lighte Breases the wind att E by N Steard N by E in Latd of 14:30 this afternoon the Ships Company was quarterd and Excercised the Great Guns for an hour att Night fresh Breases the Boy Thos owen punished with 6 Lashes  Friday 29 Clowdy with fresh Breases the wind att East Steard N by E in Latd of 11:54 South  Sataday 30th Clear with fresh Breases the wind att East Steard N by E this day Exersised the Great Guns in Latd of 9 30 South  January 1.t 1794. We begin the New Year with very seasonable rains which will ensure us a tollerable tho' late crop of Indian Corn. Wind S E. 2 Fine genial Showers. Wind East. 3 Showers. Went to Sydney The Governor as usual very polite. Wind East. 4 Showers came up from Sydney Wind East. 5 Cloudy. The Francis a Colonial vessel sailed for Norfolk. Ration this week 8 ld Wheat 2 ld Paddy [a] nd 4 ld Beef. Wind S E. 6 Rain Wind S E. 7 Rain Wind N E. [8] Continual heavy rain. Wind N E. Fine growing weather. 9 Fine [w] eather wind East. 10 Cloudy - Wind North. A most atrocious murder was committed by persons unknown on the body of one Lewis he was supposed to be worth some money which he allways carried about him he was found buried under some wood his throat cut and two stabs in [h] is side. 11 Sultry Wind North. 12 o. Wind North about 4 o'[c] lock in the afternoon the wind changed to the S E a heavy rain came on with thunder and lightening and an instantaneous gale of wind the heavyest I ever experienced it tore trees up by the roots unrooft many houses among others my own and I am much afraid we shall hear of accidents happening to some of the boats going to Sydney it held up for some short time but the rain thunder and lightening came on again about 8 o'clock and continued with intervals the whole night.  13 Showers Wind East. It appears that he heavy gale of wind which came on the 12 was partial and came in a column its course was N E to N W. 14 Showers hard rain in the Night with heavy wind at S E. 15 Cloudy with wind at S E. rain in the Evng. 16 Rain high wind from S E. which continued the whole night. 17 Heavy rain from the S E. 18. Fine warm weather. Wind N W. 19 Hott wind Do. it appears from general observation that the rain comes from the S E or S W (rarely tho' sometimes from N E) and the hott weather from W. NW &c. 20 Hott wind N W. 21 Do. Do.  22 Do. Do. 23 Cloudy. Wind S E. 24 Sultry. Wind West. 25 Excessive Hott. Wind West. The Ration this week 8 lb Wheat and 3 pound of Pork. one half of the wheat at the settlement expended. 26 Hott. Wind West not more than 9 weeks wheat. Lightening from the W.ward. 27. Sultry Wind West with thunder in the Evening. 28 Sultry with Showers from the Eastward. 29 Showers. Wind South. 30 Sultry with Showers Wind East. Crimes multiply fast punishment seems to have little effect with the most part. Some preventative orders which had been given out by The Govr Phillips were suffer'd to grow obsolete wh. in my opinion is one great cause of the present multiplicity of crimes; the Freemen have had to great liberty and have in many instances been the receivers of stolen goods. -- 31 Sultry at times and cloudy wind East.  Feby. 1 Cloudy Wind East. 2 Showers Wind S E. 3 Cloudy Wind N W. 4 Sultry Wind Do. 5 Excessive Hott. This is the hottest time of the year. Wind East. 6 Hot and cloudy Wind South. Our stores diminish fast there is not more than a months provision (salt meat) in the store what means will be taken to provide the convicts with a ration in case of no ship coming is yet unknown. 7 Showers with heat. Wind West. God Almighty has been very bountiful to us in giving us such fine refreshing showers which will secure to us a good crop of Indian Corn of the greatest consequence to us when we have every reason to believe that little or no assistance will be given us from Europe. and it is much to be feared that the Shaw Hamauzur will fail us as her time is expired. 8 Hott. Wind East. The Ration the same as before. 9 Excessive Hott. Wind N W. Thunder lightening and rain from the S E. Hott . Wind 10 Hott. Wind East. 11 Hott. Wind N W. a Woman coming from Prospect hill was speared by the Natives.   Eight men absconded from the Settlement and are gone into the woods most probably for the purpose of robbing the Settlers. and this day 7 more from this place likewise absconded but were taken attempting to take a boat away. they are all Irish that came out either in the Bodington or Sugar cane. 12 Excessive Hott. Wind West. Rain much wanted. 13. Yesterday at 2 o'clock the Sloop from Norfolk Island arrived at Sydney and Officer and a party of soldiers came in her we are not yet acquainted with the reason. There is now only 3 weeks ration of Wheat and meat in store. Cloudy and Hott Wind East. 14 Cloudy and Hott. Wind N E. Yesterday went to Toongabbe for the first time these 12 months. The Crop of Indian Corn looks well. This day two years the Pitt arrived. 15 Some rain in the morning from the S W but the wind shifting to the N W it cleared up and became excessive hott. We have very favourable accounts of the crops at Norfolk Island Wheat is so low as 5s / pr Bushell and Indian Corn at 2s / 6d from forty to Sixty and even 80 Bushells were not uncomon. 16 Hott Wind East. 17 Hott. Wind S E. some small showers in the Night. 18 Cloudy W. West. A Heavy shower from the N W. which is not very common. 19 Hott. Wind N W. 20 Cloudy W. East.  21 Cloudy and Hott. Wind S E. 22 Cloudy Wind East. There appears to be a very great difference of opinion with regard to the Government of this country and its dependencies between Grs. G. and K. tho' in my opinion there ought to be but one for without all about it is a civil Government and the military are subordinate to it but this is not the prevailing opinion with those who have now the power. The Magistrates are laid aside a civil court has never been called since Govr. P left us &c. and altho' the act passed for the Establisshment of this colony says "Now are in all things to conform as nearly to the constitution of England as circumstances will admit" yet the reverse is followed. 23 Small showers. Wind S E. 24 Fine Showers for most of the day Wind S E. 25 Cloudy in the morning and Hott. Wind West. 26 Went down to Sydney ship sailed for Norfolk Cloudy Wind East. 27. Cloudy went with Major to his farm the buildings about the farmyard and the whole together more like and English farm than any I have seen. 28. Came up from Sydney Wind South. 1 March Showery Wind S E. 2. Govr. came up from Sydney dined with him. Hott: wind S E. 3 Hott. Wind S E. 4 Cloudy Wind East. 5 Cloudy and cool. wind South. 6. Cold. the hot weather appears to be gone. 7. Cool. Wind South a gentle Shower for about an hour. 8 Ration 4 ld Wheat 6 ld I. Corn and 2 ld Pork of which there is no more in the Store The Wheat is likewise out and the seed Wheat must be served it takes about 450 Bushells weekly. 9 This day we got an account of a Ship being in sight providence sent us it just in time as it will be the means of saving the seed wheat. 10 The Ship was blown off we are still ignorant of what she is. 11. The Ship call'd the William came in from England laden with Beef and Pork Iron: &c. but unfortunately no Flower Wh. is much wanted. She brings us accounts of Govr. Phillips  unworthy of their attachment; and if their gracious parent is pleased to consider its term as sufficient for trial they are feelingly convinced that it is sufficient for enjoyment.  Who is it then that favoured with the glorious gospel of the blessed God reproaches his creator for making his life as it were a span long? It is the worldly minded and the wicked whose projects of criminal aggrandisement are disconcerted by the rapid advance of death and whose expectations are to perish in the grave. It is the thoughtless and the licentious who (miserable error!) deem the great business of man to be amusement and who complain with inconsistent propriety if I may hazard the expression of the tediousness of hours and of the fleetness of Life.  -- The being who indulges useless sorrow instead of fulfilling the duties of life may claim our pity but should never excite admiration for in such characters there is no true greatness of soul or just sentiments of religion; indeed this kind of sorrow is rather the offspring of romantic notions and false refinements than of sensibility and a nice sense of duty.  -- Distinguish with exactness in thyself and others between wishes and will in the strictest sense - who has many wishes has generally but little will. Who has energy of will has few diverging wishes. Whose will is bent with energy on one must renounce the wishes of many things. Who cannot do this is not stamped with the majesty of human nature. The energy of choise the unison of various powers for one is only will born under the agonies of self-denial and renounced desires.  Sagacity in selecting the good and courage to honour it according to its degree determines your own degree of goodness. -- No wheedler loves.  Who can look quietly at nothing can never do anything wrong of imitation.  He who has genius and eloquence sufficient either to cover or to excuse his errors yet extenuates not but rather excuses himself and unequivocally confesses guilt - approches the circle of immortals whom human language has dignified with the appellation of Gods and saints. - Who crawling receives will give superciliously.  There are actions sentiments manners speeches; there is a silence of such magnitude energy decision - as to be singly worth a whole life of some men. He who has these features never can act meanly - all his actions words writings however to appearance ambiguous must be stamped by their superior energy.  There are many who are much acquainted with man and little with the world others that know the world and are not acquainted with man. These two kinds of knowledge mistaken for each other occasion many unjust and precipitated decisions.. let every one really intent on the study of mankind avoid confounding and carefully search to unite them.- Sneers are the blasts that proceeds quarrels.  There are rapid moments of joy and of grief moments which every one has at least once in his life that illuminate his character at once.  Who in certain moments can entirely lose himself in another and in the midst of the greatest action thinks of no observer is a jewel in the crown of human nature.  Who in receiving a benefit estimates its value more closely than in conferring one shall be a citizen of a better world.  Know that the great art to love your enemy consists in never losing sight of man in him; humanity has power over all that is human; the most inhuman man still remains man and never can throw off all taste for what becomes a man - but you must learn to wait.  The merely just can generally bear great virtues as little as great vices.  The more there is of mind in your solitary employments the more dignity is there in your character:- Truth wisdom love seek reasons. Malice only causes  He who can at all times sacrifice pleasure to duty approaches sublimity.  Call him Saint who can forget his own sufferings in the minute grief of others.  Trust him little who praises all him less who censures all and him least who is indifferent about all.  He who is master of the fittest moment to crush his enemy and neglects it is born to be a conqueror.  Save me from him who is inexaustible in evasions when he is called upon to do a good thing and teems with excuses when he has done a bad one.  Take here the grand secret - if not of pleasing all yet of displeasing none - court mediocrity avoid originality and sacrifice to fashion.  A god an animal a plant are not companions of man nor is the faultless - then judge with lenity of all; the coolest wisest best all without exception have their points their moments of enthusiasm fanaticism absence of mind faint heartedness stupidity. - if you allow not for these your criticisms on man will be a mass of accusations or caricatures.  Receive no satisfaction from premeditated impertinence - forget it forgive it - but keep him inexorably at a distance who offered it.  Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters pain and pleasure. It is for them alone to point out what we ought to do as well as to determine what we shall do. On the one hand the stand of right and wrong on the other the chain of causes and effects are fastened to their throne. They govern us in all we do in all we say in all we think. Every effort we can make to throw off our subjection will serve but to demonstrate and confirm it. In words a man may pretend to abjure their empire but in reality he will remain subject to it all the while. The principle of utility recognizes this subjection and assumes it for the foundation of that system the object of which is to rear the fabric of felicity by the hands of reason and of law. Systems which attempt to question it deal in sounds instead of sense in caprice instead of reason in darkness instead of light.  Every man has originally a right by the gift of God to the unrestrained enjoyment of life and personal freedom and to such a portion of the unapropriated production of the earth as is necessary for his comfortable subsistence.  He therefore who deprives another of these gifts or restrains him in the enjoyment of them except such deprivation or restraint is sanctioned by divine authority is guilty of an act of injustice to the individual and of a sin against God.  Everyman originally has authority from God to deprive another of these Gifts or to restrain him in the enjoyment of them in the following cases and in these only.  1.When in so doing he acts according to the express comand of God.  2. When he proceeds to such deprivation and restraint so far only as is necessary for the defence of the gifts of God to himself or in case his assistance is desired in the defence of the gifts of God to another against attacks unauthorized by God.  3. When he proceeds to such deprivation or restraint in consequence of the consent of the individual suffering it.  4. Every man sins against God who either voluntarily consents to relinquish or abridge any of his natural rights or who does not endeavour to resist by all requisite force every unauthorized invasion of them except he is persuaded that by imposing the restraints in question upon himself or by submitting to the imposition of them by another he shall no in any degree disqualify himself from answering on the whole the great purposes of his being. And in like manner every one sins against God who accepts from another a transfer of any of his rights unless he is persuaded that by such acceptance he shall not in any degree disqualify the latter from answering on the whole the great purposes of his being.   If these propositions are satisfactorily established they will be found to settle on solid and determinate grounds the obligations of justice in all its brances and to afford a clear insight into the distinguishing characteristics of what moralists have usually stiled perfect and imperfect rights.  The Idea of a God at the same distance from all men serves to console us from that shocking superiority of rank and fortune under the oppression of which we live. It is necessary to transport ourselves to the heights religion discovers to consider with a kind of calmness and indifference the frivolous pretensions of some and the confident haughtiness of others; and such objects of regret or of envy which appeared a Colossus to our imagination are changed into a grain of sand when we contrast them with the grand prospects which such sublime meditations display to our view.  Religion then comes continually to assist the civil legislation it speaks a language unknown to the laws it warms that sensibility which ought to advance even before reason it acts like light and interior warmth as it both enlightens and animates; and what we have not sufficiently observed is that in society its moral sentiments are the imperceptible tie of a number of parts which seem to be held by their own agreement and which would be successively detached if the chain which united them was ever to be broken.  A perfect model is necessary to fix the admiration of men and it is only by an intercourse more or less constant with that first model that several opinions which seem in appearance to arise merely from convenience have consistency.  Every thing is replaced and firmly established by religion it surrounds I may say the whole system of morality resembling that universal and mysterious force of physical nature which retains the planets in their orbits and subjects them to a regular revolution; and which in the midst of the general order it maintains escapes the observation of men and appears to their feeble sight unconscious of its own work.  What a subject for glory are the endowments of the mind when we can consider them as a participation of a sublime nature of which God alone is the perfect model. And how delightful then to yield to the ambition of elevating ourselves still more by exercising our thoughts and improving all our faculties.  In short how many charms has the observation of nature when at every new discovery we believe we advance a step towards an acquaintance with that exalted wisdom which has prescribed laws to the universe and maintains it in harmony! It is then and only then that the study is truly interesting and the progress of knowledge becomes an increase of happiness.  And that while religion improves the understanding it affords a solid support during the different vicissitudes of life. -- It is the friend of the oppressed the refuge of the being who has been unjustly or cruelly slandered as well as the man of feeling who is fatiuged with viewing the vices and depravity of the world.  Without these enlivening hopes where would be the enjoyment of friendship. how unite to that charm of our days the habitual image of a death without hope? It would indeed be a dream of pleasure and we should soon wake to a keener sense of anguish; In short the world without the Idea of God would be only a desert embelishd by a few delusions -- Yet men disenchanted by the light of reason would find nothing throughout but subjects of sadness.  The most distinct characteristick of Christianity is the spirit of charity and forbearance which pervades its precepts. The ancients undoubtedly respected the beneficent virtues; but the precept which commends the poor and the weak to the protection of the opulent belongs essentially to our religion. With what care with what love the Christian legislator returns continually to the same sentiment and interest! The tenderest pity lent to his words a persuavive unction but I admire above all the awful lesson he has given in explaining the close union established between our sentiments towards the supreme being and our duties towards men. Thus after having termed the love of God the first commandment of of the Law the Evangalist adds and the second which is like unto it is to love thy neighbour as thyself. The second which is like unto it! what simplicity what extent in that expression! Can any thing be more interresting and sublime than to offer continually to our mind the Idea of a God taking on himself the gratitude of the unfortunate? where find any principle of morality of which the influence can ever equal such a grand thought? The poor the miserable however abject their state appear surrounded with the symbol of glory when the love of humanity becomes an expression of the sentiments which elevate us to God and the mind ceases to be lost in the immensity of his perfections when we hope to maintain an habitual intercourse with the supreme being by the services which we render unto men. It is thus that a single thought spreads a new light on our duty and gives to Metaphisical Ideas a substance comformable to our organs.  A composition is perfect when the matter rises out of the subject when the thoughts are agreable to the matter and the expressions suitable to the thoughts. Where there is no inconsistency from the beginning to the end. When the whole is perspicuous in the beautiful order of its parts and formed in due symetry and proportion.  Epitaph on Miss Cambell of musical abilities who excelled  in an eminent degree on the pedal-harp.  O' pensive passenger do not deny  To pause awhile and weep upon this tomb;  For here the cold remains of Cambell lie -  This narrow spot the vernal maidens doom.  With her alas! The fairest talents fell -  And now her harp's melodious song is o'er;  Gone is that pulse which pity lov'd to swell  And all her virtues are on earth no more.  Yes she was gentle as the twilight breath  That on the fainting violet's bosom blows  Meekly she bow'd her to the frost of death  In faded semblance of the silver rose.  And oft low bending o'er this hallow'd ground  Shall the pure angel innocence appear;  And friendship like a hermit shall be found  To bathe the cricling sod with many a tear.  On the death of a much loved Parent.  O Friend! if Agony could ne'er displace  Peace from her soul or beauty from her face  If years of sufferance like some Saint she bore  And breath'd to virtue till she breath'd no more.  whom we may expect soon to see. The Ship left London 9 months ago and stopt at Cork 3 months. A Brig likewise is come in from Bengal she was taken by the French but 2 days after was retaken by the English Fleet she was bound for this place with Beef Arrack &c &c. 12 The Ship has 2080 Barrels of Beef and Pork. Some Iron Grind Stones with very little private trade. 13. Went down to Sydney and dined with the Lt. Governor. Govr. Phillips will without a doubt be out if his health will permit him which is very uncertain. 14 The Shaw-hamazur which sailed for India has never been heard of since she left this she has had full time to reach Bengal but no accounts of her had reached that place.   15. Left Sydney by land walked to Surveyor Generals farm 7 miles distance The country opens very fast farms almost the whole way which will in a short time join and make one continued range. 16. Continued my walk to Parramatta about 12 miles many good farms and with very little trouble there may be a good road all the way to Sydney. A heavy Shower in the Evening. 17. Hott tendency to rain. Rain in the Evening Wind South. Ration last week 4 ld Pork. 4 Do Wheat and 6 Do. I Corn: 18 Sultry and cloudy rain in the night from the E:ward. 19 Rain and sultry hott weather is much wanted for ye backwd corn. Wind S E. 20 Cloudy Wind West. 21. Cloudy with small rain. Misfortunes come on quick. I hope God Almighty will give me resolution to bear up against them. 22. Hott. Wind West. This is my birth day and I ought to be thankfull to God Almighty that he has still preserved me from the dangers I have experienced. Fair was the star under which I was born but `tis much darkened yet I will put my trust in him only who is able to carry me thro' this tedious life. I hope I may deserve it.- The Ration this week 10 ld I. Corn (which is green and when dried and ground does not produce above 6ld Meal) and 7 ld Beef. 23. Very Hott. Wind West. 24 Excessive Hott. Wind West. 25 Hott. Wind West. 26. Do. Do. 27. Small rain Wind East. 28. Very Hott. Wind West. 29. Hott Wind South lightening in the Night. 30. Warm. Rain in the Evening. Wind East. 31 Rain all the night and day the heaviest I ever experienced in this country. Hott weather is much wanted to ripen the I. Corn. 1 April Continuance of rain. Wind East. 2 Warm. Wind East. 3 Showers with intervals of Hott weather This day a man was unfortunately kill'd by the fall of a tree. Sailed the Brig for the N W coast of America 5 men endeavoured to escape in her but were brought back and sentenced 300 lashes. 4 The Dadalus arrived from Otaheite. Warm. Wind West. 5 Hott Wind West. The Schooner came from Norfolk Id: and brought some men who had been sent for by the Lt. Govr. for having been the cause of the soldiers having been disarmed by Lt. Govr. King. Some of them received 100 lashes at the head of the Regiment by the Drummers of the Corps. If this is not a strong symptom of Military Government I do not know what is. 6 Hott. Wind West. Ration 7 ld Beef and 10 ld Indian Corn. Gott in 4 Acres Wheat. 7 Do. Do. 8 Cloudy. Wind West. 9 Do. Do. 10 Rain and Sun Wind South. 11 Cloudy Wind South. 12 Do. Do. Ration 4 ld Pork 10 ld Indian Corn. 13 Warm Wind S. E. 14 Rain Wind East. 15 Rain Wind East. Dined with the LtGovr 16 An unfortunate rencontre took place between the Natives and the Constables who guard the corn at Toongable! They had in the morning drove about 12 of them out of the corn laden with bags of corn. In the Evening they returned to the number of 20 and again begun filling their baggs upon the Constables endeavouring to drive them away they turned on them threw some spears but fortunately without hurting any of our men they then closed in upon them in consequence one was shott and one cut down with a sword the head of one is brought in and the Lt. Govr. has preserved it as a present for Dr. Hunter. 17. Cool: Wind S E. 18 Do. Do. 19 Do. Do. The Dadalus has brought from Otaheite the bread fruit tree I am fearful the winters are too cold for it. We have likewise the Ava tree the juice of whose fruit they make a drink wh. when put in fermentation makes an intoxicating liquor. 20 Cloudy Wind South. 21 Some rain. The day after the two Natives were kill'd six others were driven out of the Corn it will be absolutely necessary if the preservation of property is an object to take some fatal steps with them. 22 Some rain Wind West. 23 Do. A report of two Ships. Wind East. 24 The Colours were hoisted for Saint George's day which was the cause of the report of Ships. Cloudy Wind East. 25 Do. Do. 26. Some rain Wind S E. 27. Very warm seasonable weather for I. Corn. Wind North. 28 Do. Do. 29 Do. Do. 30 Went down to Sydney dined and supt with Lt. Govr: 1 May. Returned. 2. Fine weather Wind S E. 3 Showers. Wind S E. 4 Cloudy Wind East. 5 Cloudy and small rain Wind S E. 6 Tho' I am far putting any faith in dreams yet last night I had one so extraordinary that I cannot help setting it down the time I had it. I dreamt that G. P. had arrived from England that I had some conversation with him and as we were walking he turned out of the road to look at something and fell into a precipice I clearly saw him fall and when he was at the bottom I heard him distinctly say. I must now go home again. Soon after I saw the colors on board the ship hoisted half mast high it was a large ship with a flash deck. Cloudy. Wind S E. 7th Fine warm weather Wind West. 8 Do. Do. On the 4th sailed the Wm. for the coast to fish. 9 Some small rain. Wind S E. 10 Rain Wind S W. 11 Continuance of rain very prejudicial to the after I. Corn tho' of some service to the wheat. W. S E. 12 Cloudy Wind West. The Lieut Govr: is encouraging people to settle by remitting some short space of their time he wishes to have an extensive settlement upon the banks of the Hawkesbury the land is very fine and it certainly would have been fortunate had the original settlement been formed there. 13. Warm Wind N W. This day seven years Govr: Phillip sailed from England to form the settlement of N.S.Wales. When he left it there were 1700 Acres in cultivation there are now 4900 and odd and settlers clearing land every day. 14 Hott. Wind N W. 15 Warm Wind West. 16. Light frosts in the night warm in the day Wind West. 17. Do. wind N W. every thing excessive high common brown sugar [3 / 6] and 4 / per pound. Tea £1: 1s; Soap 4 / s Spirits 40 / indeed the [trad] e carried by those of a very different profession does no honor [to] it. 18. Mild day high wind from W:ward. 19 Fair W. West.  Parramatta  August 24th 1794.  Dear Madam  You will probably have heard before this reaches England of our safe arrival in New South Wales. We have much to bless the Lord for who conducted us safe through the mighty waters and brought us to our. the desired haven. I wish I had a greater sense of the Divine mercies and were more humbly dependent upon the goodness of Providence and Grace.  We are now pretty comfortably settled at Parramatta and shall not be removed to Norfolk Island while Major Grose is Lieut. Governor. You will have heard of Mr. Johnson 's quarrel with the present Lieut Governor and how uncomfortably we are situated in point of Religion. Mr. Johnson informs me that things in that respect were never anything like so bad as at present there is so little attention paid even to mere morality. The differences between Mr. Johnson and the Lieut. Governor hath gone to a very great length which renders it exceedingly unpleasant to me as it gives me a degree of pain when in company with either of the contending parties as I am constrained then to be under a sort of necessity of being guarded in my expressions. I am resident about 14 miles from Mr. Johnson and have to preach at several places but have no church at any of them. I bless God my congregation is constantly increasing and two or three have begun to enquire what they must do to be saved. I hope our present dark night is the womb of a bright morning not that I expect to see so many turned from Darkness to Light. yet I have no doubt hut He will own and bless his word to the eternal salvation of some of these unhappy people. Nothing can be done at Sydney while Mr. Johnson and the Governor are so at variance. The Lord will arise by and by & our enemies will be scattered. [7]   Things are better upon the whole than I expected to find them among such abandoned people. I am not surprised to see them cast such contempt upon God and Religion knowing the human heart to he so full of enmity to Christ and his Gospel. What gives me the greatest uneasiness is the unhappy differences which prevails between Mr. Johnson and the Lieut. Governor. As I enjoy some privileges which Mr. Johnson at present does not this hurts him a good deal. Though I am favoured no more than any other officer or than Mr. Johnson was before he quarreled with Major Grose yet to see the Governor pay me more attention than he does him gives him much pain. Mr. Johnson has been treated unkindly. I must and will take his part in what I see he is right but then I must not it is not my duty to he at variance with the Governor here if I can consistant with my duty and conscience avoid it. I cannot describe our situation: it is such an uncommon one. All the higher ranks are lost to God and Religion and you may so form an idea of the characters of the lower orders.  While we were at Mr. Johnsons their house was broken open and a good quantity of sugar was stolen belonging to Mrs. J. and 70 lb. of Coffee belonging to me I had also 6 pairs of shoes stolen from me to by Mr. Johnsons servant. We do in the literal sense dwell amongst lions.  Mrs. M is very well and our little daughter. She desires her kindest love to you. She will write probably to you by the next ship. Present my respects to Mr. Stokes.  I am  Dear Madam  Yours &c &c  SAMUEL MARSDEN  Please tell Edward that the mellon seed he gave me is now growing up on Kingston's Farm and sho'd be happy if he cou'd partake of them when ripe.  Paramatta  December 13th 1794  Dear Madam  I am convinced you will receive with peculiar satisfaction the information of our safe arrival in New South Wales. I shall not soon forget your kind attention and civility shown to me in London though transported to this distant part of the universe.  I have met with nothing so bad as I might have expected before we sailed from England. Since we arrived in this colony we have been very well provided with all the common necessaries of life. The climate is fine and healthy and agrees very well with my constitution. I have not suffered one single day of sickness since we came here.  The country is very romantic beautifully formed by nature and will be most delightful when it becomes a little more opened. It abounds with beautiful shrubs and ferns of various kinds. We are settled at Parramatta about 14 miles distant from Sydney where Mr. Johnson resides. There is a fine river which runs up from Sydney to Parramatta and boats continually passing to and fro so that we can easily visit each other. I have one companion at Parramatta the commanding officer wife (Mrs. MacArthur) a very pleasant agreeable Lady mother of three fine children. At Sydney there are several Ladies so that we have some respectable society. Upon the whole my situation is far more comfortable than I expected to find.  I experience a great loss of Religious Society. Our general conversation in company is very different from what I have been accustomed to in England. It all turns upon worldly affairs. Religion is seldom a subject of conversation excepting to ridicule its doctrines or professions never to edify one another. There appears humanly speaking little prospect of doing good - however I do not despair for the work is not man's but the Lord's. I trust we are not forgotten at a Throne of Grace by the faithful in England. The Lord had some grand design in sending his gospel to this dark benighted part of the world and therefore this consideration should resign us to his Dispensations who worketh all things according to the Counsel of [NN]. [9] [10]   You would hear from Miss Amey that I got a daughter off the South Cape of New Holland. The Lord preserved us both in a wonderful manner and by good nursing of Mrs. Johnson we both of us soon recovered the fatigues of a storm. She is now nine months old and a very healthy child.  Mr. M. joins with me in best respects to Mr. Stokes & family.  I am  Dear Madam  Yours &c  ELIZA MARSDEN  Letters From An Exile At Botany Bay To His Aunt In Dumfries  Giving A Particular Account Of The Settlement Of New South Wales With The Customs And Manners Of The Inhabitants  Thomas Watling  Penrith   Ann Bell   1794   [iii] THE PUBLISHER OF THE ENSUING PRODUCTION SENDS IT INTO THE WORLD FOR THE TWO FOLLOWING REASONS.  FIRST; he hopes it may contribute a little to the relief of an old infirm and friendless woman to whom it is addressed.  And Secondly; he imagines the account here given of a country so little known may be interesting to some and amusing to all. With the original which is now in his hands he declines taking any liberty but leaves the unfortunate exile to tell his story exactly in his own words and how he acquits himself the public must determine.  [iv] The publisher has several letters from the same author still in his hands; and should these meet with a favourable reception they are intended to be published together with a life of the author on some future occasion.   LETTERS &c.  [1] [May 12 1793]   Sydney-Cove Port-Jackson   New-South-Wales May 12th 1793.   MY EVER REVERED AUNT  EMBRACING the opportunity of a returning vessel I would waft you from this place a second testimonial of my insuperable attachment and remembance. My first letter per the Atlantic I hope you have received before; but should it be otherwise after speaking to the present state of my mind I shall hastily recapitulate its principal contents.  [2] In my saddest hours and God knows there are many of them I have observed you are then most busy with my memory. Melancholy's sombre shadow louring over my soul endears the fleeting moment by impelling me to write to you. Indeed it is solely owing to this despondent state of mind that ought I have produced for those last four years proceeds. When this gloom frowns dreadful over the vista of my being I but too much indulge the dreary prospect - exploring the wide domain of adversity terminated only by the impending darkness;- hence it is that whatever flows from my pen or is laboured by my pencil affects in some degree the tone of mind that possess me at the period of its production.  Recurring now to my former letter:- it informed that I had wrote you from Rio de Janeiro; that I had escaped at the Cape of Good-Hope where I was betrayed by the mercenary Dutch and remanded to captivity; whence after seven months of imprisonment the Royal Admiral E. Indiaman landed me here; where the pur-blind jurisprudence of a Scottish tribunal doubtless first intended me.  To lead you through the labyrinth of all my sufferings from the 28th of December 1791 down to the present period is a thing utterly impossible; neither is it my duty to harrow up your feelings by the attempt. - It better becomes me to soothe those sorrows that vague report in the public prints has most likely excited than to give an additional stab to so valued a life - a life I have already though innocently almost extinguished.  [3] Yet not to pass over all too rapid; and to shew how dear you were to me in my most prosperous state take the subsequent specimen intended for you when I deemed myself a favored denizen of heaven - breathing a few hours of inestimable liberty.   [4] [December 13 1791]   Dated Cape of Good Hope   African-Coast Tuesday Dec. 13th 1791.   MY DEAREST AUNT  YOUR loved Watling is at liberty! to say ought else is almost unnecessary as I am conscious your amiable tender heart will now hope every thing. Indeed I am very incapable to write more at present; nor will I ever be master of sufficient language to give any semblance to these sensations I just now experience. True I am in a remote clime where Slavery wields her iron sceptre and where slaves are at this moment attending me - yet blessed be Divine Mercy I enjoy freedom! - I that but yesterday had the ignominious epithet convict adhibited to my name am again myself! to-day all nature seems renovated. The sun that has ben clouded for three years has regained his splendour and the meads their verdure. 'Tis the jubilee of creation; at least I will believe so. - I tread in air; my spirits are electrified; and my poor heart beats quick with redoubled fervor and emotion towards that peaceful little fire side which it has long sighed after and bled for.  I hold it imprudent to commit to paper how I have obtained emancipation. I will only say that the ship Pitt lyes opposite my window and means to sail by Sunday next; after when should any other vessel here tend to Europe if possible I will procure a passage - and be happy. [5]   O my poor dear dear aunt rejoice with me! my senses are all absorbed in the most pleasing delirium that ever was poured upon mortal. Most merciful good God design to pardon all that cavil and innate murmuring I have so frequently emited against thy wise and just dispensations. Here upon my bended knee permit me to adore and render Thee the warmest gratulations for those numberless blessings conferred upon an unworthy sinner - particularly this last most exquisitely felt - this sum-total of terrene felicity.  Come then my long drooping and forlorn Hope and once more extend thy fairy landscapes and display thy tinselled forms. My glowing bosom can cheerfully heighten even thy most vivid colouring and indulge thy most flattering phantoms. Best boon of indulgent heaven never never never again fly thy suppliant votary but henceforth dwell unmolested in this unambitious thrice happy breast.  So soon as I have discharged this letter I shall fabricate schemes for a continuation of humble happiness. It is my wish that we would together with my dear and faithful C --- - lead the residue of our days in obscurity from the vices and follies of this transitory faithless world;- and every dawning day and setting sun offer up to the Father of Mercies a sincere prayer for the most distinguished of benefactions toward us his most favoured of creatures. [6]   May that gracious Almighty and every good angel protect you and haste that happy moment that restores us together - when the returning prodigal shall throw himself at your feet - recount all his sorrows - and ever remain under the influence of your indulgent eye and tender monition.  I am  Dear Aunt &c.  It is needless to tell how soon the preceding became a most bitter contrast; but the nauseous cup was poured out for me and I was born to drink it to the very dregs. - O dread Jehovah! wherefore didst thou so tenderly affix the giddy height of fragile human felicity so directly over the tremendous abyss of blackest and deepest of misery? - surely but to render me the most wretched and unhappy of all mankind!  Drop but one single tear over this rueful feature of my existence and if possible - forget it.  I may now say that my constitution has after all this had sufficient strength to combat the repeated attacks of a smart fever; and I could also say much more but it being only of the same melancholy tenor I shall for the time wave egotism and commence a slight contour of this novel country:- not however expecting connection you must just accept of each wild idea as it presents itself. [7]   [December 13 1791 Continued: Account of the Colony]   BRITAIN I believe still entertains and very justly an idea of the sterility and miserable state of N. S. Wales. It will be long before ever it can even support itself. - Still that country so famed for charity and liberality of sentiment I doubt not will persevere to continue it. - When I have seen so much wanton cruelty practised on board the English hulks on poor wretches without the least colour of justice what may I not reasonably infer? - French Bastile nor Spanish Inquisition could not centre more of horrors.  Our longest day coincides exactly with your shortest; and vice versa. The climate is an extremely sultry one especially in summer; and yet paradoxical as it may appear it is in no wise propitious for tropical vegetation. A few European culinary vegetables grow but never arrive to their pristine maturity and when re-transplanted dwindle unto nothing. - The face of the country is deceitful; having every appearance of fertility; and yet productive of no one article in itself fit for the support of mankind.  The flattering appearance of nature may be offered as the best apology for those mistaken eulogisms lavished by a late eminent circumnavigator upon this place. Perhaps nothing can surpass the circumambient windings and romantic banks of a narrow arm of the sea that leads from this to Parramatta another settlement about fourteen miles off. The Poet may there descry numberless beauties; nor can there be fitter haunts for his imagination. The elysian scenery of a Telemachus;- the secret recesses for a Thomson's musidora;- arcadian shades or classic bowers present themselves at every winding to the ravished eye. - Overhead the most grotesque foliage yields a shade where cooling zephyrs breathe every perfume. Mangrove avenues and picturesque rocks entwined with non-descript flowers:- In short were the benefits in the least equal to the specious external this country need hardly give place to any other on earth. [8]   Often amid these coveted solitudes do I wander by the silent moon along the margin of some nameless stream and pray for the most loved of aunts and for my dearest C --- -. The willing tear will often fall when I reflect upon your widowed and impotent condition. - "If in existence" I exclaim "alas! indigence and pallid hunger most likely guards her humble door whilst her modest heart pines in silence unknown to and unacquainted with philantrophy. God of the widow & the orphan shield her helpless head and shed abroad comfort and pious resignation in her agonized and solitary heart."  My worthy friend Mr. H --- - may reasonably conclude that these romantic scenes will much amuse my pencil; though therein he is mistaken. The landscape painter may in vain seek here for that beauty which arises from happy-opposed off-scapes. Bold rising hills of auzure distances would be a kind of phaenomena. The principal traits of the country are extensive woods spread over a little-varied plain. I however confess that were I to select and combine I might avoid that sameness and find engaging employment. Trees wreathing their old fantastic roots on high; dissimilar in tint and foliage; cumbent upright fallen or shattered by lightning may be found at every step; whilst sympathetic glooms of twilight glimmering groves and wildest nature lulled in sound repose might much inspire the soul - all this I confess; but all this if I possibly can shall be considered of hereafter. [9]   In the warmer season the thunder very frequently rolls tremendous accompanied by a scorching wind so intolerable as almost to obstruct respiration;- whilst the surrounding horizon looks one entire sheet of uninterrupted flame. The air notwithstanding is in general dry. Fifteen months have been known to elapse without a single shower; but though thus dry the transitions of hot and cold are often surprisingly quick and contrasted without any discernable injury to the human system. I have felt one hour as intensely warm as if immediately under the line when the next has made me shiver with cold yet have I not experienced any harm there-from; owing without a doubt to the dryness and salubrity of the atmosphere.  [10] The vast number of green frogs reptiles and large insects among the grass and on the trees during the spring summer and fall make an incessant noise and clamour. They cannot fail to surprise the stranger exceedingly as he will hear their discordant croaking just by and sometimes all around him though he is unable to discover whence it proceeds:- nor can he perceive the animals from whence the sounds in the trees issue they being most effectually hid among the leaves and branches.  Should the curious Ornothologist or the prying Botanist emigrate here they could not fail of deriving ample gratification in their favorite pursuits in this luxuriant museum. Birds flowers shrubs and plants; of these many are tinged with hues that must baffle the happiest efforts of the pencil. - Quadrupeds are by no means various; but we have a variety of fishes the greater part of which are dropped and spangled with gold and silver and stained with dyes transparent and bralliant as the arch of heaven.  One great error in many of our voyagers is the giving pre-maturely a decided opinion of what falls within the circle of their observation. That the inhabitants of N. S. Wales are centuries behind some other savage nations in point of useful knowledge may be fact; but in this there is no criterion of judging mental ability. Their huts and canoes it is true are extremely rude and ill formed; but when we consider their non- [11] acquaintance with iron tools and the hardness of their wood it is more surprising that they can use it at all. - It being so ponderous as to sink immediately in water renders it entirely useless that way:- consequently no succedaneum here can be so easily moulded or so fit for the purposes of forming their little vessels as the bark - and this both as builders and sailors they manage with singular dexterity.  The people are in general very straight and firm but extremely ill featured; and in my opinion the women more so than the men. Irascibility ferocity cunning treachery revenge filth and immodesty are strikingly their dark characteristics - their virtues are so far from conspicuous that I have not as yet been able to discern them.  One thing I may adduce to their credit that they are not cannibals. They burn and bury their dead but from what motive it is hard to conceive; immolation it cannot be; as they have not apparently the smallest idea of a Deity much less of religion.  In imitation they are extremely apt particularly in mimicry; and they seem also in many other respects to be capable of much improvement; but they are so very unsteady and indolent that it would be almost next to a miracle to bring them to any degree of assiduity or perseverance.  [12] Here I cannot help making what may appear rather an ill-natured remark; our governors for they are all such have carried philosophy I do not say religion to such a pitch of refinement as is surprising. Many of these savages are allowed what is termed a freeman's ratio of provision for their idleness. They are bedecked at times with dress which they make away with the first opportunity preferring the originality of naked nature; and they are treated with the most singular tenderness. This you will suppose not more than laudable; but is there one spark of charity exhibited to poor wreches who are at least denominated christians? No they are frequently denied the common necessities of life! wrought to death under the oppressive heat of a burning sun; or barbarously afflicted with often little merited arbitrary punishment - this may be philosophy according to the calculation of our rigid dictators; but I think it is the falsest species of it I have ever known or heard of.  The men and women at an early age devote to their chieftain the former one of the upper fore-teeth; and the latter the first joint of the little finger of the left hand as a token of their fidelity. - This is one of their public ceremonies and is performed in the most bungling manner: but it is impossible to descend to particulars in the limits of a narrow letter.  A canoe spear wooden sword and shield short buldgeon stone hatchet fishing tackle and a rude basket formed of bark comprise the whole of their domestic or offensive implements. Their substitute for knives is ever at hand; the first shell that occurs fully answering that purpose. [13]   They are very quick eyed and dexterous in the striking of fish or aiming of the spear; but they are neither so athletic or nimble as might reasonably be expected in a savage race.  Bedaubing or streaking themselves in various forms with red or white earth they would prefer to the most tawdry birth-day suit whatever. The same want of taste keeps them honest this way - but victuals knives or hatchets vanish with them in a twinkling.  It pays no small compliment to poesy and painting that they are affected by the most unenlightened as well as the most refined countries. The natives are extremely fond of painting and often sit hours by me when at work. Several rocks round us have outre figures engraven in them; and some of their utensils and weapons are curiously carved considering the materials they have to work with.  Their Poets neither having the advantage of writing or printing are necessitated to travel as the hedge-preachers in Britain to extend their reputation. It is but lately that an itinerant sable Ossian called this way and held forth to some hundreds of his countrymen who after kindly entreating escorted him to some other bourne to further promulgate his composition. [14]   Whatever may be their merits in this department I confess that I am not connoisseur enough to guess at them. Of their music however I may aver that nothing can be more disagreeable unless it be their other favorite amusement dancing; for if harmony be the foundation of the one and grace of the other these aborigines have not as yet the smallest idea of either.  The hair smeared with gum and forked as the porcupine; a bone or straw stuck horizontally through the middle cartilege of the nose; and the body streaked over with red or white earth completes the ton of dress of the inhabitants of N. S. Wales either for war love or festivity.  Many of them are tatowed over the arms back and breast in a very irregular manner which seems to have been done at an early period of life for which they can assign no other reason than that of ornament.  It were presumption in me to speak of their language with which I am but little acquainted. Glossaries have been attempted by some of our pretending and aspiring gentry who I am conscious are as much ignorant of it as myself. I think it is by no means copious but rather confined to a few simple sounds; but whether this is or is not a beauty I leave to the learned to determine. To an European ear the articulation seems uncommonly wild and barbarous; owing very likely to those national prejudices every man imbibes and perhaps cannot entirely divest himself of. One thing they have in common with more refined communities that marks a clannish propinquity of kindred; which is a similarity in the termination of their sir-names: Terribi-long Benna-long Bye-gong Wye-gong Cole-bree Nan-bree &c. &c. are full as striking as Thomson Johnson and Robson. [15]   As it is impossible for me to be so particular as I could with the barbarian New Hollander must give place to a few other remarks I would inform you of ere I finish my letter.  Returning then back to general observations; and supposing you to have heard something of the swiftness meekness and singular formation of the Kangaroo of the Opposum Guanoe Lizards &c. I may say that not only these but the whole appearance of nature must be striking in the extreme to the adventurer and at first this will seem to him to be a country of enchantments. The generality of the birds and the beasts sleeping by day and singing or catering in the night is such an inversion in nature as is hitherto unknown.  The air the sky the land are objects entirely different from all that a Briton has been accustomed to see before. The sky clear and warm; in the summer very seldom overcast or any haze discernable in the azure; the rains when we have them falling in torrents & the clouds immediately dispersing. Thunder as said in loud contending peals happening often daily & always within every two or three days at this season of the year. Eruscations and flashes of lightning constantly succeeding each other in quick and rapid succession. The land an immense forest extended over a plain country the maritime parts of which are interspersed with rocks yet covered with venerable majestic trees hoary with age or torn with tempests. - In a word the easy liberal mind will be here filled with astonishment and find much entertainment from the various novel objects that every where present themselves. [16]   To sum up natural reflection for the present:- though there are a variety of objects to exercise the imagination yet such a sameness runs through the whole of the animal and vegetable creation of New South Wales that I think it would be no hard matter for the discerning naturalist to at once distinguish them from those of every other country by their peculiarity. The various Banksias do not more appear to belong to one common family than the Kangaroo Opposum and Kangaroo-rat to that of the Kangaroo. The fruit and seed of the trees and most of the underwood ligneous and scarce penetrable to the hardest instrument have all of them something of resemblance to each other. In short from the savage native in the animal and the towering red gum in the vegetable everything indigenous to this colony approaches or recedes by a very striking and singular gradation of proximity.  [17] Sydney-Cove from whence I write this letter is the principal settlement and is about 1 / 3 part as large as Dumfries. Parramatta or Rose-Hill that I have spoke of is somewhat less; and the latest settlement called Toongabbe about four miles farther inland is the least of all. Many houses of the two former settlements are built with brick and covered with tiles; but none of them the governor's excepted exceed the height of one story. His Excellency's indeed is composed of the common and attic orders with a pediment in front and commands the most exalted station but as neither the wood brick nor stone (lime there is none) are good for much it is simple and without any other embellishment whatever.  It is impossible for a well-wisher to his country not to breath a sigh should he visit us nay the genuine British patriot could scarce refrain from dropping a tear upon a survey of such mistaken policy. To see what has been done in the space of five or six years of clearing building and planting is astonishing. To behold hundreds of hands laboriously mis-employed that might be of service and not burthensome to their country assuredly deserves attention and reformation; for whatsoever interested men may advance to the contrary I humbly declare that it is my opinion that all that has been done is of little service to our support and of none at all to government; and that neither this nor the ensuing century will see us able to subsist ourselves much less to retaliate what has been lavished upon so very wild an adventure.  [18] Norfolk is a small rocky island in the sea and is governed by a deputy named King. It lyes in latitude 29° . 3. south longitude 168° . 10. east. Its length does not exceed seven nor its breadth four miles; and it is about eight or ten days sail from Sydney. Capital offences done in this island are reserved to the decision of this tribunal; where the culprits are brought to undergo a form of trial. I will not say but justice in a criminal court may be administered impartially; but instances of oppression and mean souled despotism are so glaring and frequent as to banish every hope of generosity and urbanity from such as I am:- for unless we can flatter and cajole the vices and follies of superiors with the most abominable servility nothing is to be expected - and even this conduct very often after all meets with its just reward:- neglect and contempt.  As a late journalist is much anxious to insinuate the assiduity and virtue of governor P --- - in urging matrimonial connections and forbidding illicit ones I think I may here remark the efficacy of his endeavours. Had such a scheme taken place possibly something good might have accrued though little I think could reasonably have been expected from the coupling of whore and rogue together. Be this as it may I think that it would have been equally praise-worthy in his Excellency to have recommended to our betters the setting us a continent example; in lieu of which there is scarce a man without his mistress. The high class first exhibit it; and the low to do them justice faithfully copy it. [19]   I have observed instances in the papers of ladies of easy virtue stoutly withstanding the royal mercy and bravely preferring death to Botany-Bay; but I would beg them to permit me who am also a prisoner to encourage and advise them to behave more pliant in future and by so doing obtain their best wishes. Henceforth be they most forward in embracing every opportunity that occurs for transportation. They may rest assured that they will meet with every indulgence from the humane officers and sailors in the passage; and after running the gauntlet there will notwithstanding be certain of coming upon immediate keeping at their arrival. Nay more if any girl of uncommon spirit with a happy talent for dissention and no doubt but such there are should attract the affection of one in office she may console herself with the comfortable prospect of rendering every one unhappy around her; for by her duplicity and simulation she may so far agitate her cully supposing him one of the springs of our government as to make our infant colony quake to the very centre.  But be she ever so dispicable in person or in manners here she may depend that she will dress and live better and easier than ever she did in the prior part of her prostitution.  Now for a contrast. - If a man's abilities are good they are his bane and impede his emancipation. He must abide upon the colony and become the property of some haughty despot; or be lent about as an household utensil to his neighbours - there to exert these abilities without any other emoluments than illiberal reflection; for the least apparent murmuring would instantaneously be construed insolence and could not fail though he had faithfully served years to immediately damn him for ever in this life - for it would be burthened by cruelty hunger and the most laborious of employment. [20]   Be my merits what they may I am sorry to say that they have been pursued by a good deal of this malign fortune I now mention; and for which I quote myself as one instance to ascertain the truth of. My employment is painting for J. W --- - esq. the non-descript productions of the country; and for which I have the rewards hinted at in the preceding sentence. The performances are in consequence such as may be expected from genius in bondage to a very mercenary sordid person. There are thank God no fetters for the soul: collected in herself she scorns ungenerous treatment or a prostitution of her perfections; nor will she meanly pluck the laurel from her own brow to deck that of her unworthy governor. Let it suffice to Britain that my youthful hopes and reputation are levelled in the dust and that my old age will be unhoused and indigent; but never let her presume to barter to interested men the efforts of the artist or lowers of the mind; for those are placed infinitely above her reach.  [21] I could along with this point out many practices equally obnoxious to honor or justice; but coming from my pen they might savour so much of virulence and so little of candour that I shall wave them. Though I have nothing to expect from or thank my natal abode for still fallen as I am it would pain me to have my veracity even doubted of by those I am unknown to.  Should all or any of these observations seem not quite original they may still prove entertaining from their simplicity and truth. If therefore the publication of such a letter after the revisal by an abler hand can be in the least conducive to the interest of my dear aunt I shall yet account myself not altogether cast away; and shall take care to furnish her with materials by every opportunity. There however are reflections which I need not point out that I could wish either entirely suppressed or moulded into such a form that should they recoil here they may not create me cruel and invincible enemies. And if any person can be found whose influence is so powerful as to extend here and soften my ill-fated condition one or two years would return me back with as correct an history and as faithful and finished a set of drawings of the picturesque botanic or animate curiosities of N. S. Wales as has ever yet been received in England.  Possibly E. M --- - esq. No. --- - Ely Place London; J. M --- - esq.; J. B --- - esq. at the India-Board Whitehall; J. St. B --- - esq. London; or Sir J. [22] J --- - any of these either jointly or severally might accomplish it. - I but submit this hint without the smallest expectation of ever profiting by it.  To make a proud comparison with a most celebrated literary character in order to soften the demerits of this heterogeneous and deranged performance I may truly say that it was neither executed under the shelter of acadmic bowers nor the patronage of the great; but in much indigence sickness and indescribable sorrow. That it was stolen from the nightly repose of a poor being who could but ill spare it and who had to toil as a slave by day and prohibited from such an attempt under the terror of rigid punishment - and yet who maugre every barrier accomplished the present from no other motive than to inform his abilities subservient to her necessities.  Having occupied so much of my paper and perhaps to little purpose it is high time to turn to my aunt and speak of my affection. Never did I find language so imperfect as at present nor letters to give so little satisfaction; for the former cannot shadow my feelings nor the latter yield me more than pensive melancholy reflection. Yet blessed be my God and you my dear dear parent even for the power of writing. It can soothe in come measure the black desponding hour and escape me to hold an imaginary correspondence with you. - If my present should reach Dumfries and find you in existence I can figure to myself the little assembled groupe anxious for its perusal; and my dear aunt as principal with the tear of unceasing sorrow stealing down her pallid cheek. O God here I would implore thee to speedily terminate to us both the bitter tempest of time; and grant to two afflicted and weary wanderers a happy meeting in the profound repose of thy beatific eternity! [23]   I find also for every one of my friends a regard strengthened in proportion to my long long absence. Heaven knows whether my weak heart could have stood equally faithful in prosperity; but certain it is the annals of adversity does not inroll a name superior to that of poor Watling for grateful fidelity to generous well-wishers.  To two young women who I doubt not will remember me I would present both my love and respect. I think Miss K. M --- - will not forget one who wishes her but barely as fortunate as he is unhappy. Neither should Miss A. B --- - disfavor the recollection of me for a similar reason. Tender motives I will not urge as they might possibly offend; but a letter from either especially Miss M --- - would be an acquisition superior to worldly fortune. For these two young people my regard must be very superior to impure desire; as at this remote distance and with so little hope of future comfort I never- [24] theless treasure for them both the most tender but most pure and virtuous of sentiments.  My old favourite Miss J. S --- - is also still a great one. Tell me whether or not she is single: she used ever to be a kind neighbour; and one I could cheerfully at any time in my better days have taken as a lovely and an agreeable partner through life.  I begged hard for a letter from Mr. H --- - in my last one to you. I hope he will indulge me with the state of himself and amiable spouse and family. Tell him it will be extremely painful should I return without having where to lay my head if he should forget me.  I shall not enumerate all my friends; flattering myself they will not deem it disrespectful. Woe-worn as I am my memory is not that treacherous as to forget favours though long since conferred; but having crowded myself to this last page I cannot do more than just repeat their revered names. Mr. and Mrs. M --- - B --- - D --- - and the pious Mrs. M. K --- -; these are foremost in my memory; yet thank God I have still more that I do not specify who occupy a warm corner in this unfortunate heart.  When you write to me be so kind as inform me of every little incident in the place; for the most trivial will be entertaining and dear to me. I have seen almost the whole of the London newspapers down to the last six months; but as they do not descend to occurrences done in that neighbourhood where my infant and happier years were passed their intelligence is flat and insipid. Your new bridge and theatre I have already heard of from a soldier who had wrought as a gardener with the M --- - and P. M --- - of D --- -; and who called upon me to see whether I could promote a little cause for him with his commanding officer. [25]   Possibly if you can insert an advertisement in any public print something to the following purport it may one day turn to advantage: as my sole motive is your interest and my happiness your well-being. I leave the scheme for you to decide upon and to act as the better judgment of yourself and friends shall determine.   [26] Address  Sydney-Cove Port Jackson   New South Wales May 20th 1793.  THOMAS WATLING  PRINCIPAL LIMNER IN NEW SOUTH WALES  Extremely anxious to deserve better of his Country proposes with due Deference under the Patronage of an impartial Public  The Execution of a PICTURESQUE DESCRIPTION of that COLONY  In an highly-finished Set of Drawings done faithfully upon the Spott from Nature in Mezzo Aqua-tinta or Water Colours.  THAT the subjects attempted shall be partial and general views of Sydney Parramatta and Toongabbe; romantic groves or native groupes and that if possible in the course of the work curiosities in ornothology and botany shall be interwoven.  Though the fabricator with deep confusion confesses himself a prisoner he would nevertheless flatter himself that a philanthropic and liberal minded nation would not render that an insuperable barrier; nor from so melancholy a circumstance deny him any claim to merit. He would modestly insinuate that he rates his abilities equal to the task proposed; and flatters himself that his performances shall be the most accurate and elegant that have as yet been received in Britain from the new world. [27]   Those gentlemen inclined to encourage a work attempted by an unfortunate being that possibly may not be utterly destitute of genius - are humbly requested to transmit their names (post paying) to Mrs. M. K --- - nigh &c.  *** No emolument is expected until the paintings or drawings shall arrive in Britain and be submitted to the subscribers for engraving; when should they be found worthy the indulgence and protection of the really unbiassed friends of lowly distressed merit - The author shall gratefully thank his patrons for what they may think him deserving for his labours.  Try to prevail with Mr. H --- - to write a good letter in my name to capt. M --- - at E --- - P --- -; stating that my present condition is chiefly owing to the low revenge of a certain military character now high in office. I would also beg the permission of dedicating this intended work to him which I have already privately commenced and which I have every reason to hope will not be a despicable one. Could he prevail with alderman M'C --- - to intercede for me if not to be emancipated at least to procure for me the indulgence of prosecuting my plan it would probably revive my almost extinguished emulation. Here again I refer you to your better judgment.  And now being upon the close of my letter - a letter that I am much anxious for its conveyance; I would earnestly implore that should it fall into the hands of strangers they would generously forward it to the person for whom it is addressed:- and that should it arrive in Dumfries and that tender being happily stolen from existence that they would add to this obligation a single line of information to the writer his most fervent prayers should be the retaliation. [28]   O! my dear aunt at the moment I write hastily these last lines my poor heart undergoes the most ominous pangs - Yet alas! why should it? since only in immortality I now fix my anchor for peace and rest. The sooner we meet in that state the sooner it is to be hoped will these painful perturbations cease and retrospection and sorrow be wiped forever from your eyes.  Pardon me best of parents that this il-pensoroso gloom urges me to affect you. - What would I not give to stretch me but one half hour upon my aged grandmother's grave? or what to throw me at your revered feet or mingle with your dust? Pardon such ideas! Oh me! aunt I am weak! hide this paragraph and impute it solely to the softening hand of ever dropping sorrow.  If there be a friend of mine that can yet recollect me I would thank him or her for a letter. No one commander of a vessel will refuse its carriage paying the inland postage and directing it to the care of E. L --- - esq. surgeon at Sydney N. S. Wales I need not say that I bless you; and that I am sure of your blessing in return; for if possible we are both of us more than sure of either. Remember we will meet if not in time in eternity. Meanwhile accept this tear and heart-felt adieu which is all at present that is in the power of your unhappy but most affectionate nephew   T. WATLING. the Paramatta  October 26th 1795.  Dear Madam  I received your kind present of the Candles and embrace this opportunity to thank you for them. I wrote to Mr. Stokes since Governor Hunter arrived to inform him that the Cows which were lost seven years ago are now found and am not certain whether I gave you a line or not at the same time. Governor Hunter's arrival hath given Mr. Johnson and myself peculiar satisfaction. We have some hopes that the wicked will not triumph so much as what they have done heretofore though I do not yet expect to see any great Reformation.  The enemy hath so complety possessed himself in the minds of all ranks and orders here that it is a matter of doubt with me that His Power will be ever seen in this place to fall like Lightning from Heaven. I wish the unfortunate Convicts were the greatest enemies to the Cross of Christ we had to encounter. Satan hath his Agents everywhere and generally some persons of influence and authority in the world. To do my Duty here as a Minister is extremely hard and burdensome. When I compare what I do with what I think I ought to do the whole of my work seems daily neglected. I am ashamed & confounded before God for all my shortcomings. A Physician bath no business when all the inhabitants around him are whole. This is exactly my case. I do not know one person that wants the great physician of Souls. I often wonder how some of your great preachers (your Newtons and Fosters in London) men of sound piety and real godliness would feel if they had to preach for six months and knew that they had not for that space of time two persons to preach to who ever made the enquiry "Where is God my Maker" or had the smallest concern for their souls. I should like to know what effect this supposed situation would have upon their great minds though I believe they could not tell me. I know this situation hath produced a very odd and I may add a very unpleasant effect upon mine. [13]   My religious feelings are very different from what they once were. I am often lead to doubt that I was wrong in England and much more so now. The Lord search and try my heart and make me sincere and unblameable before him in Love.  Government hath not provided me any place to perform public worship in yet neither do I know when they will. I am going to preach at the Hawkesbury settlement on Sunday next twenty miles distant from home and I know no more where I shall sleep or perform divine Service than you to whom I am writing. And what is much more trying I expect the people will absent themselves as soon as they know I am coming. These things render a ministers duty painful and difficult.  With regard to temporals our situation is much better than would be expected. Articles of comfort are often very dear but we are seldom without them. I paid a guinea a pound for the last Tea I bought here and three pounds a dozen for red and white wine. When I was at Norfolk Island about four months ago Tea sold there for 27 / - per lb. and Tobacco 10 / - Candles 3 / - Spirits £1 / 5 / - per Gallon and all other articles which would be procured from the ship that was there were equally extravagantly dear. Though this is the case we have no cause to complain of our outward comforts taking them all together. If everything was equally as agreeable we should be well situated. I have great reason to be thankful that I am happy in my own family; I believe few more so. As you are married I may mention this to you without risk of being laughed at. Did you know what sad feelings I sustained on account of Mrs. M. in my late voyage from Norfolk Island for nearly a fortnight together when every day and night too I expected to be buried in the Great Deep you would not have dropped that kind hint in Mr. Johnsons letter "Tell Mr. M to be kind to Mrs. Marsden." Your admonition is highly gratifying to me as it only enjoyns a repetition of what I take pleasure in. I should have been wretched and miserable here without a wife now I am happy and comfortable.  Our little daughter (whom probably you may have heard of) grows a fine girl and affords a little amusement for Mrs. Marsden. [14] Mrs. M. unites with me in every Christian respect to you and your family.  I am Dear Madam  Yours &c &c  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  In haste. Late in the evening. Excuse mistakes.  Elizabeth Farm Parramatta  1st Sept. 1795  Once again my much loved friend it is permitted me to sit down under a conviction that the letter I am about to write will be received by you with pleasure. By the capture of a ship off the coast of Brazil we were left without any direct intelligence from Europe for twelve months. We firmly believed that a Revolution or some national calamity had befallen Great Britain and we should be left altogether to ourselves until things at home had resumed some degree of order and the tempest a little subsidised. These fears however have by a late arrival proved without foundation.  This country possesses numerous advantages to persons holding appointments under Government. It seems the only part of the Globe where quiet is to be expected. We enjoy here one of the finest climates in the World. The necessaries of life are abundant and a fruitful soil affords us many luxuries. Nothing induces me to wish for a change but the difficulty of educating our children and were it otherwise it would be unjust towards them to confine them to so narrow a society. My desire is that they should see a little more of the world and better learn to appreciate this retirement. Such as it is the little creatures all speak of going home to England with rapture. My dear Edward almost quitted me without a tear. They have early imbibed an idea that England is the seat of happiness and delight; that it contains all that can be gratifying to their senses and that of course they are there to possess all they desire. [96] It would be difficult to undeceive young people bred up in so secluded a situation if they had not an opportunity given them of convincing themselves. But hereafter I shall much wonder if some of them make not this place the object of their choice. By the date of this letter you will see that we still reside on our farm at Parramatta a native name signifying the head of a river which it is. The town extends one mile in length from the landing-place and is terminated by the Government House which is built on an eminence named Rose Hill. Our farm which contains from 400 to 500 acres is bounded on three sides by water. This is particularly convenient. We have at this time about 120 acres in wheat all in a promising state. Our gardens with fruit and vegetables are extensive and produce abundantly.  It is now spring and the eye is delighted with the most beautiful variegated landscape. Almonds apricots pear and apple trees are in full bloom. The native shrubs are also in flower and the whole country gives a grateful perfume. There is a very good carriage road now made from hence to Sydney which by land is distant about 14 miles and another from this to the river Hawkesbury which is about 20 miles from hence in a direct line across the country. Parramatta is a central position between both. I have once visited the Hawkesbury and made the journey on horseback. The road is through an uninterrupted wood with the exception of the village of Toongabie a farm of Government and one or two others which we distinguish by the name of Greenlands on account of the fine grass and there being few trees compared with the other parts of the country which is occasionally brushy and more or less covered with underwood.  The greater part of the country is like an English park and the trees give it the appearance of a wilderness or shrubbery commonly attached to the habitations of people of fortune filled with a variety of native plants placed in a wild irregular manner. I was at the Hawkesbury three days. It is a noble fresh water river taking its rise in a precipitous range of mountains that it has hitherto been impossible to pass; many attempts have been made although in vain. I spent an entire day on this river going in a boat to a beautiful spot named by the late Governor "Richmond Hill" high and overlooking a great extent of country. On one side are those stupendous barriers to which I have alluded rising as it were immediately above your head; below the river itself still and unruffled; out of sight is heard a water fall whose distant murmurs add awfulness to the scene. I could have spent more time here but we were not without apprehensions of being interrupted by the natives as about that time they were very troublesome and had killed many white people on the banks of the river. The soil in the valley of this river is most productive and greatly superior to any that has been tilled in this country which has induced numbers to settle there but having no vessels there is at present much difficulty in transporting the produce to Sydney. [97] Our stock of cattle is large; we have now fifty head a dozen horses and about a thousand sheep.  You may conclude from this that we kill mutton but hitherto we have not been so extravagant. Next year Mr Macarthur tells me we may begin. I have now a very good dairy and in general make a sufficiency of butter to supply the family but it is at present so great an object to rear the calves that we are careful not to rob them of too much milk. We use our horses both for pleasure and profit; they alternately run in the chaise or cart.  Mr Macarthur has also set a Plough at work the first which has been used in the country and it is drawn sometimes by oxen and at others by horses. The ground was before tilled with the hoe. These details I am sensible have no other interest than as far as they serve to show the progressive state of this yet infant settlement.  Mr Macarthur once superintended the agricultural concerns of the Government but since the arrival of Governor Hunter he has declined further interference. By the kindness of the commanding officer of the Regiment we are permitted to reside here and there being a good road as I have before observed to Sydney Mr M. is enabled to attend to all his duties at headquarters although at times upon very short notice. Myself or one or more of the children occasionally accompany him. As the distance is convenient our stay is prolonged as business or pleasure require or we return the same day but as our family is large we do not choose to be long absent from home together.  Mr Macarthur has frequently in his employment 30 or 40 people whom we pay weekly for their labour. Eight are employed as stock-keepers in the garden stables and house; and five more besides women servants; these we both feed and clothe or at least we furnish them with the means of providing clothes for themselves. We have but two men fed at the expense of the Crown altho' there are persons who contrive to get twenty or more which the Governor does not or will not notice.  You will wonder how a return is made for the daily expense which it must appear to you we incur.  In the first place some thousands of persons are fed from the public stores perhaps between three or four thousand all of whom were formerly supplied with flour from England to meet the demand for bread. But since so many individuals have cleared farms and have thereby been enabled to raise a great quantity of grain in the country which at the present time is purchased by the Commissary at 10s. a bushel and issued for what are termed rations or the proportionate quantity due to each person instead of flour. In payment for which the Commissary issues a receipt approved of by the Government; and these receipts pass current here as coin and are taken by Masters of Ships and other adventurers who come to these parts with merchandise for sale. [98] When any number of these have been accumulated in the hands of individuals they are returned to the Commissary who gives a Bill on the Treasury in England for them. These bills amount to thirty or forty thousand pounds annually. How long Government may continue so expensive a plan it would be difficult to foresee. Pigs are bought upon the same system as would also sheep and cattle if their numbers would admit of their being killed. Beef might be sold at 4s. if not 5s. the lb. A good horse is worth £140 to £150. Be it ever so bad it never sells for less than £100. A cow is valued at about £80. An English cow that was the property of Colonel Grose sold for £100. From this statement you will perceive that those persons who took early precautions to raise livestock have at present singular advantages.  We have fattened and killed a great number of hogs in the year which enables us to feed a large establishment of servants. These labourers are such as have been convicts and whose time of transportation has expired. They then cease to be fed at the expense of Government and employ themselves as they please. Some endeavour to procure a passage home to England; some become settlers and others hire themselves out for labour. They demand an enormous price seldom less than 4s. or 5s. a day. For such as have many in their employment it becomes necessary to keep on hand large supplies of such articles as are most needed by these people for shops there are none. The officers in the Colony with a few others possessed of money or credit in England unite together and purchase the cargoes of such vessels as repair to this country from various quarters. Two or more are chosen from the number to bargain for the cargo offered for sale which is then divided amongst them in proportion to the amount of their subscriptions. This arrangement prevents monopoly and the impositions that would be otherwise practised by masters of ships. These details which may seem prolix are necessary to show you the mode in which we are in our infant condition compelled to proceed.  I have had the misfortune to lose a sweet Boy of eleven months old who died very suddenly by an illness occasioned by teething. The other three Elizabeth John and Mary are well. I have lately been made very happy by learning the safe arrival of Edward in England. We often remember and talk over in the evening the hospitalities which we have both received in Bridgerule Vicarage and happy shall I be if it is ever permitted me to mark my remembrance more strongly than is expressed in these lines.  If you are in the habit of visiting the Whitsilne family I pray that you will kindly remember me to them. The benevolence of the Major's heart will dispose him to rejoice at the success which has attended us and that the activity which was very early discernible in the mind of Mr Macarthur has had a field for advantageous exertion. [99] How is it my dearest friend that you are still single? Are you difficult to please? or has the war left you so few bachelors from amongst whom to choose? But suffer me to offer you a piece of advice: abate a few of your scruples and marry. I offer in myself an instance that it is not always with all our wise foreseeings those marriages which promise most or least happiness prove in their result such as our friends may predict. Few of mine I am certain when I married thought that either of us had taken a prudent step. I was considered indolent and inactive; Mr Macarthur too proud and haughty for our humble fortune or expectations and yet you see how bountifully Providence has dealt with us. At this time I can truly say no two people on earth can be happier than we are. In Mr Macarthur's society I experience the tenderest affections of a husband who is instructive and cheerful as a companion. He is an indulgent Father beloved as a Master and universally respected for the integrity of his character. Judge then my friend if I ought not to consider myself a happy woman.  I have hither in all my letters to my friends forborn to mention Mr Macarthur's name lest it might appear in me too ostentatious. Whenever you marry look out for good sense in a husband. You would never be happy with a person inferior to yourself in point of understanding. So much my early recollection of you and of your character bids me say.  E. M.  Parramatta  New South Wales  1 May 1796.  Dear Madam  Your kind favor dated March 10th 1795 we received Nov. 6th 95 but find myself at loss in what manner to express myself. Your good wishes and kind remembrance merit my warmest gratitude and that is the only tribute I can pay your goodness. I long for an opportunity of conversing with you face to face. This would enable me to open my mind more fully than I can now do with paper and ink but whether I shall ever be indulged with that privilege or no is still in the dark womb of Providence. We seem in our present situation to be almost totally cut off from all connexion with the world especially the virtuous part of it. Old England is no more than like a pleasing dream. When I think of it it appears to have no existance but in my own imagination. I feel as if I had once conversed with friends united in love by the same spirit - some faint remembrance of those pleasures still remain and I cannot but flatter myself with some distant hope that it will be again with me as in months past. Had we only a few pious friends to pass away an hour with it would render this colony more tolerable.  The want of a place for public worship is still to be regretted. We have not one at Parramatta nor any likely to be. [15] So little attention being paid to the ministers makes Religion appeal contemptible. Sometimes Mr. Marsden preaches in a Convict hut sometimes in a place appropriated for Corn and at times does not know where he is to perform it which often makes him quite uneasy and puts him out of temper both with the place and people.  With respect to myself I enjoy both my health and spirits pretty well equally as well as when in England. I thank you for kind attention to my daughter; the book you sent her' I hope she will live to benefit by. She now can talk pretty well and is an entertaining companion to a fond mother whose feelings you will readily excuse. I have also a little Native Boy who takes up part of my attention. He is about six years old and now begins to read English and wait at table and I hope at some future period he may be an useful member of society. He has no inclination to go among the natives and has quite forgot their manners.  Present my best respects to Mrs. Stokes Miss Stokes and Master Edward and tell him we often talk of him when we are eating melons the seeds of which he was so kind to give me.  With wishing you every blessing in this life I remain  Dear Madam  Yours &c &c  Eliza MARSDEN.  Mr. M. gives you a line but as the two ships sail together we divide the letters.  Parramatta  December 3rd 1796.  Dear Madam  Though I wrote to you lately I embrace the earliest opportunity to inform you I have received your letter by the "Sylph" and also Mrs. Marsden one. We feel ourselves greatly indebted to you for your kind remembrance of us in this distant port. News from old England come from whom it may is welcome and much more if it comes from a lover of Jesus. We have many things to struggle with here which have a natural tendency to deaden our affections and stupify our souls. Happy should I be to see God reviving his work of grace in New South Wales. Our land brings forth plentifully neither does he suffer our cattle to decrease - The bounties of Providence are bestowed on us with a liberal hand no poverty or want is experienced by any - have plenty of bread and to spare notwithstanding we are very ungrateful. We are unmindful of the God who gives us all these things richly to enjoy. It is an unspeakable happiness to see the kind hand of Providence superintending all our ways. He both can and does make the barren wilderness smile. His goodness and mercy hath followed me all the days of my life and I humbly hope dear Madam to dwell in his house for ever. I am so greatly blessed that was I to murmur or complain against any of his dispensations towards me it would almost he an unpardonable sin.  You mention in your letter you would be glad if I would collect you some seeds and plants from Norfolk Island. I was there better than a year ago but I do not know when I shall go again. I will write to an acquaintance who lives there and endeavour to obtain some for you. Anything that this country affords and that I can obtain shall be very happy to send you. I think it probable I shall be able to collect you some seeds such as you never have yet received as I sometimes visit different parts of the settlement at the distance of forty or fifty miles from Sydney. Such as I can obtain you shall have though I do not profess any great botanical knowledge myself.  I have much to occupy my time and a great variety o duties to perform. I am a Gardener a Farmer a Magistrate & Minister so that when one duty does not call me another always does. [17] In thus infant colony there is plenty of manual labor for every body. I conceive it a duty for all to take an active part. He who will not work must not eat. Now is our Harvest-time. Yesterday I was in the field assisting in getting my wheat. To-day I have been sitting in the civil court hearing the complaints of the People. To-morrow if well must ascend the pulpit and preach to my people. In this manner I chiefly spend my time. It may appear strange but it is necessary situated as we are. You can form no idea Madam of our state. I wish to be found faithful to act like a Christian Minister. I can say this that I do not eat the bread of idleness It is my opinion that God will ere long visit New South Wales with his heavenly grace. Out of these stones he will raise up children unto Abraham. There has not been any shaking yet among the dry bones but the Son of Man is commanded to prophecy and I hope by and by the Lord will command the wind to blow. Stir up thy strength o God & come amongst us.  My little family are all well. Mrs. M. has not time to write by this conveyance she enjoys her health well. I take more care of her probably than you are aware of. I beg my kindest respects to Mr. Stokes. Inform him our crops are immensely great - we have the greatest abundance of wheat now. Could maintain some thousands more people if we had them in dry provisions. We could also make plenty of wine if we had persons who understood the operation properly. Would be very thankful if you could by any means send me out a few Hop-cuttings. I think they would grow if they were packed properly with a little mould in a case and nailed down. And also a little Hop-seed. Let it be put into a bottle and seal it with a little seal wax. A few hop cuttings might also be put up without mould and sealed at each end. This might be a means to preserve them. Should it not be too much trouble for you to do this I shall be greatly indebted to you. Hops would be a general good to this Colony. Mrs. M. joins me in every kind respect to you and Mr. Stokes.  In haste  I am Dear Madam  Yours &c &c  SAMUEL MARSDEN  J. Shortland Jun. To J.Shortland Sen.   HMS Reliance Sydney Cove Port Jackson   10th September 1798.  My Dear Father About a twelvemonth since I went on an expedition in the Governor's whaleboat as far as Port Stephens which lies 100 miles to the northward of this place. In my passage down I discovered a very fine coal river which I named after Governor Hunter. The enclosed I send you being an eye-sketch which I took the little time I was there. Vessels from 60 to 250 tons may load there with great ease and completely landlocked. I dare say in a little time this river will be a great acquisition to this settlement. The short time I remained at this river we had rain which prevented my doing so much as I otherwise should.   J.Shortland  I take the first opportunity of informing you of my safe arrival in this remote quarter of the world after a pretty good passage of six months. Since my arrival I have purchased a house for which I gave £20 and the following articles which are three turkies at 15s. each; three sucking-pigs at 10s.; a pair of pigeons at 8s.; a yard-dog £2; two muscovy ducks at 10s. each; three English ducks at 5s. each; and a goat five guineas; six geese at 15s. each. I have got a large garden to the house and a licence. The sign is the "Three Jolly Settlers".  I have met with tolerable good success in the public line. I did a little trade in the passage here in a number of small articles such as sugar tea tobacco thread snuff needles and every thing that I could get anything by. The needles are a shilling a paper here and fine thread is sixpence a skain. I have sold my petticoats at two guineas each and my long black coat at ten guineas which shews that black silk sells well here; the edging that I gave 1s. 8d. per yard for in England I got 5s. for it here. [10] I have sold all the worst of my cloaths as wearing apparel brings a good price. I bought a roll of tobacco at Rio Janeiro of 54 lb. weight which cost me 20s. which I was cheated out of; I could have got 12s. a pound for it here. I likewise bought a cwt. of sugar there and also many other articles. Rum sells for 1s. 6d. per gallon there and here at times 3s. Any person coming from England with a few hundred pounds laid out at any of the ports that shipping touch at coming here are liable to make a fortune. Shoes that cost 4s. or 5s. a pair in England will bring from 10s to 15s here.  On our passage here we buried only two women and two children. The climate is very healthful and likewise very fertile as there are two crops a year of almost everything; and I really believe with the assistance of God by the time that I have paid the forfeit according to the laws of my country I shall acquire a little money to return home with which I have not the smallest doubt of and to be a comfort to you at the latter end of your days.  Any person that should have a mind to come out here as a settler by applying at the Secretary of State's Office may have a free passage and likewise two men and a farm here which is great encouragement. I should be very glad to hear from you the first opportunity. I live by myself and did not do as the rest of the women did on the passage which was every one of them that could had a husband. I shall conclude with giving my kind love to my brothers and sisters nieces and nephews so am dear father your ever dutiful loving and affectionate daughter till death. thethe 1799  July 8th  Monday. We weighed with a moderate Westerly Breeze and at eleven oClock passed between the Heads when we set all sail & steered to the Northward along the Coast At seven in the evening took a departure from the south part of Cape Three Points bearing WBN five miles. At two in the morning made the land to Leeward which obliged us to keep farther out.  Tuesday 9th.  Our distance from the land at day light was about four miles. It was rather low and fronted with long low white sandy beaches. Three lumps which I supposed to be Black Head seemed to lay at a considerable distance from the Coast but it is no doubt connected by low intermediate land.  At half past seven we sounded but got no ground with fourteen fathoms at half a mile distance from a small reef of black rocks which run off from a sugar loaf like point. There are two low and therefore dangerous rocks which lay at S20°E three or four miles and SE about two miles from this sugar loaf point. Captain Cook passed this part of the coast in the night and therefore did not see the rocks but they require to be particularly looked out for by any Vessel coming near the land. The latitude of the point is about 32° 27' So. Cape Hawke lays N1° or 2°E from it and the intermediate coast is mostly beach but divided at intervals by short stony heads.  We got ground with ten fathoms at half a mile distance from the shore of Cape Hawke. The two Hillocks mentioned by Capt. Cook stand upon the pitch of the Cape and are covered with brush down to the low cliffs. The strata in these cliffs lay 40 or 50 degrees from the horizontal line.  At noon the observed latitude was 32°7'34" So; the north extreme which afterwards proved to be one of the Three Brothers but now made like any island bore N10°E; and Cape Hawke S5° W seven miles. [2] From the Cape the coast falls back forming a kind of double bay. The land is low and rises but very gradually ridge over ridge inland to a moderate heighth. The Country looked pleasant enough from the sea but the trees appeared small and mixed with brushwood.  We kept along the low shore at four or five miles distance with a light southwesterly breeze till half past seven when the latitude [indecipherable] was 31°51'. The southernmost of the Three Brothers then bore N W B N and should be in about 31°43' or 44 south. They have been described "as remarkably large and high" but they did not appear so to me. They are sloping hills and their conspicuousness seems principally to arise from the lowness of the neighbouring land. It is necessary to remark here that their form & situation in Capt. Cook's chart are erroneous; the latter differing even 20' of latitude from the account of them in the voyage. A little south of these hills the coast falls back into a bight; the head of which could not be discerned for its being nearly dark. There may probably be a small inlet here. At eight P:M: when the outermost hill bore N W 1/2° W we got ground with 35 fathoms and at midnight with 55 having continued our course along the shore; but at daylight found ourselves much farther off and to the southward of our expected situation.  Wednesday 10th.  The observed latitude at noon 31°37'48" being 33' south of the log and nearly the whole of this difference must have arisen since eight oClock on the last night. The extreme land in sight [bore] NNW1/4W from the mast head and the easternmost of the Three Brothers bore S60°W: our distance from the nearest shore was about five or six leagues. This extraordinary current I attributed to our greater distance off the coast; for in the preceding twenty four hours when we were close in shore the difference between the observation and the log was 8' in our favour.  This morning we found that the Sloop had sprung a very bad Leak which admitted as much as water as kept one pump constantly going. [3] By its coming on suddenly I judged that it could not be occasioned by any straining of the Vessel. It was however a serious cause of alarm; and the Maize with which the sloop had been before loaded was now continually choaking up the pumps. Having a fresh breeze from the southward of West we got tolerably well in with the land by sunset; at which time the same north extreme seen at noon bore N19°W. and the easternmost of the Brothers S40°W. At ten oClock the hummock which had been the north extreme bore NW three miles in which situation we had thirty five fathoms with a sandy bottom.  Thursday 11th.  Our distance from the land at daylight was four miles. It is low near the sea and skirted by a sandy beach; but rises almost immediately to a moderate heighth; it is well cloathed with timber and diversified by irregular and somewhat steep hills & vallies. The Solitary Isles were soon after in sight. The principal of these Isles are five in number extending from 30°14' to 29°58' south; and the outer & northernmost is seven or eight miles off shore. There are as many more smaller ones laying close in.  It had been my intention to land upon some of these islets had it been possible and should any inducement present itself; but we neither saw Seal or Bird. They seemed to be covered with some short brush and two of them being lately burnt proves that they are visited by natives. There is a general likeness amongst several of them in that they appear almost separated into two unequal parts; but the largest of the isles is not more than one mile and a quarter in length. In the colour of the rock and in their general appearance they much resemble the small islands laying off Tasman's Head and might with equal propriety be termed the Miserable as well as the Solitary Isles. There is a patch of breakers between the two southernmost Isles but we had fifteen and seventeen fathoms through within them altho' the water seemed to have a strong inclination to break in many places. [4] I think it would be dangerous for a ship to pass between any of them till they are better known.  At noon the observed latitude was 29°57'25" south the northernmost islet bearing EBN or true East and a low sandy point at the northern extreme N3°E; our distance off shore was two or three miles & the soundings 10 fathoms upon a sandy bottom. The Country still retained the same woody hilly irregular though not u[n] pleasing appearance; but in running along shore in the afternoon its got manifestly worse having more tendency to sand. The small projections that opened out as we sailed along often presented the delusive appearance of openings behind them; and we were the more inclined to entertain these hopes as Capt. Cook passed along this part of the coast in the night. At half past two a small island opened off from a low rocky point behind which there is a small river running in to the SW but the breakers seemed to extend mostly across the entrance. If there is any passage it lays on the south side of the island.  At half past three a peaked hill standing four or five miles inland and more conspicuous than usual bore true West; (see sketch No 1) Before 5 we stood in for what appeared to be an opening; and about dusk were in the entrance of a wide shoal bay [Actually the Clarence River estuary]. Our soundings were from five to three and half fathoms on the south side of the entrance and the breakers extending from the low north point more than half way across shewed that it was the deepest side. In standing onward the water shoaled to ten feet; upon which we wore; and on hauling up close to the south head deepened to four four fathoms. Soon afterwe anchored in two and a half fathoms on a hard sandy bottom; the extreme of the South Head bearing EBN & the breakers from the north side NE: between these we were exposed to the sea winds. [5]   The objects that induced me to come into this bay [Clarence River estuary] were that we might have daylight to run along the remaining part of the coast which Capt. Cook had passed in the night; and to ascertain a place of safety to run for should the wind come dead on the coast on our return. The leak was also a part of the inducement; for should this place turn out to be of consequence enough to be worth expending a few days in its examination and a convenient place offer itself for laying the Sloop on shore I intended to get it stopped in the mean time. During the night the ebb tide ran near two knots past the Sloop.  Friday 12th.  At day light in the morning I went upon the south head of the entrance and took bearings of the few remarkable objects that presented themselves. The Bay [Clarence River estuary] appeared from thence to be a large extent of shoal water with channels somewhat deeper in different parts of it. The principal one seemed to be that in which the Sloop lay which ran West along the south side of the bay till it turned round the west end of a middle shoal. This shoal is mostly dry at low water. We afterwards went up this channel in the boat: and round the shoals; but altho the tide ran very rapid there were scarcely three fathoms any where; and in going toward some branches in the north part of the bay were obliged to get out and drag the little boat over the sands into another channel The north point of the entrance into this bay is only a projecting spit of sandy ground; for the water turns sharp round the point and runs to the northward nearly parallel with the coast line. Along this shore there is a deeper channel but the swell from the sea seems to prevent the tide from making a clear passage out for the channel becomes shoaler as it approaches the entrance. The tide having fallen so much as to preclude our return by the way we came we were obliged to try this passage tho' it was at the risk of swamping the boat; for the ebb tide ran with with increased rapidity in this shoal water; and meeting the sea swell and southerly wind the water broke at times all across from the north point to the middle shoal and made such a jumble that the Oars could scarcely be used. [6] In one minute however the danger was past; for the velocity of the tide was such as to carry the boat to windward against all obstacles. It was only necessary for us to keep the boat end on to the sea to prevent her from being filled.  Having returned to the Sloop I took the Sextant and artificial horizon on shore to the south head to observe for the latitude. The Sun being more than half an hour distant from the meridian gave me time to examine three Native's huts that stood at a little distance: they were of a circular form of about eight feet diameter. The frame was made of the stronger tendrils of vine crossing each other in all directions and bound together with strong wiry grass at the principal intersections. The covering was of bark of a soft texture resembling the bark of what is called the Tea tree at Port Jackson; and so compactly laid in as to keep out both wind & rain: the entrance is by a small avenue projecting from the periphery of the circle and does not go directly into the hut but turns sufficiently to prevent the rain from beating in. The heighth of the under part of the roof is about four & a half or five feet and those that I entered had collected a coat of soot from the fires which had been made in the middle of the huts. Those who have been in an Oven will have a tolerably exact idea of these habitations but the sides of these are nearer to a perpendicular than those of ovens usually are. One of the three huts was a double one in this form containing two recesses with but one entrance intended most probably for kindred families This hut would contain ten or fifteen people. Bongaree who was with me admitted that they were much superior to any of the native houses he had before seen. He brought away a small hand basket made of some kind of leaf which would contain five or six pints of water and was nearly such as I have seen used at Coupang in the island Timor for carrying the toddy about in.  The meridional Altitude of the Sun gave the latitude of the entrance into the bay 29°26' 28" south. There were many many white Cockatoos and Parroquets about this bay as also crows whose notes were much more short & hasty than any I ever heard. [7] Numbers of Pelicans frequent the shoals and some Gulls and Redbills. The country itself is very sandy where we went on shore. The Palm-nut tree grows here which is the third kind of Palm mentioned by Capt. Cook as being produced in New South Wales. He says "it was found only in the northern parts" and as Bongaree who is tolerably well acquainted with the country as far as Port Stephens never saw or heard of it before this is probably one of the most southern situations it will be found in. We found the individual nuts scattered about the fire places of the natives and observed that the lower ends had been chewed and sucked in the same manner that artichokes are eaten; this method on getting some that were ripe we afterwards practised. The taste was rather pleasant at first but left an behind that scarcely tempted me to try a second. The eatable part astringency of the nut in this way is so small as to be scarcely worth the trouble of sucking it out from the fibres. The individual nut is about the size of a Walnut: within the outer skin there is a hard shell like cocoanut and within this two or perhaps more almond-like kernels. The nut as taken from the tree is an assemblage of these set into a core and is from the size of a man's two fists to that of his head; its size and the furrows or indentations upon the surface struck me on the first view with its resemblance to the exterior form of the Bread-fruit but perhaps a pine apple is a better object of comparison. The stem of the tree is short and none were seen of two feet or even eighteen inches in diameter. The branches do not ramify out into twigs but keep their size to the extreme where the leaves are produced surrounding the fruit: one or two smaller branches sometimes strike off from the main one and produce their leaves in the same way without fruit. The heighth of the tree altogether may be from fifteen to twenty five or thirty feet Suckers or Branches shoot our from all heights below the fruit bearing branches and growing downwards along the stem enter the ground & radicate; becoming not only roots but supporters to the tree. [8] I saw one that descended in this manner from considerably above where the large branches struck off from the stem. It was in low sandy situations that this tree was principally found. May not this fruit be the Mellori of the Nicobar Islands? The description given of it in the 3rd Volume of the Asiatic researches seems to answer in every part as far as my examination went; for having no idea at the time of the value of the tree and being foreign to my pursuits I did not pay particular attention to it. The method of cooking this fruit used by the natives of Nicobar is given in the description and may be found in the annual register for 1793.  As this Bay seemed to deserve but a very superficial examination I did not think it worth staying any longer and therefore got underweigh at one oClock the tide being then rising by the shore altho' the stream was still running out.  There was but ten feet in some parts of the entrance and the wind dying away we were obliged to get the sweeps out to prevent the SE swell from setting the Sloop amongst the breakers that lay off from the north side. At four oClock the south head bore SWBS. four miles when we sounded in seventeen fathoms & at sunset when it bore SSW1/2W: five miles in 25 fathoms. Two other heads bore S:W:b:W: and W:bN: behind which there was some appearance of an inlet; and it is not improbable but that there may be another entrance into the shoal bay behind one or other of these heads.  I can give no particular mark that will point out the situation of Shoal Bay but its latitude and the somewhat remarkably peaked hill that lays about four leagues to the southward of it. Was any vessel ever likely to visit it it would be necessary to remark that either of the two heads above mentioned might be mistaken for the south head of the bay.  We had a moderate breeze all night from the SW and at ten oClock on Saturday. [9] 13 saturday morning Cape Byron bore N67°W three miles and at this same time the Peak of Mount Warning was just topping over it. Capt. Cook observes that it bears NWbW from the Cape: the Bearings therefore given in his voyageare reduced from the magnetic to the true bearings.  At noon the latitude was 28°32'12" south being but 4' south of the Log. Mount Warning bore W8°N and Cape Byron S16°W. 7 or 8 miles. Towards the evening as we brought the Mount to bear more to the southward it put on a Cocks-comb like appearance (see sketch of it No 2) We had hauled more off the shore soon after noon to pass without the reef laying off Point Danger the wind being from the eastward. At ten in the Evening the meridional altitude of Scorpionis gave our situation to the northward of the reef and finding no bottom either at eight oClock or at ten with forty five fathoms we edged more away towards the land and at day light kept well in finding the land to be at a considerable distance.  Sunday. 14  At ten in the morning we steered West for a large space where no land was visible; and seeing breakers off the south point of the opening were satisfied that this was Moreton Bay. The breakers are occasioned by a small flat rocky island which lays north three or four miles from Cape Lookout. We passed between these and when the Point bore S5°E two & half miles got ground with 20 fathoms the bottom a blackish peppery sand. At noon Point Lookout bore SE three or three and half miles and the observed latitude being 27°:24':6" it raised some doubts whether this could be Moreton Bay for Capt. Cook's latitude of the Point is 27°:6'. This however proved to be Point Lookout and its latitude must be about 27°:26' 3 / 4" south.  After steering half an hour longer upon a West Course for an opening in the head of the bay the water shoaled to four fathoms; and seeing breakers running out from the low sandy south side of the opening towards the middle of the Bay we wore round and steered NE past the shoal water and then kept away along the shore for the northern extreme. [10] There appeared to be a very large extent of water within the opening but I suspect there is no passage for a vessel this way. The country to the seaward is wretchedly sandy as was that which we sailed along in the afternoon. At dusk Cape Moreton bore West two or three miles and the highest Glass House whose peak was just topping over the distant land had opened round it at W3° or 4° N. Two Haycock like hummocks distinct from any other land opened soon after a few degrees to the southward. We now hauled in round Cape Moreton to go into Glass House Bay [Moreton Bay] and when the extreme of the Cape bore south one mile and half struck soundings with fourteen fathoms upon a sandy bottom. Steering West we carried eight fathoms till eight oClock when having little wind and that from the southward we dropped the Anchor for the night Cape Moreton bearing EbS two or three miles. In the Morning we made a trip over to the Glass Houses the wind being from the South-westward but getting into shoal water kept working to windward near the eastern shore till noon. The observed latitude then was 27°:00':29" south and Cape Moreton bearing.  Monday. 15   E10° to N 2 or three miles will be in the same latitude allowing the variation to be 10° east. This differs 4 1/2' from its situation in Capt. Cook's voyage. At two oClock we bore away to go round the Shoal which had obliged us to tack in the morning finding there was no passage between it & the Cape Moreton Shore. Some part of this Spit is so near the surface of the water that the swell from the sea broke upon it. We passed over the north point of the Shoal in a quarter less three fathoms Cape Moreton then bearing East six miles and a low sandy point on the west shore S41°W. The water deepened immediately to eight fathoms but was very irregular afterwards between three and a half fathoms and thirteen. At eight in the evening we anchored in eleven fathoms about two miles from the low sandy shore on the west side of the Bay [Moreton Bay]. [11]   During the night I took two sets of distances of the star Fomalhaut east of the Moon's nearest and two of the star Antares west of the Moons farthest limb. The corresponding time by the watch being corrected by altitudes of the stars Altair & Achirnar and compared with the lunars gave the longitude of the Anchorage 153°:18':25" east of Greenwich which being reduced to Cape Moreton by the Sketch will be 153°:30':50" east for its longitude. According to Capt. Cook the longitude of the Cape is 153°:32 S.  Tuesday. 16  At daylight we again weighed to turn up the bay the wind being still from the southward. Assisted by a strong flood tide we made good progress but in half an hour were obliged to tack having gotten into two and a half fathoms upon the edge of a large shoal. In stretching to the Southwest our soundings were various: it first deepened to seven then gradually shoaled to two and a quarter; deepened to five shoaled again to two and three quarters and then again deepened to five and six fathoms. Seeing an opening in the low western land I wished to anchor near it in order to examine it with the boat whilst the returning tide was running but here again the water shoaled and obliged us to tack for deeper water to anchor in. At a quarter past eight dropped the Anchor in three and three and half fathoms; the opening bearing N50°W about five miles and the extreme of the land towards Cape Moreton N38 1/2 East. From a low sandy point which is called Point Skirmish in the sketch of Glass House Bay [Moreton Bay] we proceeded up the opening which proved to be a river leading towards the Glass House Peaks. These Peaks stand upon the low flat ground considerably within the mountains; and as far as I could judge had every appearance of being volcanic. This was in some measure confirmed by the quantity of pumice stone laying at high water mark upon the eastern shore of the river when we landed to see the nature and appearance of the country; the ebb tide which came very strong down the river not permitting us to proceed far up it. [12] Amongst the largest and most common trees there was one which I had never seen at Port Jackson. The leafy parts afford a dark shade and bear some resemblance to a Pine: when cut the wood smelt strongly of Turpentine which it also exsuded from places where the Bark had been wounded. The external part of the wood is white but the body of it is of a reddish brown; the bark somewhat resembles that of the tree called the iron bark at Port Jackson. The soil was every where sandy where we saw it. In returning to the sloop we passed by a dry shoal laying off the mouth of the river. The deep channel into the river is between this shoal & Point Skirmish and there is from three to six fathoms in it. From the situation where the Sloop lay at this time the bay had no appearance of closing round but seemed to promise a large river at its head and a communication with Moreton Bay  if not something more interesting. At 3 in the afternoon we got under weigh with a light northerly air to proceed up it. In passing over the edge of the shoal upon which we had anchored the Sloop touched the ground but the rise of the tide took her over into deep water in a few minutes and we then steered South carrying regular soundings with us from six to four and a half fathoms till dark and then anchored about three miles from the western shore in five fathoms upon a bottom which was soft & muddy whereas heretofore the ground had been always sandy. The extreme of the land near Cape Moreton N33 1/2° E and the highest Glass House N44 1/2° W. [13]   Wednesday. 17th   At daylight on Wednesday morning we again weighed and turned up with a southerly breeze as long as the tide lasted. At half past ten oClock anchored one mile and a half off a point that has red cliffs in it in three and half fathoms. A little West of this Point I observed the latitude with the artifical horizon to be 27°:16':25" south. The bight which lays round the Point is shoal with a muddy bottom; the land is low but not so sandy as in the neighbourhood of the river. The rocks are a strongly impregnated Iron stone with some small pieces of granite & chrystal scattered about the shore. From Red Cliff Point we pulled over to a green head about two miles to the westward round which the bight is contracted into a river like form but the greatest part of it is dry at low water. The wood that we collected at high water mark for our fire proved to be Cedar and of a fine Grain.  A light sea breeze coming from the northward in the afternoon on our return on board we got the Sloop underweigh steering our course SEbS; the water gradually shoaled to two fathoms and the breeze dying away at the same time we pulled to the north eastward with the sweeps into two and a half and then anchored for the night upon a soft muddy bottom. The extreme near Cape Moreton now bore N21°E and the farthest connected land now visible on the same side of the bay [Moreton Bay] ENE which is not far from the latitude of the entrance from Moreton Bay : the shore to the S:W: was four or five miles distant.  Thursday 18th.  In the Morning there was a moderate breeze from the Southward and having a flood tide we got underweigh. [14] After running a little to the Northward to get into deeper water we hauled up to pass between two islands of from three to four miles circuit each. The northernmost one is the largest and appeared to be well covered with wood probably the greater part of Mangrove the Island being low almost with the water's edge. The foliage of the Trees upon the southern one was equally dark and luxuriant with this but the interior part of the Island is higher. To the southward of this last also; there are two smaller Islands nearly upon a level with the first and covered with Wood; the southernmost one however is very small. In passing between the two first islands our soundings were from seven and a half to four and a half fathoms with a muddy bottom and then increased to twelve fathoms; but shoaling again suddenly to three we tacked to the westward a little before ten oClock. In this situation the entrance from Moreton Bay was open the south side of it bearing N68°E. six or eight miles and the west side of what will now be Moreton Island bore N.2°.W. Another island apparently larger than either of the four before mentioned bore from the same place S 55° to 34° E at the distance of about five miles.  Parramatta N.S.W.  Sept 6th 1799.  Dear Madam  It is with pleasure I take up my pen to inform you I received your kind letter dated Sept. 27th 1798 by the Hillsborough July 99 and also your valuable present. Accept dear Madam my most grateful acknowledgment for your kind remembrance of me not only for their being so acceptable in this dear Colony as for the pleasing idea of being still held in remembrance by so kind a friend. I regret much the loss of your present by the Lady Shore. If what Mr. Marsden had in her had come safe it would have made us very comfortable as at that time we was without any of the comforts of life such as Tea Sugar Wine Spirits &c. It was very laughable to see us sit down as formerly to Balm Tea or Wheat Coffee sometimes without Sugar. Since that we have been supplied from India which at that time we had been deprived of by the loss of the Sydney Cove. The Lady Shore was a loss to many individuals  I am happy to hear of the welfare of Mr. Edward. I am sure he must make a handsome soldier - may he prove in goodness a second Colonel Gardiner as he like him has the prayers as well as example of so amiable a mother. [20] When you write to him will you give my kind respects to him and shall always be exceeding happy to hear of his being successful. The parting with him must have been a severe trial to you. I can in some measure feel for you as I was near experiencing the loss of my dear Ann as we were going to send her home with a Mr. and Mrs. Cover one of the Missionaries that went to Otaheite and came to this Colony. Their intention was to return to England if they had it would have been a good opportunity to have sent her. Mrs. Cover is a kind good woman they have no children they buried a boy about fourteen just as they left Spithead.  I own it would have been a severe trial to part with her but the manners of the people are so corrupt and we cannot get proper servants about us and there being not one good school that I should have been very happy to have heard of her being safe with my mother She is now 5 1/2 years old she reads a little and works very neat. Last Christmas we were near losing her by an intermitting fever but the Lord in answer to our prayers spared her I hope for his honor and our comfort.  My Charles is seventeen months old and that is a very entertaining as well as mischievous age. Your goodness will excuse me for saying so much of my children. You must remember I am a young mother. Mr. Marsden has wrote you a long letter and mentions every information you may wish to about ourselves and the Colony.  Mr. Johnson is much better in health than when we wrote last. Mrs. Johnson still continues to enjoy a good state of health. I am happy to have so kind a woman near me. Milbah and Henry are two fine children. Milbah you will see what progress she has made in her writing and it is a great pity she is not in England. You can have no idea what disadvantages the children labor under unless you were to pay us a visit. [21] Give my respectful compliments to Mr. Stokes and family and  Believe me to be  With the greatest esteem  Dear Madam  Yours affecte  ELIZA MARSDEN.  We are surprised to see the alteration in the fashion. The Bonnet with white satin ribbons is much admired. Dear Madam your goodness induces me to take the liberty to say a little white ribbon would be acceptable.  Governor King who has now the command will make many regulations for the security as far as in his power of the Colony - and likewise some attention to the rising generation to which hitherto none has been paid for certainly if we ever hope for worth or honesty in this settlement we must look to them for it and not the present degenerate mortals. A school is now establishing on a very extensive plan for the reception of all orphans and other children whose parents are not proper for such a charge under the management of the Govr and a Committee - these children are to be entirely secluded from the other people - and brought up in habits of religion and industry - some branches of manufactories will be by means of this seminary put on foot particularly making linnen and woollen cloths the latter to be procured from the Fleece of a remarkable fine breed of Spanish Sheep already in the Country - and the former from the Flax which grows spontaneous in the Woods. This with their education and the Boys learning different Trades and the Girls Housewifery and the use of the needle will be full employment. - This arrangement gives me great satisfaction - as there are now above a thousand children in the place. I cannot help looking forward to the time when the young Men will become useful members of Society and the Women faithful and industrious wives. Everyone must hope for our success in so laudable an undertaking - and if no material interruption takes place - we shall soon have it on a permanent establishment - I hope when an opportunity offers to hear from you - it is now fifteen months since we left England and I have not heard from any Friend I have. - Col. Patersons whole time is totally taken up with his two capacities particularly under the present circumstances either hearing evidences or in the Field with the Men and I am often lonely enough and sometimes perhaps fancy things worse than they are - but however with respect to My Dear Sister I am always easy under your protection I can have no fear - [63] I have now only to add Col. P. best respects. [I] f any thing more happens before the sailing of the ship I will mention it to my sister.  Parramatta  Feby 22nd 1800.  Dear Madam  Though I have wrote to you not long ago yet I am induced to give you a line again by this conveyance. I have sent to England my oldest daughter Ann under the care of a Mr & Mrs. Cover and have directed them to wait upon you with Ann before she goes down into Yorkshire. Mr. Cover is a worthy man and has conducted himself with great propriety in this settlement. He was sent out in the ship Duff on the mission to these Islands in our Seas. I shall refer you to him for any particular information.  You will wish to hear how the Kingdom of our Lord succeeds among us. I am sorry to say appearances are worse than ever. Satans Kingdom Seems to be so fully established and his power and influence so universal among us that nothing but an uncommon display of Almighty power can shake his throne My situation becomes disgusting and painful to the last degree. I long to quit the Colony and retire from such scenes of ungodliness and wrong. Our friends can form little more idea of our situation in this Country than they can of the invisible regions. [22] I have made application to Government to return. Whether I shall obtain permission or no I know not. If I do you may expect me in London in about 18 months God willing after you receive this. Should any material change take place so as to afford any prospect of real good to this Colony I might be induced to remain longer. This depends wholly on circumstances. I think it probable Mr. Johnson will return soon it is his present determination to do so. We may say on our departure from this country we have been fairly hunted out of the settlement. Our life is one continued scene of contention and opposition from the beginning to the end of the year. Besides living where iniquity abounds so much and our civil connexion with the worst of men render our souls dry and barren.  We feel little of that real vital spiritual life which is so essential to the happiness and progress of the real Christian. To be cut off from all the society and conversation of the righteous and to hold a situation in the state that calls you forth to act continually with wicked men in power is painful and distressing. We are not situated in this country like clergymen in England who have only to attend to their studies & their flocks. Many other unpleasant duties devolve upon me. In the midst of all my only consolation is the Lord knows how I am situated and foreknew it. I sometimes hope I am doing his will ever under a dark & thick cloud. The end will come by and by we shall then see why & wherefore we have met with this & that trial. In every difficulty I have cause to be thankful for good health. Mrs. M. enjoys the same and our little family. Mrs. M. would have wrote but has been so busy getting Ann ready for sea and having only got her bed about eight weeks ago therefore hopes you will excuse her. It was my intention to have made you a collection of the seeds of this country and to have sent it by this ship knowing they would have been taken care of but it has not been in my power for want of time. The few I had collected with a branch belonging to each kind according to their number I have sent you under the care of Mr. Cover - am sorry they are so few. They are all new and fresh and gathered with my own hands. Mr. Cover will inform you how few spare moments I have. I am busy in building a Church at Parramatta. Shall be happy to see it completed. I think it would never be done if I was to leave the settlement. [23] I can only say it is my present intention and wish to quit the colony yet my times are in the Lords hands it will be enough if I am found faithful when my work comes to be done. The building of an Orphan house is another object which lies near my heart. I shall feel uncommon satisfaction in having it carried into execution. The number of poor children in this colony I pity who have either no parents or would have been better at this moment if they had never known them. I shall say nothing of the monopolies extortions and oppressions of the great and the wickedness poverty and ruin of the lower ranks of the inhabitants of N.S.W. You will hear of these things from other quarters. They will and must become a national concern speedily or you will hear of the murder of the greatest part of us by & by. Let me beg dear Madam an interest in your prayers. May the Lord bless you and yours. Give my kindest respects to Mr. Stokes. Mrs. M. joins me in every Christian respect.  I remain  Dear Madam  Yours sincerely  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  New South Wales  Parramatta  August 22nd 1801.  My dear Madam  I now sit down to return you thanks for your kind letter and present also for the books you sent to my daughter who was in England about the time the ship sailed that they came in. I need not express the pain it cost me in parting from her and the anxiety till I heard of her safe arrival. You who have felt the same can sympathise with me but I trust it is for her good. This has been a very had place for children indeed I may say for people of every age. [25]   Some good I hope will be done with the rising generation. The orphan home been open for 30 girls and will be ready for 30 more in a short time. Mr. Marsden has sent the proceeding home and sermon he preached the first Sunday the children attended. The governor gives it every support. Mr. King and Mr. Paterson attends every day that it may be properly managed.  Before this you have had the pleasure of seeing our dear friends Mr. and Mrs. Johnson and daughter. I feel great regret in their leaving the colony. Their kind attention to us will always endear them to me. I hope Mr. Johnson will recover his health now he is returned to his native country.  The prospect before us is rather unpleasant. We are on short allowance of meat and grain from the public store and it wants three months to the harvest. Many of the inhabitants have not a grain of wheat or coin in their possession nor is it to be purchased. I hope he who fed Elijah in the wilderness will not let us feel the dreadful calamity of famine the harvest failed last year. The settlers in general was not provident enough to provide against the latter end of the year.  Mr. Palmer had a great loss for himself and the Colony he had a large stack of wheat calculated at a thousand bushels burnt.  The Governor has sent the Porpoise to Otaheite and the other Islands to see if they can get Pork for us. The Governor seems desirous for establishing communication between Port Jackson and Otaheite. This might prove a great advantage to the poor Missionaries and he a great protection to them should a ship constantly visit them from this colony they would be able to keep a constant correspondence with their friends in England.  I hope dear Madam to be favored with a line at every opportunity it gives me the greatest pleasure to hear from you or from our friends and connexions you don't know the happiness it gives me not only for the moment when I am alone and dull I amuse myself with reading my friends letters and find myself refreshed. [26]   My family is the same as when I last wrote a boy and girl Elizabeth is very engaging she is just beginning to prattle. Please give my best respects to Mrs. Stokes and Miss and thanks to Charles for writing Anns name in her books. You must also remember me to Mr. Edward. Let me beg an interest in your prayers.  I am Madam  Your obliged & affecn  E. MARSDEN.  Mr. M. writes by this ship.  Sydney  New South Wales  August 22nd 1801.  Dear Madam  I received your kind favor for the Cornwallis. It always gives us peculiar pleasure to hear from you in this distant part of the globe. I hope in this period our friends Mr. & Mrs. Johnson will have paid you a visit. From them you will learn the exact state of this Colony and what a miserable place it is in a moral & religious sense. Since my colleagues departure it is quite changed. The greatest alterations have been brought about from a variety of causes uniting together. Our present Governor has almost put a total stop to the introduction of spirits into the Colony. However strong an inclination the common people may have to get intoxicated they will not have it in their power. We have also had a number of ships from all quarters with Commodities for sale which has reduced many goods below their original cost and many thousands of pounds worth of goods have been taken out of the settlement lately for want of purchasers and an immense quantity of goods remain unsold. We are at present in great want of Bread. This is in a great measure to be attributed to the extravagance & idleness of the Farmers who take little or no care of their crops when grown. We have a good prospect at present of a plentiful harvest next Season but before then the sufferings of many will be very great. [27] You would see from my colleagues papers when he returned that an Institution had been adopted for providing for the poor distressed children in this Colony. The school is now opened and more than 30 Girls received. I spent the last evening with them for the first time and made a beginning to instruct them in the principles of Christianity sang a hymn and went to prayers with them.  New South Wales while I was performing this duty appeared more like a Christian Country than it had ever done since I first entered it. I hope the foundation is now laid for religion and morality if God only furnish means to carry it on. It will meet I am aware with great opposition and have many difficulties to surmount in order to carry it into full effect. I shall exert my utmost abilities to promote its prosperity & like Nehemiah shall make supplication to the God of Heaven and say the "God of Heaven will prosper us therefore we his servants will arise and build."  My colleague may think himself happy that he is out of the settlement at present. He would have been very miserable had he been here. There are still great differences amongst our leading men which renders the situation of those who would be quiet far from pleasant. I make it my study to avoid all quarrels as much as possible and sometimes do violence to my own feelings for the sake of Peace. After all ones caution troubles will come they must be expected while we live in the midst of unreasonable and wicked men. I have lately had a difficult task to perform. Our Courts of Justice where we are compelled to sit as members to administer Justice often expose an honest man who will do his duty to great troubles. He is constrained sometimes to condemn the conduct of his equals or superiors. When he does this though no more than his duty the guilty will remember him and seek occasion to do him an injury. I hope from what has lately happened the mode of administering Justice will be completely changed in this country.  I have seen a great deal of mankind during my residence in this Country at least of the bad part but I am quite tired of my situation in many respects. I have much to do more than almost is possible for one person but God is very gracious he gives me strength and spirit. [28] If I feel little pleasure from the multiplicity of other business in Religion in the week day I am refreshed sometimes on the Sabbath and find my soul sweetly drawn after God. This is a very ungracious soil for the growth of Piety. The Lord knows best where to place me. In the midst of every difficulty I see cause to rejoice that he has appointed me such a Post of Honor. Whatever I may meet with if it comes in the way of my duty it does not become me to complain but to he still & know that he is God. Mrs. Marsden has wrote you a line. You will have seen Ann our little girl. Her mother did not wish to part with her but I prevailed at length.  I do not suppose you will he able to make out this scrawl. I am very weary this evening having had much to do this day. The Ribbons came safe shall give Mrs. Johnson an account of them next conveyance. Give my respectful compliments to Mr. Stokes. I would have wrote him but he may expect one by the next ship. I want to give him some account of the progress of Agriculture our Coal Mines &c &c.  I have the honor to remain  Dr Madam Yours resptfy  SAML MARSDEN.  Paramatta  New South Wales  Novr. 13th 1802.  My dear Madam  It is with pleasure I take up my pen to acknowledge the receipt of your two last letters and the parcell received by the Atlas for which I return you my sincere thanks. The things were exceedingly useful but consider them as the strongest proof I am not forgot by so good a woman.  I rejoice that Mr. and Mrs. Johnson reached England in safety and had an happy meeting with their friends. Am glad to find from Mrs. Kent that Mr. Johnson has recovered his health so well and trust that before this they are settled comfortable and to their own wishes. [29] I daily regret the loss of Mrs. Johnson's society from this country so much so that I have not visited Sydney but once since she left it and that was to wean my little girl Elizabeth. Our society of married ladies increase there are now twenty. There never were so many at a time since the Colony was established. I wished I could say we increased in divine things but we still continue in the same depraved state as ever. You who have so many privileges can have no idea of our situation.  You have no doubt heard what an affliction we have been visited with in the melancholy death of our dear little boy. We was going to the farm a servant was driving him and me in a single horse chaise. Mr. Marsden was on horseback when a man twenty yards from our own home carelessly run a wheelbarrow directly under the wheel of the chaise and overturned it and my dear child never stirred more. I received no hurt myself though I was but two months of my time. I am conscious that his was a happy translation yet dear Madam picture to yourself my feelings to have him in health and spirits and the next moment to behold him in the arms of Death. I was wonderfully supported and had one consolation which the world cannot give neither take away. He who is faithful has promised when thou passest through the waters I will be with thee and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee. God is a refuge & strength a very present help in time of need. This is the first time I have taken up my pen to write to England since I lost him though it is now fifteen months. I am afraid I am very sinful. I often think could I know his little thoughts he would reprove me for wishing him back in this troublesome world but his removal has stirred me up to he more earnest in Divine things and though he cannot come to me I may meet him in that place where sin & sorrow and sighing are fore ever done away. I have still one little girl & boy with me the youngest John is a little turned of a twelve month old. This letter will be delivered by Mrs. Johnson the Surgeons wife that left England a little after us who I believe you saw. I was very much disappointed in your letter that on did not mention in what part of the world Mr. Edward was if he is with you beg my kind respects to him. [30] Mrs. Hughes arrived safe here they reside in Sydney. The Governor gave him a superintendents place soon after their arrival so that I seldom see her. Mr. Marsden joins me with best respects to Mr. Stokes & family. Let me intreat to be remembered in your prayers and believe me  Yours with respect  E. MARSDEN  Wednesday 2nd February. - At the usual time the same party as yesterday with the addition of the doctor went on shore; for about a mile the land dry a light sandy soil; and afterwards a large swamp with three lagoons in it all dry. The land appears to be covered with water in wet seasons. Came to a salt lagoon about a mile long and a quarter of a mile wide; had not entrance to the sea Soon afterwards came to a large river 2; went up it about a mile when we turned back and waited for the boat to take us on board The ground is a swamp on one side and high on the other. Saw many swans pelicans and ducks. Were obliged to go up to our middle to get to the boat and got on board between five and six o'clock. Rain and thunder in the night. [...]   Thursday 3rd. - At six o'clock the captain Mr. Grimes self and five seamen went in the boat up the Great River; at between two and three miles it divided into two we took the left hand stream at half past eight o'clock. The land became high where we landed and went on a hill. The soil a reddish loam from ten to fifteen inches deep. Saw a large lagoon at a distance. Went over the hill to a large swamp. [90] Soil black eighteen inches with blue clay at bottom. No trees for many miles. Came to the boat and proceeded on; passed two dingles; no water; came to a third where we found some water where we dined and proceeded on. Opposite this the land is stony soil stiff blue clay and no trees only some straggling oaks by the side of the river. We went up time river till we came to rocks; could not get the boat over; crossed it at a place the natives had made for catching fish. It was still salt though a great fall; went about two miles on the hills which are level at top and full of stones the land very had and very few trees and appeared so to the mountains which appeared clothed with timber. On our return back came to the river a little higher up and found it excellent fresh water where it divided and appeared deep enough for a boat. Just as we got to the boat it began to thunder and rain. Stopped a little time and came back till we could procure wood to make a fire and it being sunset stopped the night. [...]   Friday 4th. - Started at six and came to the branch we passed before at the entrance the land swampy; a few miles up found it excellent water where we saw a little hill and landed. The dinner was getting ready Messrs. Robbins Grimes and self went on the hill where we saw the lagoon seen from the hill where we first landed. It is in a large swamp between time two rivers; fine grass fit to mow; not a bush in it. The soil is black rich earth about six to ten inches deep when it is very hard and stiff. It is better farther back. About two miles further went on shore again; the land much better and timber larger. Soil black ten to fifteen inches deep; bottom sand or gravel I went to the other side where the ground was time same; went in about two miles; it began to rain. I returned to the boat and after dinner we all got on board and arrived on board the vessel at dusk. Saw a canoe and two native huts.  Parramatta  April 27th 1803.  Dear Madam  I once more sit down to drop you a line. As we are at all times exceeding glad to hear from you it may give you the same pleasure to hear from this part of the world. Last Easter Sunday I consecrated my church at Parramatta. This building proves a great comfort to my mind as I can now perform a divine service in a manner becoming the worship of Almighty God. At Sydney there is no place for public worship and I fear will be none for a long time to come. I do my duty with great reluctance there and few attend for want of accommodation. It is surely one of the most shameful neglects of Government that perhaps was ever known since we became a nation professing Godliness.  Government have granted one of the Roman priests who was sent a prisoner from Ireland permission to perform the Catholic service here. I am apprehensive this toleration will be productive of some serious evils. [31] Satan has still his friends in the world and maintains his cause in every quarter. I did not expect to see his kingdom strengthened among us by the addition of the Roman religion. God is all wise and he governs & orders all things according to his own will. I cannot but lament the evils I have not power to prevent It has been with many years labor and patience I have got a temple erected. It has also been built in troublesome times and had many to oppose it. Sometimes I contested against those who opposed my church and sometimes I craved their aid. At length I have had the honor and happiness to dedicate it to the worship of God and shall retain a grateful sense of his goodness in opening the way to have it completed so far. I am surprised no Clergyman comes out in the place of my former Colleague Mr. Johnson. He tells me he has no inclination to visit us again and that none has been appointed to succeed him. The political state of the Colony is much changed since my friends departure. The measures adopted by the Government have made very many poor who were lately in better' circumstances. I have no cause myself to complain. God has blessed me in my Basket in my Store. I may say he has given me all things richly to enjoy.  1 labor' hard but the toils of the day makes rest sweet at night so that the morning finds me ready for my task. My spirits and strength seldom fail me. I should be happy in a colleague as I am constrained to travel from Sydney to Parramatta every Sabbath which is 16 miles and preach in both places. Another clergyman would ease me in this respect and some others.  I am making great progress in my Orchard and Garden. I have got many hundred of different Fruit Trees and great abundance of some kinds of fruit. I made more than 60 Gallons of Cider this year which promises to be very good. This was made from peaches though we have apples they are not of the cider kind. I have hops also growing now well. The vines have run more than two feet. A man of the name of John Fleming is gone to England in the "Glatton." He is an uncommon clever man as a gardener & botanist. Should he call upon you he will give you a better idea than any person you have seen of this Colony. [32] [33] He was a prisoner here but an honester man cannot perhaps he found in England. I have requested him to make a small collection for me of such things as he knows I want. Should he return to this colony I should wish him to call upon you and then he will learn what kind of seeds & plants you would wish to have. Mrs. Marsden and my little family are well. She returns thanks for all favors and joins me in the kindest respects to Mr. Stokes and yourself.  I remain  Dear Madam  With the greatest respect  Yours SAML Marsden  May 7th 1803  My dear  uncle and aunt i have sent you 2 newspapers the only i cold git at this time so i hope you will faver me with sum of the ipswich papers when you right to me and send me that when i mad my ascape out of prison and send me word if you ever hard or see Mrs. Starkes since i Left the Countrey and how Mrs. Skid do Lucey and James and samendill and my Boy Charles and that is for poor William i had forgot But i hop thay are all dutifull to you in your old dayes for i niver for i niver whish no one to com hear in to such a wicked [...] country to God in heaven. Bless you all and Good night i am well Beloved By all that know me and that is a Comfort for i allwais goo into Better Compeney then myself that is amonkest free peopell whear thay mak as much of me as if i was a Laday - Becaus i am. the Commiseres book so no moor at present from your  Loven Cuson Margaret Catchpole  i have at this time a man that keep me company and would marrey me if Lik But i am not for marring he is a gardener he com out as a botner and to Be a Loved one hundred pound par year and this perveshon found him and a man to fech wood and weater and one to goo out with him to celect sedes and sea [...] and all sortes of curiosetes.  for william Hower  near the sea hors St Petters Ipswich Suffolk  My DEAR HARRY  I never in my whole life experienced so much disappointment & vexation than this Week has given me - Two Ships have arrived from England (the Coromandel & Experiment) by which Every Officer in the Colony has recd. Letters & Newspapers &c from his friends except myself - but for me not one individual friend has had the kindness to send me a single line or token that they at all remember me - I cannot therefore but conclude I am forgotten or not worth notice. For it is impossible that those Ships could have sailed without its being publickly known else how shod other persons friends send them large pacquets.  I have not neglected those at home so - I have written from Teneriffe - Rio de Janeiro - Port Phillip twice - & from this place three times. I am so much hurt at this coolness & inattention that I could almost resolve never to write to England again whilst I stay here - BE GOOD ENOUGH TO GET THE INCLOSED LETTERS FORWARDED. / BELIEVE ME YOURS AFFTELY. / G.P. HARRIS  Ap.' 12.th 1804  Dear Piper  I receiv'd yours of the 20th. of February on Sunday 4th: Ultmo: & that very night at twelve oClock I was awoke out of my sleep & inform'd that a Trooper wanted to speak to me when I got up he inform'd me the Governor was just behind & wanted to see me I immediatly walk'd to the Parramatta road & soon after he came up he acquainted me the Cropy's were in Arms to the number of 5 or 600 & that before he left Sydney he had given directions for a Detachment of 2 Serjtt: & 52 rank & file under the command of Lieut. Davies & Quarter Master Laycock to proceed to my House when I was to take them under my orders & proceed directly to Parramatta about 1/2 past one in the Morng. of the 5th: the Detachment arriv'd & having ascertain'd that they were all loaded & good flints in their Pieces I form'd an advanced guard & march'd the rest in four sub devisions or rather sections (which just fill'd the road) to Parramatta where we arriv'd at the dawn of day.. . the Governor gave me his Orders in Writing how to proceed & seeing I could not make it out he said he supposed I cou'd not read it I told him no he might as well have given me Greek he then read it himself which was that with half the Detacht. I was to go in quest of the Rebels who had lately been at the Park Gate to the number of 5 or 600 & if I did not meet them there to proceed to Toongabbe & then wheel in to the right & go to Castle Hill where I was to wait for further orders but in one part of them he desir'd me to fire upon any person that attempted to run away when call'd to which I told him was all I wanted; I directly divided the Detachment giving Lt. Davies the Command of the left Division (& who had different instructions) & taking Mr. Laycock & the other half with me I march'd as quick as possible to Toongabbe on our arrival I was inform'd there were four hundred of the Rebels laying on the top of Sugar loaf hill all well arm'd I instantly detachd the Corpl. with the advanced Guard (5 in all) with about 6 or 8 Inhabitants (arm'd with Musquets) by the Hawkesbury road to take them in flank whilst Laycock & myself with the rest of the soldiers & about 12 arm'd Inhabitants ascended the face of the Hill behind Doctor Masons & when we gain'd the sumit we found they had push'd on for the Hawkesbury & by every account we could learn there were at least 400 of them I immediatly advanced as rapidly as possible (the day being intensely hot) & having heard before we arriv'd at the Governmt Stock fence that they were not above a mile before us I desir'd Handlesack (the only Trooper I had with me) to take my Handkerchief & wave to them as a flag of truce & acquaint them the Governor was coming as I thought that might delay them whilst we were gaining ground upon them - He went to them & spoke to them but they wou'd hear no terms they however took the flints out of his Pistols & & allowed him to return I then sent Dixon the Priest to them (still with a view of detaining them) but they wou'd not listen to him; shortly after having taken one prisoner arm'd with a fusee that had separated from them & understanding from him they were not above half a mile before us I ask'd the Trooper if he was affraid to ride up along with me to speak to them he replied he wou'd go to hell with me (I desired Laycock to push on with the soldiers) & we immediately gallop'd after them; when we came up with them I call'd to them to stop that I wanted to speak to them they desir'd me to come into the middle of them as their Captains were there I told them their Captains must have very little spirit if they wou'd not come & speak to me as I was within Pistol shot of them (& I do assure you expected to be compleatly riddled every minute) at length two men of the names of Johnston & Cuningham came from amongst them when I reason'd with them upon the impropriety of their conduct they wou'd not hear it I told them I only wish'd to stop the effusion of blood & that I wou'd even bring their Priest up to convince them they were wrong & desir'd them to Persuade the People to surrender whilst I return'd to bring up the Priest I soon join'd the Detachment & desiring Laycock to push forward with the soldiers (10 file our only front) I rode again within Pistol shot of the Rebels & call'd to speak with the two People I had before seen with some reluctance they again came to me (whilst their Main Body form'd line on the second Hill on this side the last half way Pond) the Priest as well as myself spoke to them wishing them to surrender to prevent Bloodshed which they wou'd not listen to at last I ask'd Cuningham what he wanted? his reply was Death or Liberty I instantly cock'd a Pistol I had stuck in my sash & clapping it to his head order'd him instantly to join the Detachment (that just then appear'd in sight) else I wou'd blow his soul to Hell the Trooper did the same by the other & in this Manner we drove them forcibly into the Detachment which I order'd to advance & fire & instantly charge the firing immediatly commenced & both sides & the Rebels soon fled in all directions when we join'd (after the pursuit at the last Pond we found 9 Kill'd) & since that there has been six more found 6 or 7 wounded & when we arriv'd at the Hawkesbury we had 26 Prisoners 27 stand of arms that we took from the Rebels besides Pistols Cutlasses Bayonets Pikes & Pitchforks. - I never in my life saw men behave better than those under my command & the only fault I had to find with them was their being too fond of Blood for I do assure you I sav'd the lives of 6 miserable wretches that the soldiers wou'd have butcher'd if I had not presented my Pistol at their heads & swore I wou'd shoot them if they attempted to kill them in cold blood. [94]   Parramatta  March 13th 1804  Dr Madam  I received yours by the Calcutta and need not inform you we were exceeding glad to hear from you. The seeds you wrote for Mrs. Marsden has put up in a small box with some others which I hope you will receive safe. I have sent them by one of the officers of the Calcutta to whom I refer you for information of this Colony. This gentleman can give Mr. Stokes a particular account of the wild cattle he having paid two visits to the Cow pastures . Mrs. Marsden has visited them once about a month ago. Where the wild cattle feed it is the finest country my imagination can conceive the hills and vales are so beautiful. It was my intention to have sent you a good collection of seeds by the Calcutta but have been prevented from collecting them by the Irish rebels they have given us some trouble lately and put the Colony in much danger. [34]   I hope they are subdued for the present - they had laid a plan for a general insurrection fortunately for us it did not succeed. I am truly sorry to hear of the death of Mrs. Goff & also of poor Milbah Johnson - both Mr. and Mrs. Johnson would be greatly afflicted. I can feel for them having lost two fine boys myself. They are not lost in that glorious morning of the Resurrection of the just we shall all meet again - Parents & Children shall see each other if numbered amongst the Saints they part no more for ever. If we are conducted to glory from this seive of iniquity it will an eternal wonder. I often think I must return to England and enjoy the society of God's people again before my soul can have any bright prospects of Glory. The thought may be vain because God's power is infinite and he is everywhere present. Everything here is so unlike religion so unlike God & his glory. I often feel an anxious wish to see my native land but when the time will come I know not. Government seems not to pay much attention to religion here as they send me no assistance. My duty is very hard the Colony is become very extensive now and a great number of people in it with only myself as a Minister. Should any come I hope he will be a pious man and hearty in the cause of God. I wish you would inform me particularly what you want & if I can get it here you shall have it - the great difficulty is to get an honest man to take what we wish to send without stealing it. My private letters are sometimes stolen and if not stolen opened by some person unknown. The greatest rogues in the world come and go from this Colony. If you ever get a letter it must be a chance business. I think you will get this safe the young man has too much honour to neglect delivering it should he come himself. You will give my kindest respects to Mr. Hollis with Mrs. M's.  I have the honour to be Dear Madam Yours respectfully  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  P.S. - Mrs. Marsden begs Miss Stokes' acceptance of a little netting box made of the wood of this country which you will find in the box of seeds.  Parramatta NSWales September 28th 1804  Dear Sir  I have much pleasure in availing myself of the first opportunity that offers since the receipt of your letters to Mrs. McArthur and Mrs. Marsden to return my acknowledgments for your kind remembrances - and to assure you Capt. Kent and myself were much disappointed on returning to Port Jackson to find you had left it. - The Buffalo is under sailing orders for Dalrymple and I believe there is a probability of her extending her voyage to Norfolk Island - permit me to say your being a resident there is a great inducement to my visiting the Island exclusive of the temptation you hold out viz. "dancing down the Government House & Lansdown Place." but really these long voyages have had such a serious effect upon my health that for some time to come (however unwilling) I must relinguish them - Our passage from Calcutta was rendered extremely pleasant by the society of two Gentlemen whom I have the pleasure of introducing to your acquaintance Mr. Serer and Mr. Sanders - as their stay at Norfolk will be very short if you could assist them in procuring some Tropic Feathers I should consider myself obliged - if there is anything Cap Kent or myself can do for you here we beg you will command us in the meantime accept our best wishes and believe me Dear Sir  Yours very sincerely Eliza Kent  PS: By the last vessel from Norfolk I had a letter from Daveron requesting I would make interception for him - being a stranger to the nature of his offences I can only state such a request was made - I saw several persons in India who were much interested in his welfare and his connections in that part of the World are very respectable - I therefore hope on their account as well as his own whatever misdemeanours he may have been guilty of they will not prevent him regaining his liberty should a fair opportunity offer.  About three Months since by the arrival of a sea Whaler from Pt. Jackson I had the inexpressible happiness to hear from my dearest Mother & other friends for the first time since leaving them going on now for 3 Years! I need not say the joy I felt at the receipt of the valuable Pacquet more especially to find that you were all in as good health & happy as when I left you - The anxious hours I had passed daily looking for some tidings was fully repaid by the pleasing Intelligence I received tho I almost dreaded to open them least I might find in so long a time that I had lost some dear & valued friend - but thank God it was not the case & I hope I shall ever receive such welcome news. [20]   The last date of your Letters were in Octr. 1804 & some as far back as August & Septr. 1803 - so that I think I must have received all you had written to that time - as there were abt. 24 of them - John & Tom did not write - which I am sorry for as I should wish always to hear from every one of you - I had several Letters from Harry but from Nancy - what a delightful packet!! I have hardly read all the volumes thro yet - I shall thank her for them - as well as my little dears Dolly & Mary - but I forget; the former by this time is I suppose Mrs R ... R(?)...lly! but of that more by & by - I have also to thank my kind & worthy friend Comyns for his very friendly Letter - I shall write him a very long letter & wish it was in my power to send him some Curiosities by this Conveyance - but I have met with a great Misfortune in having a large Case of Birds (some capital ones) abt. 100 in number totally destroyed by a nest of large ants eating into it unknown to me - Not a feather was left on them - Nancy & Mr. Comyns write me to preserve them in Spirits but they could not know the scarcity of that Article - but Adieu to this subject which I wonder how I got into when I have one so much more interesting to talk about - My dearest mother I have to beg pardon of you for doing something without your leave but for the life of me I could not help it - I followed Harry's example without knowing of it & that very day 12 Months - married? Yes my dearest Mother & what is more enjoy the most perfect happiness My sweet little Girl is one of the most ameanable Disposition I ever met with - and her affectionate attachment to me is such as must render my life devoted to her happiness in return - You will naturally expect and have a right to know who your new daughter in law is - She was Miss Ann Jane Hobbes; her Father was a brave Officer in the Navy (a Lieut.) who died shortly before she left England & a Brother also a Lt. in the Navy was killed in Egypt. there were then the Mother 4 Daughters and a younger Son - The Eldest married Mr. Hopley who was appointed one of the Surgeons of this place and Mrs. Hobbs having only the widows pension was persuaded to follow her Daughter here with the rest of her family They came passengers with me in the Ocean where I first got acquainted - and here at Hobart Town had the happiness to call Ann Jane the 3rd daughter mine To use Harry's words "I might perhaps have got a richer but I could not have got a better Wife" - for young as she is (not 18) I'll be bound to say there is not many double her age that understand more of Domestic Management - She often reminds me [of] my Dr. Mother when I see her so busily employed about Household affairs - I will give you a sketch of her Person - she is about the middle size well formed fine blue eyes & brown hair & is altogether a fine woman - I may consider myself as peculiarly happy in having the fortune to gain the heart of one calculated for my comfort in every point of view & whom with pride I can call by the name of Wife - otherwise I should have perhaps followed the example of most others here who having only convicts about them for Servants have been induced to take temporary ones but thank God I have escaped that rock & got safe into the Harbour of happiness - And now my dearest Mother my beloved Ann Jane joins me in begging your blessing on us which I am sure you will not withhold for I make no doubt you will feel as happy in hearing from me that I am - as I do in assuring you of it - your motherly affection for me has ever been such as to convince me of it. [21]   But now I suppose you will wish to know a little in what manner we go on here - I can assure with respect to general comforts very badly indeed - I have not yet had a house to live in (except one I have rented) - nothing but Canvas in all weathers - What I am now in is a miserable Hovel a Ground floor of 2 Rooms about the size of a Nutshell - 2 Windows - 1 Door - 1 Chimney - & thatched - & for this I pay at the rate of 50£ pr. ann - without any Garden or Land belong to it and very little probability of getting into a better for Govr. Collins has not paid the least attention to the wants of his Officers in this respect - Only one Officer has yet had a House built him - all the rest have either been obliged to build for themselves or else to hire houses or live in Marques tho God knows he has had time enough to do it since he had built elegant houses for Convicts where the Wife was a favorite - Times are very much altered here for the worse - everything is most abominably dear & in some instances we pay 500 pr Cent on the English Goods - particularly Shoes - Broad Cloths - Hats etc etc and some times cannot get them for love or Money - We have lately & are now almost in a state of starvation having been on the allowance of 4 lb bread 2 lb Pork per man pr week owing to not having had any supplies from Sydney but as we have such abundance of Kanguroo here we can never want - from 2 to 3000 [lbs] weight a week having been turned into the Store by the Officers at 1 / - pr lb. which has considerably helped us on. We are in daily expectation of a Ship from Sydney or England with Supplies which will be a delightful occurrence for us - I have however notwithstanding all these difficulties being getting a house under weigh & hope shortly to be in one I can call my own without obligations to any one - I have got about 1 Acre of Wheat in this Year (which considering is doing wonders) - My stock consists of 1 Cow & Calf - 1 Ram 2 Ewes - 2 Ewe Lambs 1 He Goat - 4 females 2 female Kids - 4 Geese - 10 Goslings - [NN] fowls - Besides which I have a pack of Kangaroo Dogs as good as any in the whole Country - namely Lagger Weasel Lion Boatswain Brindle etc etc - & with those Dogs I scarcely ever go or send out (for I have two Huntsmen) but get 3 4 5 or sometimes 8 Kanguroos in a day or two some of the Kanguroo stand 6 feet high & weigh from 100 to 130 or 150 lbs & fight the dogs most desperately so as sometimes to kill them & very frequently to wound them sadly - Sometimes we get Emus a large Bird (Species of the Ostrich) which are hunted in the same manner as Kanguroo & make a worse resistance They frequently weigh 80 or 90 lb. & run (for they cannot fly) amazingly swift so that the swiftest greyhound can scarcely get up with them - They are much coarser food than the Kanguroo which when young is nearly as good as Venison - it only wants fat - Kanguroo hunting fishing & shooting are the only recreations we have at this place - there is no society - I cannot visit with my wife most of my brother Officers because they have female Companions - we seldom therefore visit except to Captn. Sladdens (Marines) who is married - or in her family who are the only females she can associate with - this with the very great Dearth of every kind of News for there is none (except the daily account of Robberies during the Night) unless on the arrival of a Ship makes the place extremely dull & very unlike Old England - [22] Books are also a very scarce article and the few there are have been read over & over again Therefore every little trifle - newspaper - handbill or anything that comes from England is valuable & interesting - I must beg of you to save all pamphlets - Newspapers - Handbills - Murders Dying Speeches - Calendars &c &c & send them to Harry for me. I have sent him a list of Books &c I wish to have sent out - I am in great measure deprived of my favorite amusement - Drawing having used or lost most of my paints & expended all my drawing & other papers which is a great drawback on me no such article as either to be got in the Colony - I am very much obliged to you for the Flower Seeds which I shall take care & put in our Garden & hope you will send me some more - If you can send some Gooseberry Raspberry Currant Seeds - Plumb & Cherry Stones - Acorns ripe Thornberrys or any thing of that kind I think they would thrive well - In return I will this year collect flower & tree seeds from this place - it is too early yet being only the commencement of Spring but there are some beautiful shrubs & flowers here quite new at home -   Could I have an opportunity of sending by a Ship direct from this place to England I could make up a Box of little things for you & wd. send a few of the Beautiful Parroquet we have here was there any one I could trust to take care of them & deliver them alive - but the Ships that have come to this Port are either gone on the Whalefishing for 12 or 18 mos. or else to Port Jackson and as I know no one there things might lie & spoil long before an opportunity offered to send them. I expect that Captn. Bristow of the Ocean Whaler will return here from Norfolk Island in about 3 Months & then I shall be able to make up a Package for you and my friend Comyns which I am daily collecting - I was very sorry to hear of poor old Mrs. Bradfords Death she was a good old lady & I shall always respect her Memory - I have now my Dearest Mother written you a long letter and as I have several more to write by the same Conveyance I must beg you will remember me most affectionately to every friend of which I have so many that I shall not particularize one but include them all together - Mrs. Hobbs my Mother in law begs I will say all that is kind for her tho unknown & hopes we may all one day meet together - My Ann Jane joins me in every thing affectionate & dutiful - Believe me ever my dear Mother while I have breath  YOUR TRULY AFFT. SON / GEO. PRIDEAUX HARRIS  It gives me extreme uneasiness to relate to you any unpleasant news concerning any person belonging to this Corps and especially about Mr. Laycock senior whose conduct has been so extremely improper since his wife has left the Colony as to be noticed by almost every person and if possible every succeeding day has been marked in him with some fresh act of folly indecency or un-officer-like behaviour After having been admonished by the Major without making any amendment and his setting all authority at defiance in using threats and language in the public Streets of the most mutinous tendency he was at last put into arrest at large. Here one would naturally have imagined (who knew Laycock at all) he would have been brought to his senses but instead of which his behaviour continued as I am informed worse if possible on which account he has since been confin'd to a close arrest and it is in agitation to send him a prisoner to England for want of officers to try him here; [95] as there is only one officer at Head Quarters who could sit on his trial and also but one could be had from the out posts nor could his Son sit for obvious reasons. It is with regret that I add the father's bad example has been follow'd by the Son - You will perhaps scarcely credit that Lt Laycock escorted his fathers convict whore through the streets arm and arm on duty in full Regimentals & had the indecency to walk with her on the public parade last Sunday whilst the Band of the Regiment was playing - I have given you but a concise account of the business as I wish to fill my letter if possible with something more agreeable to you.  Dear Madam  As a gentleman is returning from this Colony to London I shall just drop you a line to let you know we are well and anxiously expecting to hear from England.  C. Grimes Esqre who will deliver you this will inform you how we are going on - his stay in England probably will be but very short as his duty will require him to return by an early conveyance. I am very uneasy at times about Mr. Johnsons affairs in this Colony since the failure of the Paymaster of the N.S.W. Corps. He was considerably in debt to Mr. Johnson. I had done my utmost to obtain the money for him & believe he will be one of the least sufferers of Mr. Cox's creditors considering the sum he left me to recover for him. Mr. Johnson unless he was to visit us again could not believe the great change in the political state of the Colony. Many things are altered for the better. I shall be happy should I ever live to see religion flourish amongst us - there is no prospect of this. I often think the Gospel if we may judge from appearances in the settlement was only intended for children the common soldier & the convict in irons. The military officers will march the soldiers to the church door & then return the gaoler will unlock his cells & turn his prisoners out to public worship but has no idea of attending himself. Such is the afflicting situation I am placed in my soul is pained within me I cannot but mourn for the abominations that are committed in the land. With respect to temporal things we have abundance in the Colony. Our present crops are very promising and cultivation goes on very fast. Our flocks and herds increase and multiply very much - beef & mutton will soon be very plentiful. This country will at some future period become great from the richness of its soil and the healthiness of its climate. I have no complaint to prefer on temporal accounts I labour hard enjoy my health & family. I generally go weary to bed my rest is very sweet and the morning finds me ready for the toils of the day. [36] I feel a longing for my native land and wish to revisit Old England again - it cannot be yet but I hope the time will come when I shall have that happiness. We have got an addition to our family of another boy about two months ago. Mrs. M. is very well - she is very contented in her situation - suffers little affliction either of body or mind - she rides a good deal for amusement and exercise on horse back being a good horsewoman - she will ride to Sydney and return the same day which is 20 miles very well I keep a good horse entirely for her use and convenience. We have not much agreeable society and therefore endeavour to supply the want of it in the most pleasant manner we can. We shall be happy to hear from you at all times and believe me  Dear Madam to remain  Yours in every Christian respect  S. Marsden  Mrs. .M. joins with me in kind remembrance to Mr. Stokes & your family.  Parramatta  New South Wales  15th Jany 1805.  My dear Madam  It is so long since I have had the pleasure of hearing from you that at times I think you have forgotten us which if the case would give me great uneasiness. The last letter I wrote you was by the Calcutta favored by Mr. who promised to call on you and deliver a letter and small box containing some native pears & for Miss Stokes made of the Beef Wood and a few other I things which I hoped would be acceptable as they were not common.  You no doubt wonder how we are going on Much in the old dull and uncomfortable way with respect to a religion Yet there is one thing which has a promising appearance. There is more attention payed to the Sabbath. [37] Mr. Marsden has both at Sydney and at Parramatta a very large congregation which is voluntary so that by degrees they may be brought to fear his name and we do not know what the Lord may do for this Colony. He may yet raise up a faithful people to publish his name and though I may not live to see it yet it is a consoling hope that he will not entirely forsake this place which at times I am almost tempted to think he will do for its great wickedness. You who live in the midst of Gospel blaze know not what it is to live among a people entirely ignorant of God and his ways. At times I feel so dead and lifeless that I think I have never been a child of God and doubt whether I shall even enjoy those seasons of grace which has afforded me such real comfort. Let me beg dear Madam an interest in your prayer's that I may be enabled so to run that I may receive the prize of everlasting life.  Permit me to return you my sincere thanks for your kind attention to my dear Ann when she was in London. Mrs. Scott wrote me of your handsome present to her. I am anxiously looking for a ship from England as it is a twelvemonth since I have had letters from Yorkshire.  Poor Mrs. Johnson I feel much for her it was a hard trial to part with so fine a girl as Milbah but the Lord knows what is best for his children.  My family is the same in number as when I wrote last - a girl & boy. Elizabeth grows a great girl and it is time she was in England but I do not think I can muster courage to part with her. Charles is also an engaging little fellow and I trust he will be spared to us.  Mrs. Hughes begs her kind respects to you. When I see her she always enquires when I have heard from you. I believe I sent you word before that her husband is Master Blacksmith at Sydney and what with their salary and other indulgences they are very comfortable.   Mr. Marsden joins with me in kind remembrances to Mr. Stokes & family  and accept the same  From dear Madam  Your obliged friend  E. MARSDEN  I Received boath your Letters one wrote by yourself and the other by Mr Watson which gave me such joy that my pen or word cannot express the sentiments of my heart as I never Received any account of you my dear Chield since I parted with you - but thank the almighty that is now removed by hearing my dear Barbara has an affectionate husband and three Children you mention everything being at an enormous price in England and a Husbandman's wages being so low that you can hardly exist. [...]   Here my Dear is the most healthful country in all the Globe for there is nothing that grows in a hot or Cold Country but comes to the Greatest perfection here for Instance one acre of wheat will produce from Forty to Fifty Bushels of wheat - and as to fruit no country can equal it and our Cattle is farr beyond in size and meat to your finest cattle in England. So my Dear do not loose a moments time when you receive this but use all your Interest and endeavours to come to the Garden of the World.  My Husband came free to the Coloney along with Governor Phillips and gives me every encouragement to send for you he haveing great possesion of land here and haveing no children he had will'd everything that he posseses here to me as he has an Estate in the Hilands of Scotland our situation in this Coloney is the most plesent of any and I am very sure if please the almighty that you arive safe in this Coloney that you will think yourself a Blesd Family for your happy abode once more my prayer shall be for your spedey passage and safe arival that I may once embrace you in my longing arms to clasp you and to put you in possesion with what the almighty has bestowed upon us my Husband joins me with his love to you and your family and hopes to have the pleasure of puting you in possesion of an Estate where he past many happy day.  Sydney October the 8 1806  Dear  uncle and aunt one the eighteen of aprell 1806 i was fiftey milles in the Countrey and very ill i had the pleasant newes that thear was a Box from englent for me wich it was the grates joy that I ever felt after Being five yeares all but one month from you. Maney Be the time that i hav said to my Best friends what would i give to hear from my Dear uncle and aunt. i have Dremt of being with you wich i pray to God to perserve you in Life and mine to meet once moor wich i hav no dought But we shall as i am Bless God at this time in Good health and happy to hear you are the same and Lucy and my James and Samendill and my dear boy Charles. I am seten By the sid of a Good cask of portter and i wish to see you all Befor it is out it will not be taped till Christmas this is my Daughters as i call her she com in to the Countrey she have got 2 fine boyes and a gairll with me and they call me Granmother for this house is my home where i born [?]. Binn for this 2 yeares past up in the Countrey at Richmond hill i went thear to nurs one Mrs. Rouse a very respectfull person they com from englant free thay respect me as one of ther owen famely for Mrs. Rouse with this larst child she had tould har husband that she must died Becaus i was not thear Mr. Rouse did live up at Richmond at his farm But the Govner give him a places to be super and tender and marster Bilder at the Lumber yeard Parramitta then then i was left over seear at his farm But it was as Lonsum for me as i Left But i hav got fouer yowes and nin Breeding grates 3 wethers and sevenn yong ones that is all my stock at present Mr. Rouse keep them and Charg me nothing for them i should had six piges. But this places have Binn so flodded that i thought once must all Bonn Lorst that how i cam so very ill Being in the water up to my middell as you well know i hav a good spirit i was tring to sav what i could and then i and Mrs. Dight and her 3 children went upon the Lorft for safety wee had not Binn thear abov. owear Befor the first Chimdey went dowen and middell warl went then i expected the next Chimdey to Goo and all the warles and then to Be brushed to dead for the weater wass about five feet deep in the howes at that time it was that depth in about 2 ouers Mr. Dight and this 2 minn was Gon to nock dowen the pig sties and pig runs to Driv the pigs away so wee wear Left alon But Great provedances turned up a Boat to sav us from a wattery Grav com and took us away i was moar frightened then all the way going over this happened the 22 of Larst march housen and Barnes and wheat stackes and the indey born that was not gathered it wirshed all a way Befor the strem sum poor breaters riden one thear housen sum on thear Barnes bring out for God sake to be saved others firing ther Guns in the Greatest destress for a Boat ther was maney thousenes of head of all kaind of Cattell was Lorst and so maney Buchells of all sortes was Lorst of Grain as now this places is in Grat destress for wheat Larst Saturday Oct the 6th it sould at the market for 3 pound fifteen shillenes par Buchells and inden Corn at 3 pound 10 par Buchell that is four peches Beef 2 shillenes mutton the sam fresh pork not to Be Got Salt pork and six pence per pound sugar l b par pound tea is not to Be got But when it was it was 3 pound and a Buchell of wheat for 5 shillenes Check for aprenes 6 shillenes and every thing is very Dear the wheat is a Comming in the ear But the Cropes Look very Light. But my Dear uncle and aunt i do not know any want Bliss God for i hav Binn nursen Lining in women and i will tak that keear i will not want it is a great word to say But i am well Beloved a monkst my Betters i niver hav knowen anething of puneshment since i hav Binn hear onely that i Cannot git no tea that is all the same. I am verey happy to hear of poor Williames Death for he was so week my Dear aunt i am verey happey to hear you grow so Lustey and Lucy so steady and all do so well [?] now i did kiss your Dear hare and Cry over it for i thought that i had you that minnet in my heand i hav Binn very happey ever since. My Dear uncle i recived yours i hop you hav receved Letters twices sinces then for i all wayas tak every opertunetey of senden to you and that you may Be well a sueard i will and i hop you will do the sam. i should be very happey to hear from my aunt and uncle Ledder and all my Cusones do an if aney of them Be marred and how maney Children they hav Got. i myself will not hav no husband But hear is no women But must hav sum sort of a man sum women do very well inded. uncle i tould you i was a going to a farm But i did not i Lived a Littell wille in a Littell houes of my owen i did not Lik that so i to nurs one Mrs. Skinner they are the Channey makeres then i went to nurs Mrs. Rouse and stoped with her one year and then went to Mrs. Dightes thear is wear i arnt a year then i wast Left at Mrs. Rouse farm and from thar i went to Mrs. Dightes to nurs har and from thear i went to nurse Mrs. Wood to nurs har and from thear to nurs Mrs. Rouse a Gain. now i am a going to nurs Mrs. Fathfull Mrs. Wodd sister thar names wear Pitt even thay Cam into the Countrey thay wear sum relashon to Lord Nelson a very good famley i Liv very well and much respected old Mrs. Pitt is very fond of me But i sharll i Beliv soon goo to Live By myself. Mrs. Palmer hav often time wished me to goo to Liv with har again But the work was to hard for me in this hot Countrey. But i allways goo to see Mrs. Palmer because Mrs. Rouse and Mrs. Dight was weat nurs to Mrs. Palmer. i might a Gon to Lived with maney of the sallers and that is to a Binn thear wife and might a Lived very well But i hav no inklanashon. i hav a pieces of ground and i am thinken to bild a house or buing a Cow But the prices of a Cow is from 30 to fiftey pound a pieces that is a grat sum of money. wee hav got a new govner and this name is Bligh wich i had given in a pertishon Larst forth of Jun But if god spar my Life i will hav a petshon in for a-man-sepated and then i will Lett you know. my dear uncle i wish you Could see this places for at thies time the petches are all on the trees the wheat all the ear. the places is full of wickedness we are forst to goo a grat partey togeather or eseel wee should be robed an murdred sum are murdred But i will tak good keear of my self. my Dear Mrs. Cobbold is very Good to me she sent me out a Box of nices thinges sum to sell and sum to wear a peies for 3 Goundes 2 petcotes whit stuf 3 muslen hankchefs 2 Cotten sharlles tharteen yardes of Black Laces six yeards of ell wid Gingam for a ground nine Borders for Capes 2 Carlls for Capes and a grat maney moor thinges to takes to menchen. i hop when you see Mr. Stebbing you will Be so good as to giv me Grates thankes to him for that Bountefal present that it was throon Goodness that Mrs. Henrietta Hoorgin henly hall near ipswich this Laday sent me twelv yardes of irish Cloth a Bible prayer Book and four yeardes of Ribbard and a Butfull Letter. i hop you will see my John Cook and giv my Lov to him and all enquiren frindes and tell them i am all the sam as ever onley i hav Lorst one of my uper front teeath and that grev me. i send Mrs. Cobbold the newes papers i wish you could borrow them after a wile and you would Lick to see them i well know. i wish to hear if you Can wear fanney Brookes is that Lived with me at Mrs. Cobbold.  My Dear aunt i hav sent you a Lock of my Darkest of my hair.  Margreat Catchpole  Parramatta June 20th 1806  Dear Sir  I thank you for your wishes that we may have altered our minds and stay a few years longer in this part of the World. Mr. Marsden still continues in the same mind and I assure you I have no wish whatever to remain any longer in this Colony - at present it is the Governor's intention to touch at your island - if so it will give me much pleasure to bid you adieu - as most likely it will be the last time we may meet. Mr. Marsden intends being out again in two years. But I hope when he once again revisit his native shore he will give up all thoughts of returning here - but in whatever place I am I shall remember with a esteem a few of my New South Wales friends and it will always give me pleasure to hear of their happiness. Your letters you must have ready and any comments you may have I shall be happy to execute.  Young Kitty's foal is weaning at Kingston with some of ours in a field of clover and rye grass. Her mother has behaved very bad having been twice sent to the Hawkesbury - and returned both times preferring the barren soil of Elizabeth's farm to the luxuriant pasture of the Hawkesbury - at present she remains very quiet - if not it will be impossible for any servant of ours to take charge of her when we leave this - if she remains on Mr. McArthur farm - but I hope she will remain where she is at present. Norfolk moggy - and Miss Kitty - are [?] in [?].  I return you many thanks for your kind remembrance in sending the oranges which are very fine - and also the drip stone which I received safe.  I remain Dear Sir Your sincere Friend E. Marsden  This is to acquaint you that I Received your affectionate letter of 30th Augst by Mary Boyd a female convict from your Gaol and it gives me the Greatest pleasure to here of your wealfare. Before you Receive this I expect that you have Received from a gentleman who went home from this place in his Majesty ship Buffulo Ten Pounds Stery a Gold Ring & Necklace &c which my Husband sent you as a small token of his friendship and should you come here he will make you a present of one Hundred Acres of land if you can get to come to this place be sure to bring all kinds of fruit seeds such as all kinds of cherrystones Nectern stones plum stones and the Different kinds of Curant Seed & Goosbury seeds with the Walnut chestnut filbert and the heasell nut which must be packed in Different Papers and put into a large bottle well corkd and Seald and then packed up in a small Box if you do not take care of the seed according to the order it will be of no use to bring or send them and if you do and the seeds will answer here you will make a fortune soon any Kinds of Market Peach in Garden Seeds will be very servisable & a few Kinds of Putoatoes that is most in voge with you at home if you can bring a little hop seeds & a pound or two of Cloverseed - Should be very happy to here from you as soon as you can and acquaint me if you Received what I sent you and if you mean to come as me and my husband is geting on in years and will have no person to leave what we have if you do not come...  P.S. If you can come bring some thread as it is one shilling a Skean here and Tobacco £3 a Pound and sugar 8 shillings a Pound and Spirits L1-10 a Bottle and all other things according - my Husband & I joins in our love to your Husband you and your family.  Papa is quite well but dreadfully harrassed by business & the troublesome set of people he has to deal with in general he gives great satisfaction but there are a few that we suspect wish to oppose him; as yet they have done nothing openly tho' it is known their Tools have been at work some time; that is they are trying to find something in Papas conduct to write home upon but which I am sure from his great circumspection they will not be able to do with honor to themselves. Mr. [John] McArthur is one of the party; the others are the Military Officers but they are all invited to the house & treated with the same politeness as usual.  I wish I could tell you that Putland is as well as my Father; since you last heard from us he has been continually ailing & has had every symptom of a Consumption for these two months past he has been confined to his room but is now I trust in God gradually recovering:  you may suppose he has required my whole attention & that except a dinner party now & then of eight or ten persons we have not had any - In May Papa sent him to Norfolk Island as a sea passage was much recommended but it was not of any service to him his Surgeon is a clever man & tells me I need not make myself at all uneasy therefore I beg my dear Mama you will not do either; before my next I trust he will be much recovered.  I cannot express how much we were delighted with Betsey's Picture; we think it the strongest likeness that can possibly be taken & the Drawing beautifully done: we can never repay & convey the pleasure it has given us. It is a long time since we have had any arrival from England or India the Colony is in great distress for articles from the latter country; but nothing would do my spirits as much good just now as letters from you my dear Mama & another Picture - Putland joins with me in affec. love to you my dear sisters & Henry a letter from Papa will accompany this so I need not say more for him than that it is astonishing to me how he gets through the multiplicity of business he does without impairing his health - That this may find you all in health & happiness.  January the 28 1807  my Dear uncle and aunt  this ship hav Binn so long a bout saven this Collen But it is now a-Bout it and i am happey to inform that i am in Charmen helth and happey at this an hopping my Dear uncle and aunt this will find you all in good health i hop and all my Dear Cussones. and i pray to God to keep you all from such a wicked Countrey as this for a-Bout a fortnight agoo a man Burnt a poor woman to dead he cut 2 or 3 holes in har head But it ded not a-Cason har death for he Burnt the poor Crater to dead Becaues she said mary smith went to see after sum thinges that he stolen from her sum time agoo. it is a very dangres Countrey. But Bliss God i tak grat kear of my self i mind that my Compeney is Good allways Better than my self and if any thing i Got smarter than ever i dead i Look pretty well But i hav Lorst one of my frunt teeth and a good maney of them are a Brokin away all my hopes is to se you and my Dear Cussones. i Giv fifteen shillenes for a par of black spannesh shose and the same for a par of Cotton stockenes thinges are very Deear ouer harvest is onely one month over and wheat is sellen for twenty fiv shillenes par Buchell all readey i hop thinges are not so Dear with you wood is Giten very Deear fiv shillenes a Cart Lood with one hors one and six pences for a weelbarrow Lood and one Can Goo and Git it that Like But it a Grat way of a very Bad Crop of wheat this sason times will Goo very hard with us next winter i am a fraid. i hop if i Com home aney moor i shall be worth By this time two year i hop two hundred pound and then i will Cum by sum heand or a nother i am not at a Loss in no part of the world i am as Supell as ever thay say i am Lik a young woman for strewen nimbell.  all my aquantences are my Betters i dod very well Bless God for it and i am much oblig to you for the newes you sent me and hop you will send me all you Can. i hav seen the newes paper of Lord Chedwick Death and will. hear is a woman that was in Ipswich a Bout 2 year a Goo har mothear Liv a Tutham and her name is haggears and she and i are very sosebell she toul me of the grat altrkashon in that place. you may rember me to Mr. Clubb and tell him i shead his Daughter Mary Ann Smith with my letter and she was very pleased and tould me when i did wright to give har Lov to you and to Leet you know she was well and that i hav to say she might a Binn as well of as aney woman in this Countrey if it was not for the Drink a drop of rum she Lik to har heart Lik har farthear But she is doing very well she want for nothing for i hav Binn in hear houes and she Liv at Parramatta i hav all wayes seen har ever since i went to the Countrey. my dear uncle pray giv my Lov to them that ask after me and to all that have asked after and tell them i am all the sam as ever and to my uncle and aunt and Cusons Ledder and your selves and ma Dear Cusones and grat happeness it giv me to hear thare are so stedey and to Giv you so much Comfort in your old Dayeas.  So no more at this time from your   Loven Cuson Margreat Catchpole  this is in December 1806 wheat is sellen at this time for fewer pound par Bushell times are very Bad  My Dear uncle our wrighten paper is six pences a sheet  it is a wondfull Countrey for to have Children in. Very old women hav them that never had non Before  Sydney Saturday 5 o'clock.  MY DEAREST LOVE  I have been deeply engaged all this day in contending for the liberties of this unhappy colony and I am happy to say I have succeeded beyond what I expected. t am too much exhausted to attempt giving you particulars; therefore I must refer you to Edward who knows enough to give you a general idea of what has been done. The tyrant is now no doubt gnashing his teeth with vexation at his overthrow. May he often have cause to do the like.  Monday 15th. May 1809 We set out from London for Portsmouth late this evening; slept at Kingston and pursued our journey early next morning accompanied by Major Macquarie 42d.. Regt.. who attended us to Portsmouth [.] [W]e slept the second night at Lipook and arrived at Portsmouth at 12 o'clock on Wednesday the 17th.. of May; putting up at the George Inn. ---   Friday 19th.. Embarked on board His Majesty's store Ship Dromedary Commanded by Mr. Pritchard (a Master in the Royal Navy) then lying at St.. Helens between 12and 1 o'clock this day; Captn.. Pascoe Comr of the Hindostan Man of War having conducted us in his Barge from Portsmouth off to the Dromedary. Our party onboard consisted of Mr. Pritchard one midshipman who lived at his table Mr. & mrs.. Bent Colonel Macquarie and myself. ---   Monday 22d.. -- The Hindostan & Dromedary weighed anchor about 12 o'clock and we proceeded on our voyage for New South Wales with a fine light fair Breeze down the British Channel. --- -  Wednesday 24th.. At 4 o'clock this afternoon we lost sight of good old England; being abreast of and having taken our final departure from the Lizard (the Southernmost point of Great Britain) about an hour before. The wind fair and Steering out proper course at W.S.W. --- [O]n the 27th.. the weather alter'd much for the worse it blew extremely hard for two days and was against us; with a heavy Sea. --- I suffer'd much being in a weak state of health and Sea Sick; we were at this time chased by two large Ships which did not answer the private Signals this occasion'd much uneasiness to me & the other Ladies I found afterwards that there were new Signals which the Ships at Sea had not time to be made acquainted with. [F]or these two alarming Ships turn'd out to be Friends; indeed it is a gratifying sight to every English person to see how the Ships of their Country possess the dominion of the Seas all the way we have come we have occasionally met fine Ships of War as so many safeguards at different stations to smaller vessels. [T]hose Ships we have seen belonging to other nations have all been small Traders. --- -  Sunday 4th.. June we have had a great deal of rough stormy weather for the last eight days; and a contrary wind the whole time; knocking us about in the Bay of Biscay. --- We had a very violent gale of wind the whole of this day. We fell in with the Magicienne Frigate and her convoy early this morning. Captain Pascoe of the Hindostan happened unfortunately to have letters & packets on board & a Boatswain belonging to the Magicienne he was order'd by Captain Curtis of that Ship to send them on board; and against his opinion of the propriety of sending a boat out in such violent weather unfortunately decided on running the risque in preference to disobeying the Commands of a superior officer. --- The Boat had hardly left the Ship when she was upset and nine men run the risque of being drown'd; other Boats were immediately put out & six of the nine were saved by the great exertions of their Brother Seamen. --- We have been much detain'd on our voyage by the desire in the Commodore to make Prizes; we go off our course in pursuit of every Sail we See by which we have lost many a fair breeze and encounter'd many a foul one -- we have however once succeeded in taking a Prize- an American Ship which had been taken some days before by a French Privateer by which I am happy to find that Captn.. Pascoe will derive a considerable sum of money. --- -  Sunday 12th.. June -- Anchor'd early this morning in Funchal Roads in the Island of Madeira within a mile of the shore; after passing a hazardous night sailing among the [D]eserters [sic] having mistaken those Islands for that of Madeira --We landed in the afternoon at the Town of Funchal and went by invitation to reside at the House of Henry Veitch Esqr British Consul at Madeira; we were received and entertain'd with much hospitality by Mr. & Mrs.. Veitch & their [***] an elderly Man [.] Mr. Veitch who appears to me a most hospitable pleasant man I took quite a likening to him but I am sorry to remark in him what I believe is seldom to be found in a Scotch man that a long residence in a foreign country seems to have deprived him of that natural love for his Country which I should wish every good man to live and die with. --[H]e has been fourty [sic] years resident at Madeira & only once during that time at home -- he has now outlived all his very old friends & seems to have no idea of returning again; as often as I think of this man I must think of one who knows how to pay the most gentlemanlike civility & attention to strangers without the smallest apparent effort. My bad state of health prevented my being able to see much of the Island of Madeira & what I regretted much more I fear I prevented Colonel Macquarie partaking of many invitations which could not fail to be agreeable. --- -  Friday 16th We visited the Church of the Lady of the Mount above two miles up the Hill Captain Grant of the 11th was so good as to accompany us he is an extremely pleasant Man has made himself perfect master of the Portuguese language & seems intimately acquainted with the Inhabitants of the place even the Nuns at the different Convents seem to be his intimate friends -- his manners are certainly calculated to conciliate the affections of every person with whom he associates; -- I was carried up the mountain in a Hammock the appearance of which seem'd to shock Coll.. M. not a little; this did not altogether displease me as he said I look'd exactly like a corpse so I flatter'd myself as he did not like my resemblance; that he had no wish to see me in that state & to tell the truth I never dreaded that he had as he is not of a nature to wish ill to any one much less his own wife; who indeed during this voyage has been a troublesome charge for at the time my illness required the attendance of a maid; I never saw mine; being confined by Sea Sickness below in so much that for days together I never saw her. --- -  On Sunday the 18th.. We walk'd about the Town a good deal and went by chance into a church where a [young?] woman was taking the veil! It was a sight of too much interest to admit of our quitting the spot till the ceremony was over. The poor young woman was attended by two noble Ladies in full dress she was also adorn'd with flowers in her head &c. [S]he sat on the steps opposite the alter [sic] one of the Ladies on each side of her who endeavour'd to support her spirits with cheerful conversation; she seem'd to do her best to second their efforts but with a visible struggle. I sat or rather crouch'd very near her --A long time intervened before the arrival of the Priest; as we waited for him those Ladies next to me told me that the Convent to which this poor girl was so soon to belong was the strictest ever known; something in resemblance to that of La Trap. [T]hat it was so poor that the nuns were obliged to labour very hard for their support and with all that the situation of the Convent was so extremely damp & unwholesome that the nuns died at a very early period. The Lady Abbess at the time being only thirty years of age a dignity which is never confer'd at so early a period except from necessity. I felt so extremely sorry for the young woman that if it had been possible I should have most gladly offer'd her my [**indecipherable] if she would have desisted from her dreadful intention - at last the Priest attended by a member of his order arrived; he was a very old Man he went up to the alter [sic] the Nun knelt at his feet he was so blind that a Friar held a very large heavy candlestick so low as to enable him to read. The weight occasion'd an unsteadiness in the hands which held it the old man finding himself like to be burnt express'd great indignation; the ceremony then went on. The Priest read for some time in Latin when that was over the young noviciate was led in procession to the door of the convent which was open'd to receive her; the Nuns within appearing all dress'd in black with a large piece of black cloth thrown over their heads which was so thick as to conceal even the form of their Bodies; they had really an appearance not human. --- A second ceremony took place at the door of the convent but the crowd was so great that I could not see it at this moment there was a noise made by a Person pressing forward thro' the mob she was soon known to be the Mother of the young woman there was room made for her to pass & she arrived at the spot where her Daughter stood to take her last embrace! -- till that moment the Nun supported herself but the sight of her Mother totally overcame her; her head fell on her breast & she sob'd aloud in an agony of grief; she was then hurried forward & I saw her walk on follow'd by those dreadful looking black nuns who threw roseleaves at her. --- I saw her no more! but I understood that her head was immediately to be shaved she had a great quantity of fine hair and I saw the dress carried in which she was to change for that she had on it was an extreme coarse brown heavy stuff which I suppose she was to wear till she took the black veil. --- I cannot say that I ever felt so much distress at the fate of a stranger as I did on this occasion; the impression was not that I could not hear the subject mention'd without considerable emotion for sometime after. I hope her situation does not feel to her as it appear'd to me. --- While we were at Madeira Captain Curtis gave a splendid Ball on board the Mageciane [sic] my bad state of health obliged me to decline going & Coll.. M. was so good as to remain with me. We had the pleasure of seeing General and Mrs.. Mead Mrs.. M. was an old acquaintance of Coll.. Ms; and an extreme [sic] pretty woman -- I admired the style of her house and Garden much --- -  The Island of Madeira is certainly one of the most beautiful & romantic places to look at which I have ever seen to Persons who have been long at Sea & who have suffer'd illness and bad weather the sight of Funchal is the most gratifying which can well be imagined; but by the time one has been a few days on shore the want of air and great heat; the total exclusion from all kinds of exercise from the hardness of the roads; which are very steep and paved with small stones; and above all the filth of the Inhabitants is so disgusting that I think no time could reconcile one to witness it with indifference -- all this serves to shew how many comforts are necessary to render life agreeable to a person who has been accustom'd to live in England. --- -  On the 19th.. of June we sail'd from Madeira with very moderate weather we met some small Cruisers which we chased they proved to be small Portuguese traders. --- -  [O]n the 28th.. we discover'd land and at noon pass'd the Island of Buenavista on the 29th.. we made the Island of Mayo and came to anchor at Porto Prayo Island of St. Jago on the 30th.. -- from the Sea this place had a very barren appearance the ground appearing cover'd with sand & a very few Palm Trees scatter'd upon the plain; the few houses there are seem'd of the most miserable appearance. Neither Colonel Macquarie nor I went on shore there seem'd little inducement & the weather was extremely hot. Those who did go were shock'd at the miserable state of the people even the military were in rags the Sailors sold their old cloths at a much greater price than they cost when new. [A]nything of a military uniform would have been purchased almost at any price -- the people were much disappointed that nothing of that description could be had. The Governors house was described to us to be more like a shed than a house and the Cows & horses occupied the ground floor. This Island however must have a very different appearance in the interior as we were supplied with Bullocks Poultry & fruit in the greatest abundance and at very moderate prices. --- We only remain'd here twenty eight hours when we sail'd again to prosecute our voyage; which we continued to do with moderate weather and nothing particular occurring till the 5th.. of July; when we were sent in chase of a Strange sail when we came near she appear'd to be a very large Ship & so far from wishing to avoid us hove down full sail to meet us. [E]very thing was prepared for action the Strange Sail shew'd no colours; Colonel Macquarie & his men were on the Sloop; just as the Ship was coming along side he went to Captain Pritchard to beg he would not be too hasty in firing till he was confirm'd in the certainty of her being an enemy; this was a fortunate precaution; for she proved to be an American bound to Canton and had hoisted her colours but in so awkward a manner as not to be seen by us -- we have had many alarms about fighting but none that came so great a length as this; I felt a great deal of uneasiness & was very much relieved when the alarm was over. --- We occupied our time in reading I work'd at my needle occasionally every Sunday when the weather was moderate Mr. Bent perform'd Divine Service in the most agreeable manner. [H]e even read to us in the evening but this agreeable entertainment was of short duration -- we have regularly every evening a game of whist of which Captn.. Pritchard is particularly fond but if his Partner commits a mistake he is sure to be severely reprimanded. When the weather is such as to permit the ships sailing in a steady manner & that every person appears in good humour I think being at Sea a very agreeable life; our society on board I consider as particularly good; Captn.. Pritchard being a man of extreme good understanding and general information; & I must say uniformly desirous of being attentive to his Passengers. --- Mr. & Mrs.. Bent are both pleasant people & I enjoy'd his society extremely at the beginning of our voyage what the cause is I cannot tell but he is now more silent & by no means so much inclined sociability as at first. --- When we left England it was the intention of Ministers that the ships should touch at Madeira and the Cape of Good Hope only; they considering that two stops on the voyage was all that was necessary for the refreshment of the Troops and if the Hindostan had been as fortunate as this ship it would have been quite sufficient. --- The People on board being very healthy; those few in the Hospital being mostly confined by accidents or sore legs and never from the time of our sailing having any infectious complaints. [A] letter from Captain Pascoe gave a very different account of the state of his ship[.] [H]e inform'd Coll.. M. that the Disentary [sic] had lately spread to an alarming degree both among the Soldiers & Sailors of his Ship that the Sick list increased daily nor could they hope for a favorable change having nothing but Salt Provisions; and that his supply of water had run so short that he had not sufficient to carry him on to the Cape -- he therefore hoped his proceeding to Rio Janeiro would be favorably thought of at home. [T]he case was too urgent to admit of debate and we proceeded for that Port. [O]n the third of August we boarded a Portuguese Brigg [sic] from Bengola to Rio Janiero [sic] laden with female slaves this was a more hazardous service than we had any idea of the officers found on getting on board that an infectious fever prevail'd among them to which the Captain and a great number of the slaves had fallen victims -- to put a stop if possible to the complaint they had resorted to a precaution at which humanity shudders namely that of throwing the unfortunate slaves overboard as soon as they were taken ill. When we hear'd of this we all thought on Mr. Wilberforce. --- We received a visit from three Gentlemen on board the Oxford Transport Coll.. Cox of the Artilery [sic] Captns.. Hawkes & Wallace of the Dragoons; they brought a living Albatross on board which one of the Sailors had taken on the water by knocking it with an oar we suppose the Bird was in a sickly state tho' apparently very well. --- [W]e saw great numbers of them about this time but this was the only one caught on the voyage it is an extreme [sic] beautiful Bird & of great size. --- The Gentlemen did us the favor to dine with us & we were very much pleased with Captn.. Hawkes who with extreme good looks combines the most pleasing manners. He told us that he had a young wife on board which surprised me he seem'd so young a man. Soon after we left St. Jago we were deserted by every living creature & left to navigate an immense ocean without even a Bird to keep us company we met no Ships so that for a time it seem'd as if we had the whole world to ourselves; the first Birds which paid their compliments to us were the albatross's [sic] & their appearance was an event of the greatest interest and importance to us; we next saw sea weed floating on the surface of the water another indication of our near approach to land & on the 5th.. of August we sounded and found a sandy bottom; about the same time we boarded a very small Sloop trading from one part of the coast of South America to the other. --- I felt quite rejoiced at the sight of human beings again it gave rise to a kind of feeling new to me till that moment connected with the idea of being totally seperated [sic] from our Country & the people belonging to it seeing that here we were on another quarter of the Globe with a new Race of beings which I could not help regretting were not our own people. So that there was a great mixture of melancholy reflection combined in the satisfaction which I felt. --- -  During this voyage one day when the Ship was going at eight knots an hour a seaman fell overboard -- he fell over the poop & past our Cabbin [sic] window I saw something fall but had no idea it was a man till I hear'd him cry out which he did in the most disturbing manner. Coll.. Macquarie ran forward and encouraged him by every means in his power to keep a hold which he had fortunately caught of a fishing line which hung over the stern -- the Ship was put about and a Boat lower'd by which the man was saved. --- -  On the 6th.. of August we saw land and on the 7th.. came to an anchor in the harbour of Rio Janeiro --- It appears to me that no description can convey to the mind of a person who has not seen this harbour the wonderful beauty and grandeur of it. The Entrance is I believe the finest of any harbour in the world; we saw it to the greatest advantage it was a fine clear evening we had a steady leading Breeze to carry us in & the sun was setting behind the Sugarloaf; which greatly added to the grandeur & beauty of the scene. The first remarkable object after passing Cape Frio is a gap or rent in the ridge of mountains which skirt the sea shore. This chasm appears from a distance like a narrow portal between two cheeks of solid stone. The cheek on the left is of a Sugar-loaf form; a solid mass of hard sparkling granite 680 feet high above the surface out of which it rises. The opposite cheek is of the same material; but has a regular and easy descent to the water's edge. A little Island strongly fortified just within the entrance contracts the passage to the width of about three quarters of a mile. Having cleared the channel one of the most magnificent scenes in nature bursts upon the eye. A sheet of water of immense size running back into the heart of a beautiful country to the distance of above thirty miles where it is bounded by a screen of lofty mountains; expanding from the narrow entrance to the width of twelve or fourteen miles every where studded with innumerable little Islands in every deversity [sic] of shape -- the shores of these Islands fringed with shrubs some of them cover'd with noble Trees and altogether forming the greatest variety of beauty. --- The Town of St.. Sebastian with its numerous churches & spires adds greatly to the lieu [NN] and in every direction from where our ship lay we saw convents and noblemen's houses scatter'd over the Country which is also much adorn'd by the number of fortifications & bridges which in several places form the communication from one mass of rock to another which have been seperated [sic] by some convulsion of nature & now present a frightful chasm between. [S]o that Rio Janeiro is not only highly favor'd by nature but also much adorn'd by the art of Man; indeed tho' the Portuguese have a character for great indolence no one to see the many great works which have been carried on at this place could think it justly due. --- -  On the 8th.. of August Colonel Macquarie went on board the Foudroyant 80 guns Flagship to wait on Rear Admiral de Courcy. [H]e accompanied the Admiral to Lord Strangfords the British Ambassador who he found at home; and on the 15th.. he was presented in the Evening by Lord Strangford to H.R.H. the Prince Regent of Portugal and went with his Lordship to the opera where he could not help remarking to his Lordship that the Princess bestow'd some very cross looks at him. [H]e told Coll.. M. not to be surprised at that as he had incurred the Ladys highest displeasure & resentment at having interferred & prevented her being proclaim'd Queen of Mexico which Sir Sidney Smith had proposed and meant to affect. [sic] The Prince who is a heavy fat man slept most part of the time leaning on his Princes. [sic] [T]he opera was well attended & the performance respectable. The first day that I felt myself equal to a walk Coll.. M. & I Mr. & Mrs.. Bent went on shore we met Sir James Gambier who very kindly walk'd with us all the morning & took us to see the Public Garden which is well laid out and ornamented by several buildings; but was badly kept when we saw it -- we also went to the Principal church which is quite in the style of Roman Catholic Churches & not to be compared to the chaste & solid grandeur of our English Churches. Sir James invited us to dine with him next day -- we were conducted to his house which is situated in a most romantic spot in an Inlet of the harbour about six miles from where we lay at anchor by Captain Curzon of the Elizabeth in his beautiful Barge -- on our entering the house we were surprised to find it paper'd & furnished in the newest English style. Sir James has purchased the house & grounds and is improving it both within & out of doors at an unbounded expense conducted by the best taste; his manner of living is quite magnificent which Lady Gambier seems form'd by nature to enjoy; she appear'd to us one of the most elegant and pleasing women we had ever seen and very handsome. They live in the most hospitable manner and keep quite an open Table for all the English; which Sir James says he considers his duty besides its being his inclination; he is English Consul. --- They were so kind as to insist on giving a ball to the Regt. we endeavour'd to prevent them but found it impossible; the ball accordingly took place & would have been one of the pleasantish that could be were it not for the anxiety which we felt for the Officers of the Regt. .belonging to this ship who never arrived tho' we knew they had quitted the Ship. [O]n our return we found them all safe they had mistaken another arm of the harbour for that in which the house lay and after rowing about in the dark for several hours were very glad to regain their Ship again --- The midshipman who commanded the Boat in giving an account of the mistake said that when they found themselves in the wrong every one was of a different opinion of what should be done & all spoke at once; but when it was finally decided on that they were to return a general Silence ensured each person being too much out of temper to speak. [A]t the Ball we met with the Popes Nuncio several Portugese [sic] nobility Ld.. Strangford and all the English persons of distinction at Rio; consisting for the most part of naval officers. Captn.. Pritchard had dined with us on board the Elizabeth with Captain Curzon he had been invited to the ball in the kindest manner but sent his excuse; saying that he would not for the world remain out of his ship after nine o'clock. [A]ll his wonderful prudence forsook him when we left him for the ball an old shipmate who had dined with him at the Captains table proposed to him to renew the pleasures of the bottle below and there they sat till the middle of the night when the prudent Captain retired to his own Ship with a violent headach[e]. For which I was not in the least sorry as I wish'd him to go to the ball. --- -  Wishing to see something of the Country a little inland Coll.. M. & I accompanied by Captain Clea[v] eland left the ship with the intention of making a little excursion. Captain Pritchard went with us on shore but express'd no wish to go with us till he saw us setting off. [H]e then proposed that Captn.. C. should remain to go with him when they should find horses; by this means tho' a Sailor wishing to Jockey us out of Captn.. C's company; indeed he had always taken the greatest pains to assure us that he was a first rate horseman which came soon to be tried for he succeeded in procuring a horse; but at that unfortunate moment he forgot his [NN??] in this boasted profession and acting as most sailors would do set off with his ponderous load on a weak half famish'd beast at full speed-- by his account the poor horse got sick when he was not much above a mile out of The Town here the order of things became completely reversed for he was obliged after treating his horse to wine & every thing that he could think of to recover his exhausted strength to support & almost carry him back to the Town. In the mean time Coll.. M. Captn.. C. & I got ourselves pack'd into a small & most antique sort of carriage exactly like Giles Blas which he went in to take possession of his country house; it was drawn by two mules and we had for a driver a monkey looking black man who could not speak a word of English & we were equally ignorant of Portuguese; he set off apparently in good humour enough but he had no sooner got us into a Street where no English person was to be seen then he came to a full stop & began chattering Portuguese evidently in great wrath we soon had a mob about us to whom he address'd himself occasionally we did not understand a word; & there we sat in the most hopeless state imagineable; to be sure I then thought what with the opposition from Captn. P. before and altogether that the fates were against us & that I should be disappointed in my ride. [T]he Gentlemen becoming tired of being stuck up as if in a show box in the middle of the street for the amusement of the rabble began to threaten Mr. Post Boy in their turn he seem'd more enraged than ever but at last proceeded. [W]e imagine that he objected to carrying three persons two being the usual number for those sort of carriages. After this detention we got on very well the road was extremely good and the Country very beautiful. [W] e went to see a house which was preparing for the reception of the Prince four miles from St. Sebastian in the most beautiful situation; this Palace (as it is call'd) is built in a very pretty style neat Plain & by no means on a great scale; which indeed would ill suit the circumstances of the Royal family at this time. [A]fter spending some time at this place we return'd to St.. Sebastian & on enquiring for Captn. P. who we had been expecting to see all the time we were surprised to hear that he had gone to meet us & had not yet return'd -- in about half an hour he made his appearance very much fatigued with the exertion of conducting his horse to his Stable. ---   We had the pleasure of dining with Admiral & Mrs.. de Courcy at their house in apart of the harbour which we had not been in before it is a very retired situation shut in by a number of small wooded Islands; the house is quite on the waters edge so close that you step from the Boat on the stair which conducts you into the house. [H] ere we were entertain'd in the kindest manner imagineable without any ostentation or parade; the Admiral & Mrs.. de C. appear very good sort of people of kind unaffected manner he gave me much good advice on economy and said that he thought nothing could be more absurd than people going abroad to live in a style which their circumstances could hardly admit of when it was to be suposed they would not have quitted their own dear Country if their fortunes had been such as to admit of their living there in comfort. --- [A]t the Admirals house we met several naval people and among others Captain Hancock to whom I took a great liking from a stricking [sic] resemblance which he has to Colonel Macquarie. --- We became acquainted with a number of pleasant men of the navy at Rio among whom I must not forget Captain Schomberg who is one of the most gentlemanny [sic] pleasant man I ever saw. --- Two days before we left Rio we went in the evening to take leave of the Admirals family it was very fine weather and the row on the water was delightful. [T]he day before we sail'd we took one of the Carriages of the place & went to take leave of Sir James and Lady Gambier the approach to their house (which is call'd Bolto Togo) is one of the grandest things I ever saw; within a quarter of a mile the road comes down on the Beach when the Sugar loaf & other fine Pointed rocks burst on the veiw [sic] at once with the milder beauties of the foreground; in which the house is situated. [C]ertainly this is one of the most beautiful places I ever saw but seemingly very unhealthy; there is a grove of orange trees under the house this sounds very fine & appears very beautiful but the scent is so strong that it is quite overpowering & to my taste a grove of Birch would be ten times more preferable & that I hope to possess in front of our house in the Isle of Mull. ---  The object of our going to Rio was fully obtain'd as soon as the state of the sick was made known by Colonel Macquarie to Admiral de Courcy as many as they could find room for were admitted to the Hospital & the others were accommodated in a vessel appropriated solely to thier [sic] use; they were treated with the greatest care & humanity by Doctor Roddam & were recovering; but the time necessary for a perfect cure was more than the Service would admit of in detaining us so long; on the 21st.. Coll.. M. went to the Hospital and left it to the choice of those persons who were still extremely ill either to remain till their recovery & then follow the Regt..; or to reembark as they were the poor Fellows answer'd by a shout of joy that they were ready to embark; their great terror being that of remaining behind the Regt.. --- In one of Coll.. M's visits to the hospital I attended him I believe rather against his inclination; it was highly gratifying to see such extreme good accommodation for the Sick the Hospital had formerly been the house of a nobleman was situated in a beautiful Island commanding fine air and an extensive I need not add beautiful view of the harbour; the lower appartments [sic] were spacious & fitted up in the neatest manner for the Sick who lay I may say on the edge of the water with the view before them in the upper part of the house there is a noble Hall for the Surgeons -- the Sick have the advantage of walking about the Island as soon as they are able with perfect freedom the Island being appropriated exclusively to their use -- during our stay the ships were amply provided with vegitables [sic] & beef; the first were excellent the latter extremely bad indeed there is no such thing to be had at Rio as good Butcher meat of any sort; the oranges were the finest I ever eat the Seamen & Soldiers were also supplied with them; and we understood that this last donation was a present from the Prince. --- -  The weather during our stay at Rio was variable we had a tremendous thunderstorm attended with excessive heavy rain; I awoke in the middle of the night &was so extremely terrified with the uncommon loud thunder & wind lightning that I had not courage to move tho' the rain pour'd in upon me at last my anxiety to know whether Colonel Macquarie was safe induced me to awake him for such had been the sound sleep he was in that he had not heard the thunder. --- [W]e were told that the water at St. Sebastian was very bad unwholesome & that it would not keep at Sea; but we did not find it so. --- The Magicienne Frigate which we left at Madeira arrived in the Harbour a few days after we did[.] --- Coll.. M. made an application for a transport to carry his Sick men to the Cape of [G]ood Hope in the expectation of preventing the infection to those men in the Hindostan who had not been seized with it but the Admiral said that he could not furnish one on which it was mentioned to him that as next best Coll.. M. would like to send from fifty to a hundred who were perfectly well on board the Magicienne so as to make room in the Hindostan for the better accommodation of the Sick. The Admiral express'd himself as most willing to give an order to that effect but Coll.. M. finding that Captn.. Curtis was entirely averse to taking his men said that he would not on any account send his people on board of a Ship of war that being the case not knowing what treatment they might meet with -- I must confess that this inhuman conduct on the part of Captn.. C. in addition to the loss of the Sailors on the fourth of June disgusted me so much that I could not speak to him with common civility; tho' on all occasions he had been very civil to me. --- -  One of the Ships officers Mr. Worthington had his gold watch &c. taken out of his cabin at night; on the seventeenth Coll.. M. was inform'd that two soldiers (Edward Jordon & John Shelly) were suspected as guilty of the theft; he immediately order'd them to be confined on the Poop as it was too late to have an examination of their effects that night; it being extremely dark & torrents of rain falling they contriv'd to make their escape in the Jolly Boat unobserved by the Centry [sic] ; the Boat was brought back by two of the natives next day. --- I much fear these men will be found & if they are; they will be sent after us; and as their offence has been great the punishment must be in proportion which will be unpleasant; but Coll.. M. wishes they may be found as their succeeding in deserting is a bad example to others. [O]n the whole I believe it would be almost impossible to find a more orderly or better behaved set of men but among so many it would be too much to expect them all to be good. --- -  On the 23th. [sic] of August at seven o'clock in the morning we sail'd from this most noble Harbour and pass'd the narrows at 1/2 past eight o'clock A. M. & stood out to Sea with a very fine favorable wind; Captain Curtis intended sailing for the Cape two days after his ship sails well the Hindostan being so very remarkable for the reverse we all thought the Magecienne [sic] would arrive before us; Capt.. Pritchard whose judgement seems always correct in all matters relating to his Profession thought as we got what he term'd so good an offing; that we might perhaps be there as soon as her and indeed the wind was delightfully favorable to us for a great many days. --- [A]bout the end of the month we had a great deal of rain and on the night of the 31st.. our Cabin was quite in a float; owing to a leak in the Deck. George Tiers having gone to bed a Carpenter Charles Tokens was sent to caulk it I observed as he pass'd me what a very pleasant handsome looking man he was; after doing what he could to the leak he said that for want of materials he could not do it completely that night but that he should finish it in the morning. --- Poor young man he little knew that that morrow was to be the last he should ever see in this world. The Soldiers suffer'd much inconvenience from some of the ports taking in water it was blowing pretty hard and the Ship was going 9 knots when Charles Tokens went over the side of the Ship unattended & unobserved by any person to caulk in those ports; a service which might have been perform'd with perfect safety if the man had been properly attended one of the officers in the gun room hear'd a cry & saw the poor young man fall into the sea [ --- ] he was never seen again --- The Ship was brought to a boat was sent from this ship & one from the Hindostan but they could not find him. [T]his melancholy accident shock'd us all very much; next day (as is always the custom on board Ship) there was a sale of his effects & his papers were examined by the Captain; he found a great many letters from a young woman who was engaged to him which in my opinion contain'd more pure affection express'd in a more natural & affecting manner than any I ever read; there were also copies of some of his in return which were also very interesting-- what her sufferings will be when she hears of this event it is dreadful to think on. --- The man who fell overboard sometime ago might really have lost his life owing to a joke as when Capt.. P. saw the Ship in confusion & the men busy lowering the boat he ask'd what the matter was & if any one had fallen; the Sailors call'd out Sir Nobody has fallen overboard; that being the name he went by in the Ship tho' known to Captn.. P. by his proper name of John Smith. --- -  It may naturally be supposed that the cause for our being sent on this unexpected service & the probable state we should find the Colony in was very frequently the subject of conversation; we had not the smallest expectation of obtaining any information regarding the state of things till our arrival at the Cape & even then it was very doubtful that we should; but to our surprise we found that Colonel Johnson [sic] Mr. Macarthur Drs.. Jameson [sic] and Harris had arrived at Rio shortly before us Coll.. J. & Mr. M. having also sail'd for England before we got there. [F]rom these Gentlemen we obtain'd a great deal of information we found that Govr.. Bligh who we supposed to be still under arrest in his own house had with the permission of those persons in power embark'd onboard the Porpoise under the promise of sailing for England; but no sooner did he find himself out of their power than he issued a proclamation pronouncing the New South Wales Corps to be in a state of Mutiny and Rebellion now under Coll. Patersons command and prohibiting all masters of vessels at their peril taking any persons out of the Colony who had been connected in the Rebellion; all officers belonging to the N.S.W. Corps & the following names were particularly specified John Macarthur Nicolas [sic] Baily [sic] Graham [sic] Blaxcell Richd. Atkins Gregory Blaxland John Townson Robert Townson Robt.. Fitz Thos. Jameson [sic] Thos. Hobby Alexr.. Riley Darcy Wentworth James Mileham Thos.. More and Walter Stevenson Davidson -- this proclamation was address'd to Edwd Harrison Master of the Ship Admiral Gambier who had notwithstanding brought Mr. Macarthur & the other persons mention'd to Rio. --- -  On this proclamation being issued by Govr.. Bligh Coll.. Paterson publised [sic] another; declaring the Govr.. to have acted in direct violation of his promise on the honor of a Gentleman of proceeding immediately to England and prohibiting all persons in the Colony from holding any communication with Govr.. Bligh or any person belonging to him on board of the Porpoise. --- -  We had a good deal of conversation with Dr.. Jameson [sic] regarding the extraordinary events which had taken place in New South Wales and it appear'd to us that even by their own account the conduct of those persons who had acted against the Govr.. was not to be justified or even excused; we felt sorry that a Man such as Coll.. Johnson [sic] was described to us should have committed himself as he has done by an act of the most open and daring Rebellion by which in as far as it appears to us he will probably forfeit a life which has till this unfortunate period been spent in the service of his King and Country. Colonel Macquarie felt it quite a relief to him his having quitted the Colony before his arrival & by that means having spared him the pain of taking measures which the service required but which no Officer could feel easy at being obliged to have recourse to particularly on this occasion; Coll. Johnson [sic] being a man of amiable character & in their early years an intimate companion of his own. --- -  With regard to all matters relating to the Country and climate these Gentlemen gave us the most favorable accounts; and they shew'd us a number of views which were very beautiful; one of them was a drawing of Mr. Harris's House which is situated in a park about a mile from Sydney -- the Park is stock'd with Deer and it look'd altogether to be in much higher style than any thing we expected to find in the new world. I observed the words Ultimo Place the Seat &c. at the bottom of the drawing. I was struck with the oddity of the name and ask'd what that could mean on which the Dr.. with an air of utmost importance strutted up to me & said I can explain that to you Madam I was once summon'd to attend a Court Martial the Gentleman in reading the charge happen'd to say this Court being commenced on the 12th.. Ultimo instead of instant; they were not clasical [sic] but I Madam being clasical [sic] immediately perceived the mistake; I ridiculed them and wrote verses on the subject then; & afterwards call'd my house Ultimo Place. --- This Gentleman came to wait on Colonel Macquarie dressed in a new uniform Coat & seem'd indeed to think himself a very great man & to wish that other persons should think the same; Mr. Bent named him Major Sturgeon in consequence of his resemblance to that character; one day when he had been in our Ship in the morning in his usual grand style some of the Gentlemen on board were greatly surprised at meeting him a few hours after dress'd like a Jew in a shabby little Shop making merchandise of some precious stones he had brought for sale from New Holland; it was also discover'd by chance that Dr.. Jameson [sic] had brought a venture of Shoes and Stockings and various other articles of traffic which he disposed of at Rio; it appear'd strange to us that the Surgeon General of a Colony should be concern'd in such matters tho' highly respectable to those to whose province it belongs. --- -  The usual track of Ships going from Rio Janeiro to the Cape of Good Hope is farther to the Southward than that we came and by not pursuing that far Southwardly course we made the best passage that has been made by two heavy Ships for sometime indeed this voyage was a very pleasant one to us we had very favorable weather during most part of it & we were constantly accompanied by a vast number of Birds of different kinds; I think there are several Islands in this Ocean still undiscover'd for sometimes the Birds were quite in flocksand at those times quite noisy & lively as if they had lately left the place oftheir abode. I sometimes thought that we might possibly run on a Rock in the middle of the night but if we were near any such danger it pleased the Almighty to save us from even the knowledge of it. --- On the 8th.. of Septr.. having been several days without being able to take an observation the Commodore thought himself farther to the Southward than we really were and sent us to look out for Tristan de Acuna [sic] when we were twenty leagues to the Northward of it. The weather was extremely thick and there were we full sail with a strong Breeze flying in quest of an Island which I presume is but little known; it appear'd to me a foolish and dangerous undertaking as I conceive that near any Islands or land there must always be some sunk Rocks or shoals and many such there might be near a place so little known; however if it is so it was not our fate to find them; from the superior sailing of this Ship to the Hindostan we soon lost sight of her the Commodore having us mind to part company fired a Signal of recall; and there ended the only hope we ever had or probably ever shall have of seeing this out of the way Island for which at the time I was not sorry but now that we are out of the danger I think with some regret of not having seen it. [F]or several days after this we were becalmed & every person got out of temper & out of patience with Commodore thinking that from taking us the course he did we had got out of the track of the trade wind so after finding twenty faults with this poor Man none of which he perhaps deserved and scolding and complaining to each other at last a fair wind sprung up which put us all into good humour again. Captain Pritchard was wonderfully correct in telling us when we should arrive or more properly speaking in his calculation regarding our distance. On the 23rd.. of Septr.. at five o'clock in the morning we discover'd land agreeing to a mile with Captn.. P.s reckoning and at 11 o'clock we came to anchor in Table Bay being exactly a month from Rio Janeiro. [O]ur first anxiety was to know if the Magicienne had arrived before us which we fully expected she would have done but to our surprise she had not nor were there any tidings of her during our stay at the Cape tho' we remained there for three weeks; there was much apprehension felt for her safety it will be long before we shall hear what has become of her; it was now quite a comfort to Coll. Macquarie that Captain Curtis had been averse to taking any of the Soldiers onboard the change of climate and the care that had been taken of them at Rio had restored them to health; to have sail'd from the Cape leaving part of them behind even admitting that they were safe would have been a most unpleasant business. --- At 2 o'clock P.M. Colonel Macquarie went on shore to wait on the Governor Lord Caledon Lt.. Govr.. Grey the CoMr. in chief and Vice Admiral Bertie CoMr. the Naval Force; he promised to return on board in an hour but did not come till five o'clock it blew extremely hard and there were several excessive heavy showers -- my anxiety & impatience were great but at length happily releived [sic] by his safe return. Table Bay is a most dangerous place for Ships to ride in very frequently it is impossible for them to have any communication with the shore and their situation is most dangerous when the wind blows towards the shore the ground being either loose chingle [sic] which does not hold or Rock which injures the Cables very much; while we were there a very violent gale came on & during the time it lasted the Ships were certainly in danger one vessel the East India Packet from St Helena drove from her anchors and came very near the breakers before she brought up. --- -  On the 24th.. at 10 o'clock in the morning Colonel Macquarie took me on shore there was great swell & it was with very great difficulty we got landed the swell being on the side of the Pier where the steps are Coll.. O'Connell was much amused at seeing me clim [sic] these steps on all fours and said he saw I had not been brought up in the Highlands for nothing I was not well pleased at being laugh'd at but this speach [sic] made up for the insults if such it could be call'd. --- [W]e walk'd to the house of Mr. Pringle Agent for the E.I. Company who is an old friend of Coll.. Ms we were received by him & his wife in the kindest manner they had waited breakfast for us having insisted on our living with them during our stay at the Cape which on account of Mr. Pringles very bad state of health Coll.. M. at first declined doing -- I never felt a change of situation so sensibly as at this breakfast in an elegant large room where all was stillness and quiet; it was such a change from the noise continual motion and confinement of the Ship; in the forenoon Mr. Pringle drove me out in his Curricle to Green Point which is the extent of carriage road on the West side of Cape Town; here I saw a house belonging to Mr. Alexr. on which he is spending a great deal of money and from the exposed situation and stirility [sic] of the ground I cannot think that it will ever turn to any good account. [O]n our return we met Adr.. & Miss Berty [sic] watching a Ship which was coming in Mr. P. ask'd the Adr.. his opinion regarding her for the arrival of a Ship is a matter of the greatest importance and every one seems in a state of anxiety till it is known where she is from &c. &c.; I found afterwards that this query was merely complimentary as whatever the Admiral opinions are on these subjects they almost invariably turn out to be ill founded; I cannot say that I felt any favorable impression for this Gentleman and from the account I had of his character there was no reason that I should; and I must observe that there is a natural instinct wisely given us of feeling either a predeliction [sic] for or a prejudice against a person at first sight which I think seldom decieves [sic] one; my dear friend Miss Meredith who[se] judgment I consider as very great is much of this opinion. --- I was much delighted with this drive a Curricle being my favorite carriage the road goes along the shore all the way which was cover'd with foam the wind being strong drove the sea with impetuosity on the shore which is all shelving coral Rocks; Mr. P. saw a Ship wreck'd on this dreadful Coast which indeed any Ship or Boat must be which come near it --- We dined quietly at Mr. P.; being one of the very few quiet days we had at the Cape. ---  On Monday Mr. Pringle drove again in the Curricle we went the road to False Bay which gave me a good idea of the Country in the immediate neighbourhood of Cape Town the road in this direction is very good being a great breadth & well made; we passed a great many very pleasant Country houses belonging to the Dutch Inhabitants but many of them rented by English officers-- Colonel Macquarie dined at Admiral Berties & I went with Mr. Pringle to Mr. Alexrs..; Mrs.. Alexr.. is a very pretty pleasing woman and she is blest with two fine children Mr. Alexander is to my mind an extremely agreeable good humour'd Man I felt myself quite at my ease in his company which I very seldom do with any person who I have not known for sometime; Coll.. M came to us in the evening. I felt a particular interest in the Cape from my Brothers having been at the first taking of it when he remained there for four years many other friends of mine had been there also from hearing them speak often of it I felt almost acquainted with the Place before I had been there. [O]ne of the officers of the same Regt. I found there Captain Monro who came to see me and was extremely kind and attentive during all the time we staid there. --- -   Coll.. Macquarie & I took a very pleasant ride with Mr. Pringle & Mr. Lawson round the Kloof which is a road that carries you from Green Point winding by the Sea till it comes to a pass in the mountains and terminates by descending on Cape Town the view of which from the summit of the hill is very fine we were much pleased by seeing a curious Place found by Captain Macnab of the 91st.. Regt.. with great industry & labour he has certainly the merit of having made a very curious & habitable place where no one but a Highlander would have thought it possible. [T]here are vast numbers of wild animals near Cape Town but they are seldom known to come within some miles of it a few days however before we were there a Tiger had been shot on this road within a mile of the Town. Mr. Pringle took us another very fine ride some days after when we were accompanied by Colonel O'Connell Major Dale of the 93d. Regt.. & Mr. Lawson; we went from some miles on the road to False Bay & then struck off the road to the right & went by many different winding paths with which Mr. Pringle was well acquainted over wild moores [sic] but beautifully wild; being cover'd with the most luxuriant shrubs & the greatest variety of heaths that I suppose can be seen in any part of the world; it is impossible for any person who has not seen them to form an idea of their beauty and variety; a bottanist [sic] it would seem must be lost in admiration in this Country even persons who have no knowledge of that interesting study can make but slow progress in their persuit [sic] from the irresistible desire to take a specimen of the lovely flowers which at every step arrest the attention. --- Mr. Pringle led us on thro' this forest of beauties till he brought us to the foot of a great mountain part of which indeed we ascended where there is a small valley which is known to be inhabited by Hiennas [sic] Tigers & many others of these tremendous animals; I could not help thinking with wonder of the composure with which I sat on my little horse in the immediate neighbourhood of ungentle Folks; I may indeed say with truth at the door of thier [sic] habitation; & indeed I cannot say that I thought it a wise thing to do; before I left England I should not have thought myself capable of going willingly into such a place but such is the force of example that I went thro' with it without any apparent effort. Mr. P. then led us down the hill &winding a little to the left brought us to a rising ground above False Bay of which we had a fine veiw; [sic] from this spot we turn'd our faces homewards where we arrived about five o'clock after one of the most delightful rides I ever had in my life of not less then [sic] eighteen miles. --- -   I had heard much of the extraordinary good conduct of the Private Soldiers of the 93d.. Regt.. and during this ride Major Dale began to boast a little of his men. [H]e at last said perhaps you have hear'd of this Regt.. before they were known in Scotland as the Sutherland Fencibles; Oh then said I I don't wonder at their behaving so well for they are all Gentlemen! this unpremeditated exclamation was never forgot to me during my stay at the Cape and the Soldiers of this Regt. went by the name of my Gentlemen ever after. --- -  Colonel Macquarie met with the greatest attention & kindness from Lord Calledon and indeed I may say from every one at the Cape who had it in their power to be civil to us we dined with his Lordship twice he call'd on us several times and offer'd us his Carriage & every other accommodation he had in his power if we chose to make an excursion into the Country; his Lordship is a very good looking young Man of pleasing manners but apparently extremely diffident; he reminded me much of my friend Sir James Riddle both in appearance & manner. --- There are regular Balls given at the Cape Mrs.. Pringle tho' extremely delicate ventured to go to one which took place while we were there; It was the best conducted thing of the kind that could be. [I]t commenced at eight o'clock and every person who [**indecipherable] going is there at the hour; after the first dance the Ladies draw for places; Supper is announced at 12 o'clock & the Ball terminates in an hour after. The company there very respectable the dresses of the Ladies particularly neat & plain. -- Lord Calledon staid till near suppertime his Lordship does not dance at these Balls Admiral Bertie figured away with great industry in every dance as if he seem'd to consider it a duty incumbent on him to dance his own & the Governors share too. Colonel Sorrell was Stewart he was attentive to every person I liked him by far the best & thought him the most gentlemanly looking Man I saw at the Cape which is saying a great deal as there were several very pleasant persons there among others I must not forget Capt. Blake who was very kind in lending Coll. Macquarie his horses. We became acquainted with Mrs.. Hawkes at the Cape and I liked her so much that I should consider it a very great acquisition; indeed if Captain Hawkes was to effect an exchange into the 73d.. & come to us which he said he should like to do above all things; however I fear Mrs.. H. would not willingly undertake another long voyage having been in great want of even the necessaries of life on the last part of her voyage to the Cape; in so much that she assured me she had many times cried for want of something to eat when she could not help thinking how the knowledge of her situation would effect [sic] her Father & mother if they could have been sensible of it --; her Father is a Man of great wealth Mr. Borradale [Borradall?] a Citizen of London whose Table no doubt at the very time his child was in want of food abounded in all the luxuries of good living. Our situation in this Ship has hitherto been very different from that of Mrs.. Hawkes we have been supplied with all the necessaries of life & tho' our table has never been neat elegant nor our cooking of the delicate kind; yet our table has always furnished what any person inclined to eat; could make a good dinner of and we have had A luxury which I understand is seldom experienced on so long a voyage which is that of having very fine water. --- -   I believe it is a general remark that Scotch Men find there [sic] way to every part of the world & so I have hitherto found it; I believe it is also allow'd that they are always friendly to persons from their own Country & I am happy in saying that we found this true also. [A]t the Cape I became acquainted with Major Campbell of the 72d.. Regt.. who is married to a Miss Clout a Lady of a Dutch family; he brought his wife & mother in law to see us & Mrs.. Clout who is a very pleasing woman invited us to her house to dinner & here we saw the best dinner we had at the Cape it was quite an elegant entertainment Mr. & Mrs. Pringle were of the Party and it was very pleasant. Major Campbell was not satisfied with this instance of hospitality but insisted on our dining with him in his Barrack at the Castle he also invited my two Nephews & found beds for them as often as they chose to accept of them. [T]his was true kindness & I hope never to forget it Mrs.. Campbell seems [NN] a very good kind of woman indeed of plain friendly unaffected manners. --- -  Mr. Pringle with his usual kindness took us to see the famous Constantia where the wine of that name is made we went in his Barouch [sic] & four to breakfast by invitation with General & Mrs.. Cockell & they accompanied us to Constantia where we all went on horse back; Captn.. & Mrs Pascoe were also of the party they overtook us a short time after we left the Cape in a Gig which in the true seaman style he drove at a full Canter not consulting the inclination of the tidy little horses which drew them on the subject; Colonel O'Connel [sic] & mr. Lawson were also with us; The day was extremely fine we walk'd about the grounds which are very pretty we went to see the vineyards which are very extensive & kept in high order. Mr. Clout was extremely civil shew'd us his Cellars &c. &c. & gave us an elegant cold collation to which we did ample justice-- I could have spent a day or two here with great satisfaction the people were so civil & the place so beautiful; after having stay'd a few hours here we mounted our horses again and return'd by the Hottentot Camp to General Corkells; the Regt. were at parade when we came to the ground -- they went thro' their exercise with great correctness they are a very good looking body of men as fair as figure goes and they were very clean & neatly dress'd -- their fifes & drums I thought the finest I had ever hear'd and we were told that these people have a great natural genious for music; after seeing the Regt.. exercised we rode among their Huts their wives and children are sad looking creatures some of the children attempt to clothe themselves with pieces of sheeps skins others appear in thier [sic] birth day suit & altogether they form a most savage like Groop [sic] much more so indeed than any persons I had ever seen. [T] he situation of their Camp is very fine the officers have very neat snug houses built on convenient spots in the neighbourhood they have nice gardens & really with planting hedges & other little improvements their houses have quite an appearance of comfort. -- we proceeded from this novel sight to General C's where we got into Mr. Ps elegant carriage again and return'd to Cape Town to dinner the morning having been spent in a viriety [sic] of the most interesting & pleasing amusement. -- to my great joy we had a quiet party at dinner not so with Mr. & Mrs.. Pascoe who I fancy must have exchanged the canter of their horse into a gallop to enable them to reach the Town in time to dine with the Governor; Mrs.. P being desirous of enjoying as much of his Lordships company as she could declined playing cards but sat down most boldly to attack him at Chess; to his great consternation he soon found that his willing antagonist hardly knew the moves he did all he could to lose the game but that he found quite impossible; on which the Lady wish'd to renew the attack but his Lordship had quite enough of it & beg'd leave to resign his place to some other person.-- Lord Calledon sent home his Carriage with Mrs.. Alexander & the other Ladies; by this time poor Mrs.. Pascoe herself so much gratified what with the morning drive dining at a Lords house; playing chess with the great Man & being sent home in his grand Coach with a coronet that she fairly burst out in an exclamation of joy clapping her hands & dancing with her feet I vow! I vow! this has been the happiest -- & the best day of my life. -- this is all very vulgar no doubt but who can avoid being pleased at this natural conduct call'd forth by sensations of gratitude & satisfaction. ---   The garrison at the Cape consists of about six thousand Men we went to see a Review of four Regts. one of them of Cavalry by General Grey at Green Point it was a very pretty sight; the military are in the best possible state of discipline the Regts.. very strong and fine healthy handsome bodies of Men. [T]hose we saw review'd were the 21st.. Lt.. Dragoons commanded by Lt.. Coll. Pigot the 24th.. foot command'd by Lt.. Coll.. Marriott the 72d.. by Major Ronald Campbell the 93d.. by Major Dale & a detachment of Royal Artillery by Lt.. Coll.. Cox. -- besides the Garrison at Cape Town there is the 83d.. Regt. at Stillingbush & the 87th.. at Simons Town besides the Hottentot Corps before mentioned. General Grey was particularly attentive to us in ordering a Dragoon to attend Coll.. Macquarie & on the return of the Troops to Town made them pass us in review order. The day was very fine & poor Mrs.. Pringle accompanied us for which I fear she suffer'd afterwards her state of health being so indifferent when we left her as to occasion us much uneasiness on her account. --- -  The Military at the Cape were (as is usual with Soldiers) very hospitably inclined to their Brother officers of the 73d.. Regt.. Coll.. Macquarie could not decline the kindness tho' he felt it a great fatigue dining out so frequently and sitting so late as he was obliged to do at these great Regimental Feasts; Mr. Pringle accompanied him to that given by the 72d.. Major Campbell being a friend of his he gave them a magnificent dinner & in the true Highland style the Piper play'd all the time & after the Cloth was removed enter'd the room marching round the Table to Mr. Pringles great annoyance. Major C. who has a very slow formal manner address'd Coll.. Macquarie in the most serious manner saying that it was their usual custom of these occasions to have three Coursts (that is three rounds of the Piper about the table) but that as Mr. P. did not seem very partial to it he would dispense with the third courst; Coll. M. most wickedly said that Mr. P. liked it above all things & beg'd it might go on. [T]he time bestow'd on this entertainment was far beyond all reasonable limits. --- -  These late hours were a serious distress to me & on that account only I felt very glad when the time for our quitting the Cape drew near. [T]he preparations for our departures were much facilitated to me by the kindness of Mr. Lawson who accompanied me on all my travels thro the Towns & took me to the Shop of John Heger a most singular sort of Man who as a burlesque on his enormous charges goes by the name of Cheap John; among various other articles I purchased a box of Tools from him at the enormous price of forty pounds; I was almost afraid that Coll.. M. might find fault with me for spending so large a sum on this article without previously asking his opinion on the subject but if he thought it wrong was too good natured to say so. --- -  I had always hear'd much said of the neatness and beauty of Cape Town but indeed I think not more than it deserves the Streets are wide & spacious the houses all large & handsome buildings & the Town built on a regular plan; the Parade Coll. M. says is the finist [sic] he ever saw in any part of the world except that at Petersburg -- but in one particular I fear the resemblance to Cape Town will no where be found & that is that there are no Beggars ever seen. [T]his uncommon advantage was accounted for to me by the lower orders of the people being all Slaves & every possessor of a Slave provides for them for life whether in sickness or health; those persons who have been slaves & who have obtain'd their freedom all belong to an institution which supports them in comfort when their inability prevents their being able to work for their maintenance at the moment a slave obtains his freedom he pays a sum of money to this most excellent establishment and if he does not happen to have saved enough for that purpose his Master makes him a present of what is wanting -- Indeed all the Slaves I saw at the Cape had every appearance of being well treated they were respectably clothed & looked well fed contented & happy; when they do not find themselves so they take thier [sic] departure & inhabit the most inaccessible precipices on the Top of Table Mountain where there is a constant smoke seen ascending from thier [sic] wild abode which to look at from below one could not imagine a Goat much less a Man could find his way to. [T]o draw a comparison between the Slaves here & at Rio Janiero [sic] the situation is wonderfully different; those at Rio were indeed in a miserable state. -- even the Bullocks & horses at the Cape look'd as if they were well cared for; the singular appearance of the large waggons which are here made up of must strike every stranger they are drawn sometimes by sixteen oxen all guided by one Man who sits as Coachman having a whip of such extraordinary length as to reach the front pair when they come into Town there is generally a Man at the head of them; I was inform'd that the construction of the carriage part of these waggons is very ingenious and extremely well calculated for rough mountainous roads it can be all taken to pieces in a few minutes being all constructed of wood in seperate [sic] lose [sic] joints; which making no resistance to the obstructions which come in its way lasts better & is capable of much more service than workmanship of a more solid texture; the creeking [sic] noise these waggons make is hear'd at a great distance and is truly disagreeable; two days before we left the Cape Mr. Pringle & Mr. Alexander set off in one of them on an expedition of several hundred miles to the interior of the Country their waggon was drawn by six horses they had besides three riding horses so that nine horses & four men were employ'd to transport two Gentlemen over the mountains; they look'd very droll when they got into their large machine which was more like a house than a carriage both outwardly & inwardly being well supplied with provisions of all kinds wine &c . to last them during their excursion which they expected would take them a fortnight to perform. --- There is a great space of uncultivated ground in the neighbourhood of the Cape indeed I should rather say that there is but a small part in cultivation; the soil & climate seem very favorable for gardens but not for the general purpose of agriculture; being for the most part barren sand however I understand where it is practicable that very considerable additions has been lately made to the arable land. I have no doubt but that an object of so much importance does not escape the attention of Lord Calledon who I believe is unremitting in his attention to every object of interest in the Colony. --- -  The road which is now making round the Kloof is an improvement of his Lordships for which the Inhabitants ought to feel grateful. --- I must not take leave of the Cape without mentioning the Government House & Garden the House consists of very spacious appartments; the dining room in particular is a noble size & has been finish'd in a very pretty manner by the last Dutch governor; the ornamental part being just completed when he was obliged to give it up to the English Governor. [A] very large fine looking Dog finding his quarters much to his liking keeps possession of them [**indecipherable] who will be Governor; having lived to see the English supplant the Dutch the Dutch the English then the English again who I hope will remain in possession during the remainder of Mr. Wolffs life & that of many branches of his descendents. [T]he Government house is situated in the Garden which has a very fine walk of about three quarters of a mile long &between 30 & 40 yards in breadth is well shaded by an avenue of oak Trees and enclosed on each side by a Hedge of cut myrtle; the garden contains 40 acres of rich land divided into almost as many squares by oak hedges. The Bands of different Regts.. were station'd at intervals on the great walk on Sunday which seem'd to me an innocent and pleasing amusement to numbers of respectable persons who walk'd in the Garden after Church time. [A]t the extremity of the Garden there is a Menagerie where we saw some curious Birds a Lion & Lioness &c. &c.; but the collection is far inferior to what it was in the time of the Dutch. [T]he Government house tho' consisting of such good rooms appear'd to me to be a very dull habitation; there is no view to be seen the front windows being shaded by the Trees of the Garden the back of the house is enclosed by a great well. --- -The most singular and beautiful object I saw at the Cape is the fleecy cloud which so frequently ornaments the Table Mountain to describe the singular elegance of this fine drapery would be a difficult task; beautiful as it is it is no pleasing one to the Inhabitants as the arrival of the cloud is a sure indication of bad weather. --- -  There are two Churches at the Cape; one of which I was in it is a plain building but a good size & finish in a very solid and as I think proper manner; being plain & handsome & not overloaded with ornament. [I]t is first occupied by a Dutch & then an English Congregation. --- -  The Inhabitants of the Cape seem very well supplied with Butcher Meat fish & Game; vegetables are not good very scarce & high priced. [T]he article which is most wanting is fuel. [T]ho' the weather was extremely cold during our stay we had no fires in any of the houses where we visited the price of coals is very high & wood is scarce; in most Families a slave is kept for the express purpose of collecting fire-wood. He goes out in the morning ascends the steep mountains where waggons cannot approach and returns at night with two small bundles of faggots the produce of six or eight hours of hard labour swinging at the two ends of a bamboo carried across the shoulders. [W]e met numbers of these men returning to Town on our way from Constantia most of the poor fellows had ornamented the Tops of their faggots & their heads with flowers some of them appear'd cheerful but all very much fatigued; this appear'd to me the hardest service I saw perform'd at the Cape. --- --  On the 13th.. of October at seven o'clock in the morning we took leave of dear Mrs. Pringle & embark'd in our well known Ship the Dromedary; on coming onboard I always feel now as going home the Ship appearing to me in the place of a house which had long been my habitation & a very happy one it has been to me; I have spent my time in the manner which entirely suits my inclination having the great comfort of my Husbands company uninterrupted all the morning when we read or write in a social manner which I shall never enjoy on shore as when he has it in his power he shuts himself up alone all the morning to business; but here I am admitted from necessity I have many times thought of the advantage a poor cottagers wife has over persons as she may think in a far happier line of life -- she has the satisfaction of inhabiting the same room with her husband and children she has the objects nearest her heart in her sight at once; a luxury of enjoyment seldom experienced by those she considers above her. --- -  For want of a Breeze to carry us out we were obliged to remain at anchor till one o'clock which time we spent in admiring the beautiful appearance of the scene before us; & I attempted to take a Sketch of it for alas my efforts in this way can only be term'd such. --- -  The appearance of so stupendous a mass of naked Rock as the Table Mountain strikes the eye with wonder the name of the Table Land is given by Seamen to every hill or Mountain whose summit presents a line parillel [sic] to the Horizon; the extent of the line now in our view is about two miles in length; this great Mountain is divided by two great chasms into three parts and is supported as if by two wings; one is called the Devils Mountain the other the Lions [H]ead to which it has a striking resemblance; these make in fact with the Table Land but one Mountain being all joined considerably above thier [sic] common base. [T]hese with the Sugar loaf well named from its form present a noble object from the Sea rising to a hight [sic] of between three and four thousand feet. --- Cape Town is pleasantly situated at the head of Table Bay on a sloping plain that rises with an easy ascent to the feet of the Mountain. [F]rom where our ship lay we had a fine view of the Town which extends a great way along the Beach the regularity of the buildings & the handsome appearance of them being all Built of Stone white wash'd has a fine effect; but we were told when there that this glare of which is extremely prejudicial in so hot a climate; an inconvenience so easily guarded against it is a pity they do not attend to. --- [A]t one o'clock a light breeze carried us out of the Bay most genteelly and beyond Robin [sic] Island when we thought ourselves in a fair way of being out of sight of land for sometime; but the Breeze died away and then were we like two great logs floating on the water; the swell wafted us towards the shore to which we were constantly approaching by slow degrees; and on the afternoon of the fourteenth we were only two miles off the land at that part of the Coast call'd Houts Bay; I felt extremely uneasy at the situation of the Ships the Boats were employ'd occasionlly [sic] in Towing their heads round from the land it appear'd to me that if a gale of wind came on towards it we should surely be lost as Captn.. P. told me it was not a fair place to anchor; we had a good view of our friend Mr. Alexanders place; I could not help thinking that Captain Monro & some of our friends might have taken a boat and come to us; but in this I was disappointed in this unpleasant state we remained till 1 o'clock morning of the15th.. when a noble wind came to our relief which carried us round the Cape and we were out of sight of land. --- [A]t half past 1 o'clock P.M. of the same day we chased a strange sail directly contrary to our course for N. S. Wales being contrary to the positive orders of the Admiralty and continued this chase in a N.W. direction till 1/2 past 10 at night -- when the strange sail was lost sight of and chase given up. --- -  Monday 16th.. Octr.. at noon this day in consequence of our unjustifiable diviation [sic] from our proper course yesterday in going back in chase of the Strange Sail; we found ourselves to the northward & westward of the Cape of Good Hope -- now once more in sight -- but which we may not be able to double for someday to come the wind being almost right ahead. --- -  Wedy.. 18th.. Octr.. the wind having come round to the northward & westward in the course of yesterday we were this day at noon in East Longd.. 17d. 40s; and going almost due East at 6 miles an hour we must have doubled the Cape between 8 & 9 o'clock this night. [T]his chase was a trial of patience to us & Captain Pascoe also we felt ourselves detain'd at a most critical part of the voyage for the sole purpose of his emolument and he poor Man made himself sure that the Strange Sail was French that she would turn out a Rich Prize and make his fortune; his disappointment was very great when we lost sight of her; our superior sailing was in many respects a great comfort to us but if there had been any fighting we should have had all the blows and none of the profit; this is comparatively. --- -  From every information we had been able to procure regarding this voyage we expected to have had a fair wind in all probability all the way to carry us across from the Cape of Good Hope to New Holland but we found this a great mistake; we have I believe made slower progress than on any part of our long voyage the wind has been very variable and when we had a favorable wind it seldom remained for a few days at a time; on the 26th we had a very severe gale; we suffer'd very much from not being able to carry sail which would have parted us from the Commodore it was with the utmost exertion that Captn.. Pritchard kept company with the Hindostan; in the night the arm Chests on the Poop got lose [sic] every heel the Ship gave these immence [sic] heavy Chests roll'd from one side to the other the noise & shock this occasion'd in our cabin was frightful. --- [T]his heavy gale was succeeded by a clam and very heavy swell; but as soon as favorable weather came we forgot it all. --- -  On the 31st.. in the evening Coll.. M. & I were walking on Deck when Thomas Jackson fell from the fore top Mast Rigging on the Forecastle and fractured his skull; which occasion'd his immediate death. [H]e was a very active good temper'd young Man and a great favorite with the Sailors; they were much affected with the accident & some of them shed tears. This young Man had been rather addicted to drink when Coll.. M. & Captn.. P. passed him at quarters the Captn.. said I don't think you are quite as you should be. [H]e seem'd offended & said you always look hard at me Sir. [I]t is supposed from this circumstance that his being in drink occasion'd this dreadful accident. [N]ext morning his Body was committed to the deep Mr. Bent who had been rather unwell for sometime with his usual kindness on these occasions perform'd the Service; the weather was extremely cold & I have no doubt that this exertion was partly the cause of his being taken extremely ill his situation was very alarming for sometime & we all felt great uneasiness on his account but happily for us all as well as his own family he recover'd; which in a great measure must be attributed to the extraordinary attention Mr. Carter Surgeon of the 73d.. paid him & the skill with which he treated his complaint. --- -  Towards the middle of Novr.. the great object of interest was the Island of St. Pauls which the Commodore intended to touch at here we place'd scemes [sic] for catching fish & collecting vegetables of which we were quite out the only doubt was whether the potatoes would be good being as we were told left to cultivate as they best could by some fisher Men who had lived on the Island a considerable time but had now deserted it. Captain Cleveland said at all events they would surely get some grass for the cow & he would shoot Birds; for my part I pleased myself with idea of having a walk on the shore when no doubt I should have had an eye to business too by looking out for potatoes. [B]ut all these plans were disappointed by the violence of the wind which in addition to very thick weather obliged us to give the Island a good birth [sic] as Seamen term it; so on the13th.. we passed it at the distance of 88 Miles -- and now as we drew near the place of our destination out impatience became greater than ever; calculations were made every day regarding the time we should still probably take to arrive; the Maps & Charts were on hard duty & no sooner was the day run marked off than we all crowded with impatience to see what progress we had made the most correct idea I can retain of our general progress is that we have run down fifteen degrees in 7 days generally; sometimes when the wind has been directly contrary we have bestow'd two or three days more on that distance. --- [O] n the 27th.. of Novr.. the Commodore made signal for the appearance of land & of caution; this signal was made about three o'clock in the morning Captain P. went directly on Deck where he dress'd himself in the cold he had not been very well for someday before but at breakfast that morning he found himself taken very ill; he had always express'd his abhorrence of Doctors & that for his part when he was unwell he did not wish to see any person; but to be left entirely to himself; however an acute rheumatism attended with total inability soon concerned us that his opinions when well were very different from his conduct when sick; he was more impatient and restless than any person I ever saw sick his Servants had not a moments rest by day or night when he was awake he kept two or three persons about him in constant employment. [H]is cabin was indeed very confined Coll.. M. offer'd him the use of one of ours; he seem'd to think it quite a blessing & said he would move there but how to effect this was the question for he had not the smallest power of motion & was afraid to be touch'd -- when the time came for this grand removal our Servant Joseph & Mrs.. Ovens were singled out of many persons present as the most able bodied men. They accordingly set to work and got the Captain in their arms -- I was in the next Cabin & hear'd him roar out. Avast Avast Avast; Avast heaving! now lower me handsomely; by this time they got him on a chair & here he was allow'd to rest having yet to perform the journey thro' the Mess Cabin to the one he was to sleep in. --- [A]t last they began to renew the attack and so did he with as many orders as he had breath to pronounce words. -- Skull [sic] me forward I say have a care of my larbord side now hoist altogether. -- hold on -- you must heave me in at the larbord side --now hoist me slew me round to the starbord side -- steady -- these with a few other expressions which it is as well to forget were as liberally applied to these two Men as if they had been Sea Men -- at last he was lodged in his Cott and there we thought he was to remain during his illness -- but in the morning when we sent to enquire for our neighbour the Bird was flown; we had no sooner left him for the night than he sent for a band of Sailors & had himself transported back to his old birth [sic] perhaps with as much ceremony but certainly with less noise than when he quitted it. --- [O]ne certain rule he says he must insist on which is never to be left alone; as for the Doctor he sends for him at any hour of the night which strikes his fancy and constantly thro' the day; but the worst of it is he can neither say nor do any thing to please him. [A]s to the appearance of land which seem'd to be the immediate cause of his illness it vanish'd with the morning sun. --- On the 29th.. a very large whale was seen it came quite near the Ship and we saw it to great advantage; its size appear'd to me extraordinary and I was told that they are seldom seen so large. --- -  On the 1st.. of Decr the Hindostan was supplied from this Ship with fire wood and Coals. --- -  5th.. at 11 o'clock at night a large fire ball was seen not far off passing in a S.W. direction. --- -  6th.. Latie.. 39.. 44s. Long 137 o -15 E [.] Sounded but no ground found at 120 Fathoms. --- -  10th.. in the morning a Seal was seen and some land Birds; being the first inhabitants of the new world who came to pay their compliments to us; Coll.. M. consider'd the appearance of the Seal as a sure indication of being at no great distance from the land; -- Captn. Pascoe having long before decided on going thro' Bass's Straits we are now making for Governor Kings Island. [H]e proposed going into Port Phillip but Coll.. M. wishing much to meet with Governor Bligh and judging that he might possibly be at one of the settlements on Van Deemins [sic] and requested our Commodore to take the other side of the Strait that he might have a communication with Port Dalrymple this he readily agreed to. [T]he Hindostan was this day supplied by us with Rum and Cocoa; Coll.. M. never could bear the idea of the two Ships parting company and every days experience convinced us how necessary they were to each other; indeed it is hard to say to what necessity the Hindostan might have been reduced if Captain Pritchard had not been able to supply her many wants. --- Our voyage is now please God drawing to a conclusion having been in every respect hitherto prosperous except in expedition; our detention having been occasion'd by the bad sailing of the Hindostan a Ship very ill calculated for so long a voyage. We have been remarkably healthy in this Ship the number of Soldiers on the sick list seldom exceeding five or Six & even then generally confined on account of sore legs or accidents at no time have we had a contagious disorder among them. Nothing indeed can exceed the minute care & attention paid by Coll.. M. to his Men at all times; twice each day he visits every part of the Ship the men are regularly paraded morning an[d] evening the women are also obliged to appear clean and well dress'd at regular parades appointed for them; the Soldiers deck is kept as clean as it is possible to make it and when the weather is damp or any wet has got in the stoves are kept burning between decks all day; during the warm weather wind sails were always kept in the hatchways the advantage obtain'd from than was by no means so great as it ought to have been owing to their being made on a bad construction & ill placed; besides being made of old canvas which was always giving way; if the Navy board were sensible of the very great advantage of these wind sails particularly to Ships in a hot climate crowded with Troops I cannot think but that they would make an allowance for this purpose if proper Canvas. --- -  Care was always taken that the hammocks should be kept dry -- which is certainly a matter of great importance. The provisions served out to the men were of the best quality & well cook'd; in every object relating to the comfort and health of the Men Coll.. M. always found in Captn.. Pritchard the greatest desire to promote both. What the cause is of the very different state of health on board the Hindostan it might perhaps be difficult to discover it appears to me that the Service these Ships are now employ'd in is more likely to be successfully executed by a Master in the Navy than a Captain; Mr. Pritchard is his own Purser; his Credid [sic] and character depends on the manner in which all the persons on board are accommodated he knows what is required & that if any thing is wanting the blame will attach Solely to him; any great neglect on his part would probably be the means of depriving him of his Ship; besides his situation in life does not set him above attending in the most minute manner to the wants of the persons under his charge. In the Hindostan being commanded by a Captn.. in the Navy the stores & provisions are supplied by the Purser who happens to be a Rogue; & they are in want of every thing & totally out of that most necessary article -- fire -- As I have been very little in that Ship I know nothing of how Captn. Pascoe goes on but I hardly think he can lay the minute attention to the comforts of the Men which Mr. Pritchard does.  Our society had been added to at the Cape of Good Hope by Mr. Campbell who being desirous of going to New South Wales had procured a passage in this Ship & lived at the Captains Table; in as far as we have seen him yet he appears to be a great acquisition being a man of gentlemanly manners & information; he is a native of Ireland his family having originally been Scotch. --- -  13th.. Decr.. the wind having been for some days quite against our making the Straits this object was abandon'd this morning by Captain Pascoe who made the Signal for a course to go round the Cape; a thick Fog came on which prevented the Ships from being able to see each other the whole day Guns have been fired very frequently to prevent the Ships from parting company -- in the evening the atmosphere clear'd & we had the pleasure of seeing our Friends which was much better than hearing from them the conversation being so loud as to annoy me a good deal all day. --- -  14th.. We have clear weather but the wind being N. E. 1/2p. is rather against the probability of our seeing land to day our Lat at 12 o'clock was 44 - 13 -Long 144 - 43.; we have been sent on to look out we are sailing with a fine steady breeze & smooth sea -- we have seen some large Whales to day and a number of Bonettas but we have no birds about us -- we saw a good many when we were making for the Straits -- Captain Pascoe has made the rendevous Oyster Bay we imagine his object in this is to supply himself with fire wood for which this Bay is particularly well calculated. --- -  15th.. At half past 10 o'clock this morning we have with the mercy of God made the land; having a clear sight of the New Stone. Coll.. M. immediately order'd the Band to play God save the King! [W]hen it struck up he felt himself particularly affected. --- [W] e have made the land in the most favorable manner possible our reckoning by time keeper & observation being perfectly correct.[W] e sounded & found a coral bottom at 80 Fathoms right up & down being 15miles from the New Stone which bore north of us. --- It blows a fine moderate gale at S. W. which if it continues to blow as fresh and as fair as it does at present we shall probably see Port Jackson in three days. --- -  The New Stone call'd so from its resemblance to a Rock of the same name on the Coast of Cornwall is a fine striking object being high and running to a Peak; it resembles in Shape the Bass in the Firth of Forth. We saw some low Islands a little to the westward of it. [O]ne of these Islands is named Pedro Blanco the other the Eddystone; this last had the appearance of a white Flag display'd from the highest Part of them we supposed that the excessive whiteness of these Rocks is occasion'd by the Sea Fowl the only inhabitants they are capable of maintaining. We saw a very fine surfe [sic] dashing up the Rocks to a great height tho' we were at the distance of 15 miles from them [W] hen we were leaving the Eddystone it had the appearance of a Ship under full sail --- [A]t 2 o'clock this day the Commodore hove to & made the Signal for a Man overboard; we lay to but did not go to him; he had his boats out for two hours but to no effect the Man was unfortunately drown'd -- he was one of the best Seamen Captain Pascoe had; it was his birth day the other sailors had treated him to a share of their Grog on the occasion he went to his station on the yard arm to look out in a state of intoxication & fell asleep; another man was half way up to releive [sic] him when he fell. --- This disturbing accident detain'd us three hours during which time the favorable wind lasted but shortly after deserted us. --- -  On the 16th.. at eight o'clock in the morning we saw Cape Pillar at about five miles distance. The Cape is form'd exactly like a part of Gribun [NN] in the Isle of Mull opposite to Oskamull. I do not know of any place the resemblance to which would be so gratifying to me. [S]ome of the happiest days of my life being spent at Mrs.. Macquaries house at Oskamull. [T]he weather was too thick to admit of our seeing the Pillar at the time we look'd out but it had been seen a few minutes before by several persons in the Ship. --- -  On the 18th.. Colonel O'Connell paid us a visit and told us that they were entirely out of fresh provisions -- we could not offer them any assistance being nearly in the same state ourselves the weather is calm cloudy & rainy & we are all very tired of being at Sea & sorely disappointed in the sanguine expectations we form'd of being at Sydney in three days after making the land. The Hindostan was supplied again this day with spirits & firewood. --- -  On the 19th -- the wind came against us --- -  On the 21st.. Saw Land again. --- -  The 23d.. wind quite against us & pretty high in the evening a great deal of Lightning at 2 A. M. a Calm.  24th.. -- at about 6 o'clock this morning the wind came fair we have a fine breeze & are going on well if this continues we shall be in all probability in Port Jackson tomorrow our Late to day at 12 o'clock being 36.. 17 E [blankspace] indeed it is full time for our voyage to be over we have kill'd our last Mutton & our last Pig. --- We have not had any fowls for sometime I ask'd the Stewart [sic] some days ago if he thought our mutton would stand out he said yes I think it will at five Knots.  Coll.. M. is rather unwell. [T]he motion of the Ship has given me a confused feel in my head this is in addition to my uneasiness on his account makes me feel very much out of sorts; I can't enjoy any thing & feel very cross. --- We are sailing along the Coast & can plainly perceive the smoke of the natives fires --at 12 o'clock we were only 12 miles from the Shore. Captain P. tells us that we are about 137 miles from Port Jackson. --- -  25th.. The kindest congratulation I ever received was this morning from my beloved Husband who thank God feels himself better. --- -  The wind continued favorable & brisk all night we supposed we must of course be arrived at our destined Port. Mr. Bent who I believe is one of the most anxious persons on board for our arrival ask'd his Servant how many miles there was on the board -- a hundred and twenty Sir was the answer -- Mr. Bent overjoyed said he supposed we were just coming to anchor & was getting out of his cott as fast as he could to have a view of the coast. No Sir said George for we are out of sight of land! [N]o person but one who has been long at Sea can well imagine what a disappointment this was to us all. [W]hat possess'd the Commodore we are at a loss to guess but with a fair wind & full moon and a clear Coast he thought proper to stand out to Sea and we are so unfortunate as to find that the wind has come against us[.] [T]his is really vexatious[.] [W]e have been so frequently baffled in our expectations that I really think but [**indecipherable?] things have ever so favorable an appearance again we shall hardly venture [NN] to hope to derive [NN] much benefit from it. ---   We dined this day with the officers[.] I felt it quite a pleasure to meet them all once more before we land in a sociable manner I feel attach'd to them all and happy in their company[.] --- The Soldiers were paraded by Colonel Macquarie this morning in complete marching order in their new Caps and Clothing mess'd exactly as they will be when they land [.] No body of Men could possibly appear cleaner or in better health[.] [I]t was gratifying to see that the excessive pains which Colonel Macquarie had bestow'd on them had not been lost and that out of 370 Soldiers on board of this Ship there should only be six in the Sick report and those only slight triffling cases this is the more extraordinary as they have been above seven months at Sea. --- Captn.. Pritchard gave them an extra allowance of grog to celebrate the day with[.] [T]his indulgence was well bestow'd for tho' they were merry & jovial they were perfectly queit [sic] & orderly.  Parramatta  May 4th 1810.  My dear Sir  I am pursuaded you will be glad to hear of our safe arrival in New South Wales after a very pleasant passage of twenty weeks at sea. I was much astonished to find Governor Bligh still in the Colony and the 102nd Regt containing many of my old friends. We met with a very kind reception from the inhabitants in general. They expressed much pleasure at our return many had been great sufferers during the Revolution. I believe both parties will have little more than vexation Trouble and expense. The Colony at large has been much injured and its prosperity checked. It will require some time to recover so very severe a shock The only thing that has apparently increased during my absence is the horned cattle. [41] [42] Notwithstanding the great slaughter that has been made they are become very numerous. Fine beef is now sold to Government for victualling the Troops at nine-pence per lb and will in a short time be much less. It is the finest Country in the world for Cattle my stock has done well in my absence and all my servants have behaved well. I found them all as I left them excepting one man. I think this is very much to the credit of men who are or have been convicts that such a number of them should do their duty for three years without their masters eye. I am also happy to inform you that I have got in a very fine state the Gooseberry currant and vine. I also took out two hives of Bees from Rio and got them out safe but am afraid that many of them are dead since. I have had so much to attend to since we landed that I really forgot them and left them in the Governors garden where I fear the heavy rains have injured them. I took five Spanish sheep from Portsmouth which I received as a present from his Majesty four of these I landed safe and two lambs. I think I have been exceeding fortunate in all these valuable things. Many more useful things I have collected and have introduced into the Colony. Every little adds to our stock. I hope the settlement will now have a little quiet and then it will get on well. Money is very scarce in the settlement. The Revolution has checked Agriculture so much that there is not grain sufficient grown for the support of the Inhabitants so that we are compelled to send to India for wheat.  Hassall I find has only remitted one Hundred pounds for the goods which were sent to him and that in a private Bill. This Bill may be paid and I hope it will as the woman who is in this Country had considerable property in England as her uncle informed me whom I saw at Woolwich and who called upon me about her but I do not like private Bills. I shall endeavour to get Hassall to remit the remainder in Government money.  The Revolution has injured the colony much and almost ruined many. It has been a means of preventing Hassall getting Government bills as the Bills drawn by those who had usurped the Government were not considered good. [43] I am sorry for your disappointment but you need not be under any apprehension of losing the money.  Mr. Oaks the bearer of this will give you any further information you may wish. Mr. Oaks was head constable here and is ordered home as an evidence upon the arrest of the late Governor Bligh and will return again when that business is settled. Mr. M unites with me in kind remembrances to Mr. Stokes Mrs. and Mr. Hughes and all your family.  I am  Dear Sir  Yours much obliged  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  Richmon Hill Sep 2th 1811  My  Dear uncle and aunt and Cusones this Com with my kind Love to you all and happey to hear you are all well as it Lov me at this time thank God for it. and with grat joy i receved your letter for i was allmoust Lik you for i thought you had forgot me But when i saw the dat thay had Binn wot a long time thay should a com in the Dromedary all most 2 year a go. i receved my Box on the 20 of August 1811 it mak me very happey to hear my Dear Cusones are doing so well a grat Bless and Comfort to you and a sincer happness to me. i was very sorrey to hear of my aunt Ledders Being Dead and poor Susey pray give my love to my uncle Ledder and tell him i am very sorrey inded to hear such newes. giv my Lov to all my Cusones Ledders i should Be very Glad to hear from my Cuson Sarah esp to Giv my Love to Suson if you should see har and tell har i thought she wold not a marraid. i am not and all most fiftey year old nor i do not intend i hop to see hom once moor and to see Dear Cuson Charles weay me a pound of tea for me and that fine strong young man Samuall to mak me a par of shoses and poor Lacey to threed my needell for my eyes are not so as i do. i reant a Lettell farm a-Bout fifteen ackers a-Bout half of it standan timber and the Cleard ground i hiear min to put in my Com and i work a good deel my self i hav got 30 shep and fortey Goates and 30 piges and 2 doges they tak keear of me for i Live within twenty 2 rood of me. i hav a good maney of my friendes that i Goo to see when i think proper such as i haved must when thay lay in thay Cannot do with out me i am Looked upon very well - thank God - i hop to git a few poundes to com hom with. the wight frostey mornninges is just saven of us it hav binn very Could inded this wintear But nothing Lik your Snow. that was very shoken inded i am very sorrey to hear you have Lorst your friend & i am very sorrey that i hab Lorst another Good friend as Mrs. Sloorgin. for she sent me this time 12 yeardes of iresh Cloth 3 yeardes of rebens 3 Good Bookes and wright [torn] paper and this is sum of it Mrs. Cobbold sent me a very hansom present - peces for 2 Goundes nine Capes four Last ones and Just as it Com of har owen head wich i thought moor of them aven thing i put it on dyreckly and maney moor thinges to Lang to menchen. my Dear aunt your hear i kist and Cried over it and will all wayes keep it and i hav thi other By me that you sent me i hop the next time you send you will send me sum of Lucesy and Charles hear. Dear uncle you must think i Can walk well for when i heard thear was a Boy for me i set of and walked fiftey miles in the 2 Dayas you Cannot tell the happneis it Giv me and all my frindes wear over joyed to hear of it now this will giv me grat happness for a Long time. and i hop Lucey will all wayes Be very Dutfull to har Mother as my Dear aunt must be a Giten into years for i do not grow young my self i hav Lorst all my frunt teeth i Can slur a Bout as Brisk as ever and in Good Spirites. Dear uncle i hop when you right again you will send me word of all my frindes i thank you for the newes papears and wich i could a sent you sum But hear in no tim the ship is Going to sail dyreckly so i must ConClud with my sencer Lov to you and all my Dear Cusones i pray to God to keep his Bliss upon you all and not for Giting my self a-Dew  Margreat Catchpole  i am very proud of my Dear Charles Letters and sorrey i had not time to anser it But i will the next time James will soon Git a rich man i think if her mind Samell i hop will over tak them By taken keear. this places is a Gitten very plentfull But every thing very Dear Beef mutton and pork 1 to 18 pences par pound wheat from 12 to 15 and 18 shillens par Buchell Butter five shillens par pound. on March the forteenn is my Barth Day then i am fiftey years.  Parramatta  Nov 7th 1812.  Dear Madam  I shall not have time to write to Mr. Thomas Stokes. I did not know but the acc had been settled between Mr. Hassall and him till I received his letter. He will however receive the whole amount by this conveyance in a bill upon his Majesty's Treasury. The Revolution has very much injured the private affairs of some but will prove a great benefit to the Colony at large. It has been owing to the state of the Colony that the money was not paid long since. I was sorry in my own mind that I had recommended Mr. Hassall without first knowing what would be the pecuniary state of the Colony. I cannot but blame myself a little for not calling upon Mr. Hassall before and knowing positively that the money had been paid.  You will have heard of our affliction on account of Mrs. Marsden. This is a very heavy trial and loss to me. None knew the value of such a companion as she has been to me. I am thankful that she is spared and is something better. She is able to walk about a little and can make herself understood and manage the family to a certain extent. [47] One hand is in a great measure useless and she is very lame complains frequently of pains in her head. It was a great blessing that I took out with me a female servant Mrs. Bishop. She proves a very valuable woman in my little family and is such a comfort to Mrs. Marsden as she is a sensible woman and a very faithful servant. Providence is particularly kind to us and always has been - the Lord will provide. I have no cause to complain of the Divine Goodness. He has blessed me in my going out and my coming in in my basket and in my store we have all good things now to enjoy. My return to England will I trust be the means of laying the foundation of Christs Church upon so firm a foundation that Satan shall never be able to overturn it in this part of the world. We have now cleared the Colony of all the catholic priests have schools established in almost every district so that the rising generation will be brought up in the principles of the Protestant religion. We have 5 pious schoolmasters and with my two colleagues I hope something will be done.  I shall always be happy to hear that you and your family are well and of Mr. and Mrs. Hughes. You have the prospect of leaving behind you a seed to serve the Lord. May the good Lord add to their number till not a single slough is left behind in Egypt. The times with you appear to us from the public prints to be awful. God is punishing the Inhabitants of the World for their wickedness in a very distressing manner. What will be the end of these things. I think we are happy in being at such a distance from the seat of war and all its calamities. Our settlement abounds with plenty. I wish you could take some of our surplus grain. We had many thousands of bushels this year which we could not consume. Our harvest is just at hand and very heavy crops and our Stores in a great measure full. We have about 20000 head of Cattle and about 50000 Sheep. I think this will in time become one of the finest countries in the world. I wish many of my pious friends were as well provided for as we are. I hope Mr. Stokes is well. Give my kind respects to him and to all your family and to Mr. and Mrs. Hughes. I feel grateful to you all for your past attentions. [48]   Should the Revd. Mr. Foster he still alive give our most affectionate regards to him and Miss Searle. All my daughters unite with me in best wishes for you and yours.   I am  Dear Madam  Yours respectfully  SAMUEL Marsden  WEDNESDAY [November] 24th. [1813] - We all rested well which was a preservation to us not having done so since our departure and which we felt the effects of as nothing could be procured for shelter but green Boughs that was not sufficient to screen us from rain; we start quite refreshed; at 9 o'Clock came to the end of the Range from which the Prospect is extensive and gives me sanguine hopes; the descent is rugged and steep; I stowed away here a week's provisions in some hollow Cliffs in hopes of it being sufficient for our use back from this place; it was 12 o'Clock when we got into a Valley of good feed and appears a fine part of the Country; I have no doubt but the points of Ridges or Bluffs to the N.W. and S. (the Country seems to open in the form of this Angle) are the termination of what is called the Blue Mountains and that we are now over them.   Friday 26th. - My Course is along the Stream; the banks are sandy and appear to be overflowed at times by heaps of Timber being lodged at the foot of some of the Trees; when I had proceeded about 2 miles the Forest ground rises and forms a steeper Bank; in places the Water has a great fall over Rocks; the numerous Valleys carry off the Water in rainy seasons into the riverlett; on one of the small ridges is a Rock resembling White Marble with Yellow Veins; we could not break it but from small Crivices I scraped out small pieces much like Crystal. [40] [...] ; at 4 Miles the stream alters its direction to the South at which place the main Run joins from the West forming a considerable rapid Riverlett; the land here gets better and the Country has a fine appearance; it resembles the hills to the Eastward of the Cori Linn at Port Dalrymple and put me in mind particularly of that part; the Trees being thin and light the flats clear of Timber a few Honeysuckles on the Banks of the Ridges the Lockett Bird singing and the seed of the wild Burnett sticking to our legs neither of the two last are to be seen on the East side of the Mountains; the soil still continues sandy but the feed is good and better than any I have seen in New South Wales; I stopped this evening near the foot of a very handsome Mount which I take the liberty to call Mount Blaxland also two Peaks rather North of it and which the Riverlett separates Wentworths and Lawsons Sugar Loaves. I am at a loss to describe the pleasant appearance of this place the Grass being quite green and good makes it look a pleasing scene this is the termination of the excursion of the above named Gentlemen; be assured it was not without much labour perseverance and fatigue that enabled them to reach thus far; I am certain that it is at least 50 Miles and as the present track is no person in the Colony on the Choicest Horse could reach this and return to the Nepean in four days; you may rely on what I say in this respect; the Mountains being covered with sharp Granite would be dangerous to put any Horse out of a walk and impossible so to do through the Brushes; Kangaroos are numerous we caught one this day altho' the dogs are so much hurt.  Monday 29th. - I stopped in very bad Spirits not being able to get on being completely entangled among the hills and our Course being so little Westing; were it not for the Horses the difficulty to ourselves would be nothing; they are sometimes bad to manage and soon tire among the high Lands; when so they will not move; after travelling 2 1/2 Miles we were on a lofty hill from whence the Country N.W. is all Forest hills as far as I could see which I suppose about 15 Miles every other direction was obscured by high Ranges; impossible there can be a better grazing Track of land and has the same good appearance as far as I have been able to get a sight of it to the Westward; I hope I will be able to do better tomorrow and that in a few days my account will be more interesting. [41] [...]   Tuesday 30th. - I have at length reached the Ridge I so much wished to do after walking about 2 Miles where I had a prospect to the North for a great distance; A Mist rises from a part I suppose to be a River or a large Lagoon about 20 Miles off; the Country in this direction has a fine appearance the Trees being thin and the hills covered with Grass; A 1/4 of Mile farther along the Range I came to a very high Mount when I was much pleased with the sight Westward; I think I can see 40 Miles which had the look of an open Country. To the South of me there are large hills much higher than the one I am on with pasture to their tops; This Range is rather overrun with underwood and larger Timber growing thereon but the sides are as green as possible; in descending for 2 Miles the verdure is good; the descent then becomes steep for a 1/4 of a Mile leading into a fine valley at the end I met a large Riverlett arising from the Southern Hills. We shot Ducks and caught several trout weighing at least 5 or 6 Pounds each. [...]   Wednesday Decr. 1st 1813. - My Course is down the Riverlett; it appears to lead me North of West; on the North side of it at this place is a remarkable Sugar Loaf Hill having a stone on the Peak of it which I have named after myself; I am more pleased with the Country every day; it is a great extent of Grazing land without being divided by barren spaces as on the East side of the Mountains and well watered by running streams in almost every Valley; I took a walk to the top of a very high Mount where I can see at least 50 Miles West which gives me great Spirits. [...]   Saturday 4th. - My Progress is through an exceeding good Track of Country; it is the handsomest I have yet seen with gentle rising hills and dales well watered; the distant hills which are about 5 Miles South appear as Grounds laid out divided into fields by edges there are few Trees on them and the Grass quite green; [42] I still keep the river and at times I walk a few Miles South or North as seems to me most requisite. The Dogs killed a Kangaroo and the river supplies us with abundance of Fish.  Sunday 5th. [...] We remained near the River as it is Sunday. The Horses are getting fat but am Sorry to observe their backs are sore; the Saddles should have been lined; straw stuffing is too hard to render it easy we put our Blankets under them; I walked out this Evening some Miles; I cannot speak too highly of the Country indeed I am now at a loss what to say as it exceeds my expectations and daily gets better. We are on an Allowance of Bread having lost so much by the bad Weather on the Mountains we require little pork in this part a Kangaroo can be procured at any time there are also Emu's we killed some Ducks this day.  Monday 6th.. [...] the river now forms large ponds; at the Space of about a Mile I came on a fine Plain of rich Land the handsomest country I ever saw; it surpasseth Port Dalrymple; this place is worth speaking of as good and beautiful; the Track of clear land occupies about a Mile on each side of the River; I have named it after the Lieut. Governor 'O'Connell Plains' on which we saw a number of wild Geese but too shy to let us near them; the Timber around is thinly scattered I do not suppose there are more than ten Gum Trees on an Acre their Bark is amazing thick at least 2 Inches; At 3 o'Clock I stopped at the commencement of a Plain still more pleasing and very Extensive; I cannot see the termination of it North of me; the soil is exceeding rich and produces the finest grass intermixed with variety of herbs; the hills have the look of a park and Grounds laid out; I am at a loss for Language to describe the Country; I named this part 'Macquarie Plains.'. [...]   Thursday 9th. - I have called the Main Stream 'Macquarie River.' At 2 1/2 Miles commences a most extensive Plain the hills around are fine indeed; it requires a clever person to describe this Country properly I never saw any thing equal to it; the soil is good; I think the lower parts of the Plains are overflowed at times but do not see marks to any height; the small Trees on the lower banks of the River stand straight not laying down as you see them on the banks of the river and Creeks at Hawkesbury. [43] The grass here might be mowed it is so thick and long particularly on the flat lands. [...]   Friday 10th. - Yesterdays trace led me much North of West; today it is South of it. The extent of the Plain following the River is 11 Miles and about 2 wide on each side the whole excellent good land and the best Grass I have seen in any part of New South Wales; the hills are also covered with fine pasture the Trees being so far apart must be an acquisition to its Growth; it is in general the sweetest in an open Country.  At the termination of the Plain is a very handsome Mount; I named it 'Mount Pleasant' from the Prospect it commands to the N.E. The River now winds itself round the Points of Forest hills nearly the same as described some days since.  Emues are numerous; the Dogs will not give chase; I imagine they are bad ones; we have not been able to get a shot at any of the Geese altho' plentiful they are so shy; but frequently shoot Ducks. Nothing astonished me more than the amazing large Fish that are caught; one is now brought me that weighs at least 15 lb. they are all the same species. I call the Plains last passed over 'Bathurst Plains.'.   Saturday 18th. - We departed for our Journey homewards keeping as far from the River as we conveniently could and find the feed for Stock exceeding good; the farther back among these hills the better it is; the Valleys are beautiful as also the intervening ridges that divide them being thickly covered with herbage; Grazers may keep stock here to great advantage particularly sheep as they like dry healthy parts. [...]   Tuesday 21st. - Fine weather very warm; halted at the commencement of Bathhurst Plains early as I was desirous to examine this part; I ascended Mount Pleasant the West end led me on a Ridge of Beautiful hills along which I travelled about 3 Miles a small stream of Water forming ponds run at their foot; I was gratified with a pleasing sight of an open Country to the S.W. of them; at the space of 7 or 8 Miles I could discern the Course of a River winding to the West; I saw three or four large Plains; the first of them I was on the Chain of Ponds before mentioned running. through it; I feel much regret I am not able to Travel a week or more in that direction; [44] I imagine the flat open Country extends 30 or 40 Miles; at the termination I can only discern one Mountain quite Pale with three Peaks; I suspected an open Country lay about the S.W. point as I passed the Range of hills then obscured it from me nor had I time to examine it; I cannot speak too much of the Country the increase of Stock for some 100 Years cannot overrun it; the Grass is so good and intermixed with variety of herbs. Emu's and Geese are numerous but cannot get any; we counted 41 Emu's this day; our dogs will not follow them. Returning we saw smoke on the North side of the River at Sun sett as we were fishing I saw some Natives coming down the Plain; they did not see us until we surprized them; there were only two Women and four Children the poor Creatures trembled and fell down with fright; I think they were coming for Water; I gave them what Fish we had some Fish Hooks Twine and A Tomahawk they appeared glad to get from us; two Boys ran away; the other small Children cried much at first; a little while after I played with them they began to be good humoured and laugh both of the Women were blind of their Right Eye.  Saturday May 13th 1815. - I should have left Bathurst yesterday; when near ready to go one of my Horses threw his Load which damaged some of his tackling; repairs being necessary caused my delay until this Morning; my Course was S. 300 W; or thereabouts along the fine flat named Queen Charlotte Vale. I halted near the junction of it with the Main Creek which bears S. 20 W. having plains on both sides; the Vale is also clear of Timber; this day's journey is over exceeding good Land well watered.  Sunday 14th. - I follow the Vale which still continues very good; at about 5 Miles a fine Valley comes into it bearing up S. 20 W. which is well watered; at 6.5 Miles the Valley is rather contracted and remains so a short distance when it again opens producing the rankest of Grass with ponds as before alternately; the Land is of the strongest nature; the hills that gradually rise on each side are covered with good pasture; the steepest of them grow serviceable Timber namely Stringy Bark which is a Tree most used in this part of the World. [45]   Tuesday 16th. - The first half hour's Chaining was tolerably good; but for six Miles afterwards it was extremely fatiguing along a Rocky and Bushy Ridge which led me to the Centre of the three hills I shewed you in our long Ride and which I have named 'Mount Macquarie' ; the three range in a direct line bearing N.W. and S.E.; that to the S.E. measuring of a Mile from Mount Macquarie I call 'Maclaine's Peak'; the N.W. one is seperated from the others by a small Gully and at a distance of about 2 Miles from Mount Macquarie I have named 'Antill's Peak'; they are most remarkable and conspicuous hills; I see no other in any direction of their shape; from these lofty eminences I had a clear and perfect View of the Country. The S.W. West and N.W. is a series of high Mountainous hills their tops shewing themselves at a great distance; in the direction of E. 200 S. about 15 Miles is a fine looking Country; there are plains I suppose it towards the head of Campbell River as I can trace it down some distance; it continues round to S.E. If I cannot do better or see a more satisfactory prospect Westward tomorrow I shall travel South for 10 or 12 Miles where from present appearances I think I may be able to wind round some hills again to the West; the hill at the end of my last journey is W. 12° N. about 14 Miles. I was convinced when there I could not make further in a S.W. line all my dependance is in getting South about; I halted at some Water holes running N.E.; they empty themselves into the River by way of Queen Charlotte Vale.  Friday 19th. [...] I had asscended a very high Conical hill; the sight from it quite astonished me; the whole Country I suppose from 30 to 40 Miles from S.E. to S.W. is covered with Conic hills which are lost to me in distant Mountains. I took a Man to examine a few Miles and found that between each Chain of these pointed hills are ponds; in one of the Gullies is a small stream; with much difficulty I travelled down into a Main one from the S.E.; to climb up the hills we were obliged to crawl upon our hands and knees; the whole of them are thinly wooded with small Crooked Gums and covered with good Grass; but the sharp Rocks render travelling disagreeable and bad. [46] I went among them so far as to convince me that the principal Stream runs through a break bearing near West; the last two Miles Chaining took me close upon three hours nor could the Horses travel faster from sliping about; besides this is not half the difficulties that appears before us which I unavoidably experienced to make myself certain of the direction the Stream led. Appledore and myself returned much fatigued I never was more so in my life; from a sudden slip in climbing the hills I am quite unwell with a pain in my left side; I thought it would be labour in vain to penetrate into a Country where I could not see a possibility for a Road to be made or Horses to travel with loads in safety.  Monday 22nd. - I took a W. 20° S. direction through a fine Grazing Country most part a thick Forest of various description of good grown timber; at five Miles is a Valley which bears down West. [...] A remarkable round top'd hill is now North of me about 4 Miles I have taken the liberty to name it 'Mount Lachlan.'  Tuesday 23rd. - There are hills a head I thought a West Course would avoid them but found I was necessitated to asscend and the Ridge led me onward for Four Miles when a prospect appear'd at which I was highly gratified. I never saw a more pleasing Country. I cannot express the pleasure I feel in going forward; the hills we have passed are excellent land well wooded; to the South distant objects are obscured by high hills; in the S. W. are very distant Mountains; under them appear a Mist as tho' rising over a River; it has the like look round to West; but beyond the loom of low hills are very faintly distinguished; in the N.W. are high distant Mountains; one with a flat top bearing N. 700 W. I name 'Jamison's Table Mountain.'  The intermediate space is a grassy Country thinly wooded; there are hills and dales; between some appear Valleys clear of Timber; at a great distance is a remarkable Peaked hill standing alone as it were in the Centre of an immense flat Country. Finding a Valley with ponds led near N.W. my anxiety obliges me to deviate from the intended course to follow them; at a Mile and half is a clear hill on my right hand which I have named 'Mount Mole' and the fine Valley under it 'Redfern Valley'; at the end of Four Miles ponds form a junction from an E. 200 S. point down a spacious flat I have called it 'Meehan Valley.' [47] I then travel near West; at about a Mile other Ponds join the Main ones from the N.E. and at the end of today's journey they have almost the appearance of a River; there is no perceptible Stream but some of the ponds are a half and a Mile long.  Wednesday 24th. - My Course was West for three Miles; it led me to the top of an high hill; the Water shewed itself about 4 Mile North of me; on the South is an extensive flat; from the hill I travelled W. 200 S. two Miles; at. one and half I crossed a small Creek coming from the South leading to the Ponds; I then went on again West for 5.5 Miles which brought me on a second hill; in following it down I was rather North of West for upwards of a Mile and there found a Creek bearing up South; I resolved on tracing it which I did for three Miles North; here the points of the hills end in perpendicular heads 30 or 40 feet high which is pure Lime Stone of a Misty Grey Colour; this Creek joins the bed of a River rising in a N. 30° E. direction now dry except in hollow places; it is full 70 ft. wide having a pebbly bottom; on each side grow large swamp Oaks; I travelled down in the bed of it of a Mile near West and halted greatly fatigued. The open Country and falling on the Water courses encouraged me so much that I made every exertion to push forward besides being full of anxiety hoping soon to reach a River of some consequence. Every steep hill between the Lime Rocks and Bathurst may be avoided except two and they are not worse than that at the Fish River. An handsomer and finer Country I never saw than what I have been over these last two Days; greatest part of the Land is good; Timber is its worst production; Kangaroos Emu and Wild Ducks are very numerous. [...]   Thursday 25th. - The Lime Cliffs having the appearance of being very steep down the run I thought it prudent to let the Horses have a day's rest; in the mean time I took Appledore with me to examine the Country; large Ponds of Water are now in the River Bed; they connect with each other by a small stream that I distinctly see to rise up between the Stones; its general course is W. 15° N. [48] I walked down about Five Miles; it was impossible to proceed further as perpendicular Cliffs of Slate Rock prevents me; with much difficulty I got so far. The Stream is now equal to Macquarie River.. [...] On leaving the Water I made for the high Peak which bore S. 400 E. about three Miles; it was a fatiguing matter to reach the top and feel happy I did so as it convinced me I could not go on in a West direction as I should be impeded by high head lands and Gullies.. [...] I named the Peak 'Mount Lewin.' [...]   Sunday 28th. - Being determined to see the Plains I started at day break with a Man; in the space of an hour we arrived on one this side of the River; it reached about a Mile and is at least 1.5 deep. I suppose I went up the River six Miles; the Plains are alternately on each and nearly the same size; opposite to the Plains are Woodlands and appeared to continue so for a great distance S. 30° W.; the River comes from about that point and to the best of my Judgment the Stream empties into it that I mention on the 19th Instant; the Soil on the plains is very rich and the woodlands are equally so; when about to return we saw a number of Natives; on making towards them they run from us; all that I could do had no avail in having communication with them; it was past One O'Clock when we got back and I was too fatigued to go down the River any distance therefore remained to wash and clean ourselves; I have named the Plains 'Oxley's Plains.'   Wednesday 31st. - The River took the direction I supposed N.W.; points of Rocky hills every Mile or Mile and half lead down to it; the flats continue rich Soil; on the S.W. side are no hills but a continued space of level Rich Land thinly wooded except near the Water's edge where the timber is good and very large; they are what is called Black Butted Gums; some of them are 8 and 10 feet in diamiter.  We see Natives two or three times a day; I believe we are a great terror to them; a Woman with a young Child fell in our way this afternoon to whom I gave a Tomahawk and other truffles; she was glad to depart; soon after we suddenly came upon a Man who was much frightened; he run up a Tree in a moment carrying with him his Spear and Crooked throwing Stick; he hallowed and cryed out so much and loud that he might have been heard half a Mile; it was useless entreating him to come down therefore stuck a Tomahawk in the Tree and left him; the more I spoke the more he cryed out. [49] 7 Miles.  Thursday 1 St June 1815. - The River today is near West and am clear of the points of hills; the Country is good indeed; these fine flats are flooded; there are rising Lands clear of it as I before stated but no bill that will afford a prospect; tomorrow I am necessitated to return and shall asscend a very high hill I left on my right Hand early this Morning. I could leave no mark here more than cutting Trees; on one situated in an Angle of the River and a wet Creek bearing up North I have deeply carved 'Evans 1st June 1815.' The Country continues good and better than ever I expected to discover.  Friday 2nd June. - In travelling back I left the River; at about a Mile from it the Land is not so Rich; the Soil changed to red loom as deep colour'd as a burnt Brick wherein the Grass is poor and the Box Trees small. I am glad to observe that the deficiency is made up by useful Pine Trees from one Inch to three feet in Diamiter as straight as Arrows some of them at least 40 feet high before the Branches begin to shoot out; those growing on what I term' Pine hills are stinted; the trunks of them rise but a few feet from the Ground before their Branches spread which I think may be accounted for by those hills being chiefly a mass of Granite Rock. I asscended the Height; no Country can possibly have a more interesting aspect; so much so that if a further trace into the interior is required at a future period I respectfully beg leave to offer myself for the Service. I see no end to travelling. I am deficient in abilities to describe it properly but shall endeavour to do so by compareing the Country to an Ocean as it is nearly level with the Horizon from N.W. to S.W.; small Hillocks are seen at great distances of a pale Blue shewing as Land appears when first discovered at Sea; Spaces clear of trees may be imagined islands and the Natives Smokes rising in various points vessels; it is a clear calm Evening near Sunsetting which shewed every part advantageously. [50]   The River I can distinctly discover to continue near due West and rest confident that when it is full Boats may go down it in safety; my meaning of being full is its general height in moderate Seasons which the banks shew about Five feet about the present level; it would then carry Boats over Trees and Narrows that now obstruct the Passage; no doubt the Stream connects with Macquarie or some other River further West; the Channel then sure is of great magnitude; I should think so to carry off the body of Water that must in time of Floods cover these very extensive flats. [...]   'Monday 5th June. - Left the River which I have now called 'The River Lachlan.'  Parramatta June 18th 1813.  My dear Madam  A ship being on the point of sailing my Mama is not willing to let another opportunity pass without making some acknowledgment to you and your family for your kindness to us when we were in England you have no doubt before this heard of my Mama's severe indisposition which prevents her from writing this herself she has now been two years afflicted and tho' her health is much recovered is yet far from being well: she feels severely every change of weather & having lost the use of her right arm is deprived of every means of employing herself. If you have heard of the female missionaries I know you will feel interested in their welfare I am sorry to inform you that two died soon after their arrival at Otaheite Mrs. Davis in child-bed and Mrs. Haywood of a dropsical complaint. Poor Mrs. Henry is also dead ; she came out in the Duff with Mr. Cover. My Mama regrets her death very much and is afraid it will he felt severely as she was of a true missionary spirit. Mr. Henry came to Port Jackson for another wife and was married last week he brings the welcome tidings that Pomare the King of Otaheite & some of his subjects have embraced Christianity even religion in our part of the world wears a fairer aspect than formerly the Governor is a great friend to the Gospel tho' not pious yet he is what the world calls a very moral man which is much more than any of his predecessors; he has also made great improvements in the Colony particularly at Sydney. [49] Mr. Cowper & family are very well also Mr. Cartwright. Mrs. C. & all her children are spending a short time with us at Parramatta. I am afraid you will find very little amusement in this letter but I hope my dear Mrs. Stokes will excuse it my apology must be I was afraid she should think we had all forgot our Gutter Lane friends. My Papa mind Mama unite with me in best regards to you and Mr. Stokes & will thank you to remember us to Mr. & Mrs. Hughes Mrs. Foster & Mrs. Amey begging you will accept the same My dear Madam  from yours ever affectionately  A. MARSDEN.  Parramatta  June 25th 1813.  Dear Madam  Mrs. Marsden has requested me to write to you for a few Ribbons Sewing Silk &c. You will know what she will want. She will also thank you to send to Mr. Green Glover Newport St for about £5 worth of gloves. Mrs. Green knows what sort to send. I have directed Mr. Alexander Birnie to let you have £25 to pay for the Ribbons &c. You will have the goodness to send to Mr. Birnie for the money before you send the things out. He lives in great St Helens. Mr. Wilsons failing greatly deranged my little plans when in England and has given me sonic concern. I perhaps in the end shall not be ally great sufferer but this I cannot tell as I have received no acc either of the remittances which I sent home amounting to upwards of £1000 nor of my Salary since the day I left England. [50] [51] Till I can obtain this I shall remain ignorant of my private affairs in England. I hope Mrs. Birnie will furnish me with this in time. I hope Mr. Stokes received the money I sent him on Mr. Hassall's a / c for the balance of his Account.  I am happy to say Mrs. M is much recovered all the rest of my family are well. My colleagues and families are well and schoolmasters. We have now a prospect of doing good. A wonderful change has taken place since my return with respect to the Moral situation of the Colony. The Governor is very attentive to the Sabbath day and is a very moral man. A very good understanding has existed between him & me for some time past he very readily meets all my wishes with respect to the good order and moral improvement of the Inhabitants. I must now work while it is day. I have applied for three more Clergymen and some Schoolmasters. Should you know of any that will answer me will you communicate their names to Wilberforce. I have written to him on the subject. I am certain Government will allow of two more clergymen should none be sent out before this arrives.  This will become a great country in time and the Wool will soon make a remittance to the mother country. I send home by this vessel more than 8000 lb. The last I sent to England averaged 3 / 9d per lb. What this will sell for I know not. Our wool will be fine in time. I always foresaw that wool would be of vast importance to this settlement and have now convinced the farmers here so that they will now attend to their flocks.  You will hear that King Pomare has embraced Christianity.  The New Zealand Chief who lived with me has at length got to his native land. I have heard the most flattering accounts of him and trust that he will open the way for the introduction of the Gospel into that Island.  God had very important designs in view when he induced the British Government to establish a colony here. Give my kindest respects to Mrs. Stokes your sons Thomas Charles & George and also to Mr. and Mrs. Hughes and the Revd. Mr. Forster & Miss Searle in which Mrs. M. most cordially unites. [52]   I am  Dr. Madam  Yours most respectfully  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  Parramatta  October 8th 1814.  Dear Sir  I received your last and we were glad to hear that you and your family were all pretty well.  By this conveyance I have sent you the first pair of stockings made in this Colony from my Spanish Wool. I have also sent you samples of wool from some of my sheep. Five samples from five Rams and two from two Ewes. From these you will see the quality of our wool. I have made great progress since my return in the improvement of my flocks. I have for years been convinced that the Wool would be the gold mines of this Country and of vast national importance and I trust a spirit of improvement will be excited through the farmers of this Colony to grow fine wool. We must have an export or the Settlement will never prosper and this promises to be the first. I have also sent you a sample of Cotton Wool grown in the South Sea Islands. With a little encouragement the Natives of Otaheite and the other Islands would grow great quantities. You will also find one Skeen of thread made from the Flax which I had lately brought from New Zealand. This is a natural production of that Island and may turn to great national account.  You will learn from other accounts that it is my intention to visit that Island in a little time. No doubt but many natural productions will be found there advantageous for Commerce when that Country is once examined. We greatly want a person here in authority who has a turn for examining the Islands in these Seas. [53] I am fully convinced that there will be found in them many valuable articles. With respect to this Colony it improves fast and must be in time a great Country. The Mountains have lately been crossed which hitherto had prevented all communication between the present settlements and the Country beyond thm. A number of men are now employed making a road over the mountains as a pass has been found. The country is said to be very fine beyond them. One Gentleman travelled more than 100 miles after he had passed the Mountains and found the Country very good and a fine river running through it towards the west and abounding in fish. I have no doubt but when we get into the Country beyond the Mountains we shall find some of the finest ground and very probably some large rivers which may empty themselves into the Sea on the west side of New Holland. The road is now completed on the Mountains which extend near 30 miles and I wish much to visit them and that part of the Country but shall not be able till my return from New Zealand as the passage will not be opened before I sail.  We are getting on with good schools for the Children in all the districts. I am now putting a roof upon a Female Orphan House at Parramatta which will contain about 200 Girls. It is a noble building. If the young girls are only taken care of and kept from vice the Colony will prosper as it will be the principal means of checking the growing national sins by checking the vicious inclinations of young men. No young man need be afraid to marry here lest he should not be able to provide for a family. In a new country like this there are always plenty of means at hand for a man to support himself & those belonging to him.  I have just wrote these few lines in great haste. We all beg to be kindly remembered to Mrs. Stokes and all the branches of your family. I shall ever entertain a grateful remembrance of your past kind attentions. Mrs. M. is a little better she often mentions Mrs. Stokes with the warmest affection.  I remain  Dear Sir  Yours very sincerely  Samuel Marsden  All you have done and all you propose to do in the management of our concerns appears to me most prudent and beneficial. . . I think the fall of Stock must ere this have operated upon the price of land if it have not it will for nothing can give a good value to land but a good market for produce and until the Colony can find some extensive export land and cattle will sink in value together - Taking this view of the state of things I have been induced once more to try my fortune in a small adventure consigned entirely to your management and I feel confident that if prudence and good sense can insure success it will prove successful in your hands. I impose no restrictions upon your judgment except upon the subject of credit upon that my mind is made up and I request that no credit may be given .  You have never informed me whether you got the Lease of the Sydney Cottage renewed I am much pleased at the Grant of the Swamps they make a desirable whole of the Farm to secure us from interruption.  I am very glad that you proceed so smoothly with the Governor and if you can negotiate an exchange of the Seven Hills Estate for Land at the Cow Pastures do considering its contiguity you ought to have a larger quantity but I leave the arrangement entirely to you. [...]   My dear Eliza  I know not what I can say of our mode of life that will give you a correct idea of it. It is a mixture of town and country life; and yet in many respects unlike anything you can have experienced. Our climate is delightful and we have in high perfection and in great abundance the fruits of warm and cold climates. In our garden which is large we have Oranges Lemons Olives Almonds Grapes Peaches Apricots Nectarines Meddlars Pears Apples Raspberries Strawberries Walnuts Cherries Plums. These fruits you know. Then we have the Loquat a Chinese fruit the Citron the Shaddock and the Pomegranate and perhaps some others that I may have forgotten to enumerate such as the Cherry and Guava. We have an abundance even to profusion in so much that our Pigs are fed on Peaches Apricots and Melons in the season. [69] Oranges and Lemons we have all the year round yet there is a particular season from May to August (our winter) when the trees yield a regular crop. I have I perceive omitted to mention the Fig of which we have many varieties and in abundance. The Gooseberry and Currant have not hitherto thriven at this settlement but at Van Diemen's Land they do well. We grow wheat barley oats we make hay at least I do and so does Mrs Macquarie but the practice is not general. We feed hogs we have cattle keep a dairy fatten beef and mutton and export fine wool. A variety of avocations arising from these pursuits keeps the mind pretty busily employed.  Hobart Town 25th Aug. 1815  My Dear Sir  I wrote to you by the Emu that sailed for Port Jackson on the 19th [?] and enclosed a letter to Sarah Baker which I will be much obliged to you to send to her she lives in the same row as Capt. Shawe and I hope will be easily found.  I am very unpleasantly situated here and it is in vain for me to attempt to do the duty until a more regular system is adopted. I am however on the best terms with the Lieut. Governor and as things are endeavour to make the best of it. I must rely on you for advice and assistance and I beg you will not withhold it from me. - As I mentioned before I can get nothing from Mr. Gordon and the little I have sufficiently proves his incorrectness which I trust will never appear against me.  You will much oblige me by sending a printed form of the report that is made to the Governor on the arrival of a Ship a Copy of each of the Bonds with a form of the accounts and any information or method you could suggest for me to keep them that would enable me to carry on the duty with correctness and facility I should be most particularly obliged to you for. I would also beg a list of fees and those that the Naval Officer is entitled to any remarks that may occur to you respecting the Duties I will thank you for. I would not have taken this liberty if I had not been convinced of your friendship and desire to serve me from the politeness and attention both Mrs. Drummond and myself received from you during our stay at Sydney and in complying with the request I have made I assure you it will be doing me a favor. I felt a delicacy in speaking to you on the subject but as Mr. Oblott has assessed in the same manner to Mr. Bond and received from him every advice and information I see no reason why I should suffer for want of applying to who is ever ready to oblige their friends as you are.  I am quite satisfied with the climate and Country it is certainly far superior to that of Port Jackson but the people are infinitely worse but I confidently hope everything will soon be put on a regular plan I cannot say what I could wish but apply to Capt. J[?] and you may safely rely on what he tells you; in saying this I tell you a great deal having myself heard him.  I shall not give you much trouble to procure a horse for me: The small houses I am in being £50 a year and every necessary of life most exorbitantly dear indeed it will require an yearly income of £500 to support my family.  There is an excellent opportunity of writing to England by the Jefferson whaler that will go [?] in a week had we known of it at Sydney it would have been advisable to send your letters here.  Our society here is very small none of the ladies having called on Mrs. Drummond but Mrs. Davey and Mrs. Gordon which is very fortunate for there are not any others that I could have associated with for some reason; Mrs. Hogan is a genteel woman but he has an unfortunate habit of taking an extra glass and in that case is sure to insult you for which reason I believe few if any of the Gentlemen associate with him.  The System of drinking is such here that I am obliged to keep very much to myself as I both dislike it and cannot afford it it has prevented me from having many of them with me for no other reason. Mr. and Mrs. Abbott and ourselves were constantly together and he is now more frequently with us which is society enough for me.  Mrs. Drummond and her sisters enjoy good health they desire their kindest regards to you and your little godson is thriving quite to our wishes.  I beg you will remember us most kindly to Mrs. McArthur and family Sir John Jameson and all enquiring friends. I will thank you to forward any parcels or letters by the first opportunity and to take charge of any thing that may arrive from England for me.  I am with great regard My Dear Sir Your sincere friend John Drummond  Parramatta  March 4th 1816.  My dear Mrs. Stokes  We return you many many thanks for your kind remembrances which we received by Mr. Youl. The pleasure was so much greater as it was unexpected for the time is so short since your other kind presents reached us. My Mama is much afraid that you fatigued and exerted yourself too much to get the things ready as Mr. Youl informs us your notice was very short. He regrets extremely that his acquaintance with you did not begin when first he went to England.  I think if you could have seen Mary & Jane when they first saw the little baskets with their initials on you would have been as much delighted as they were. Nothing but Mrs. Stokes was talked of for several days and they were all anxious to know if they had seen you when in England even little Martha who was born here wished to claim an acquaintance with you and was quite hurt when she found she had no pretensions to it. [58] As there was nothing marked M. M. on we gave her the little Birds Nest and I can assure you she was quite proud of her present. Elizabeth & myself admire the new card racks extremely. We are going to have a new Parsonage House built and my Mama intends to keep them to decorate the parlours with. Charles has some thoughts of writing to thank you for the book you sent him but I much fear he will not have time. We are happy to hear such a pleasing account of Henry Johnson that he was married and growing quite steady. I have often written letters to Mrs. J but Mr. Johnson never mentions whether they were ever received though he repeatedly writes to my father nor does he ever enquire after our family individually. We are daily expecting the Missionaries from England for Otaheite. The "Active" sailed for that place a few weeks back with Mr. and Mrs. Crook and family on board. My fathers time is now completely occupied with the Mission. When the "Active" is in port he is almost always in Sydney preparing things to send to New Zealand or else employed with the New Zealanders who are at our house & when she is not here he is generally engaged in writing letters to the Church Missionary Society or to other persons respecting the Mission that his own concerns are much neglected through it. Many persons wonder that his health does not suffer from so much fatigue neither does he get so much encouragement from the Great Folk as he hoped he should. He is not able to establish a Church Missionary Society at all but he intends to have another trial at the Bible Society.  I wrote you last Novr. by our friend Mr. Nicholas but as the ship goes round by China it is most likely you will receive the letters about the same time. I hope you will see Mr. Nicholas for he spends so much of his time in our house that he will be able to give you every information respecting us and I think you will be pleased with him. In my last letter I believe I told you we were suffering greatly from want of rain since then we have had such abundance that we have been in danger of floods. [59] I think the climate is almost as unsettled as England though we seldom feel any effects from it in the morning it will be intensely hot and in the evening as Cold.  I am happy to say that my Mama enjoys her health on the whole very much it was her speech which was affected and not her Memory that is and always was as good as when she was first taken ill. She does not get the least strength in her arm that still remains quite useless. She begs you will give her kind regards to Mr. and Mrs. Hughes and also requests you to remember her to Miss Janet & Miss Amy. I have nothing to write worth your reading but it would have been unpardonable in me had I neglected this opportunity of thanking you for your kindness to us. My father is now writing to you and my Mama & Sisters send their kindest love accept also the sincere love of  My dear Mrs. Stokes  Yours very Affectly  A. MARSDEN.  Parramatta  March 14th 1816.  My dear Madam  We had the pleasure to receive your kind remembrances for me & mine. We are always happy to hear of or from you. The Ink-stand I shall much esteem as it keeps me in mind of many pleasing circumstances that are past. I was much rejoiced to hear from you respecting your dear departed Companion and trust that your long fervent & ardent prayers were heard for him. I find that by every vessel my old friends are dropping off and that I am likely to be left alone on earth. I think little of Common acquaintance but much where the friendship has been long and sincere. Our best Friend will not die he remains unchangeable and to him we may at all times apply for comfort in the day of trouble. I am happy to say we are all pretty well through the Divine Mercy. I have had my vexations in this reign but it will soon be over now. [60] What the next will be I know not but the spirit of the will will continue to be enmity to God and godliness and therefore I think things will be probably nearly the same to the end of life. The Lord is good and kind and gracious and I have obtained one object that was much upon my mind by my returning the establishment of a Mission at New Zealand. This is a great work and I trust will be attended by the Divine blessing. It has gone on well hitherto and I have only to regret the death of that great man Duaterra in whom I had placed much confidence as to managing the Mission in New Zealand but in this respect my hopes arc now- blasted. Probably you will see some account of his death in the Missionary Register as I sent it to the Secretary. I should he happy to spend my remaining days in New Zealand could I do this with propriety but many ties secure my stay here at present though my life is a continuous warfare and I have fighting without and fears within.  We have some very profane and wicked men here in power and it is impossible either to conciliate their favor or to avoid the shafts of their hatred. I know that some of my friends in England will not always approve of my public conduct but they can neither enter into my feelings nor comprehend the reasons for my actions.  I have felt myself agrieved and have appealed unto Caesar again and again. Men in power like Religion so far as it agrees with their political measures and tends to support their dignity and consequence but no further. Ahab will never die so long as there is an Elijah on Earth and Elijah will always be considered as one of the troubles of Israel. I shall refer to the Revd. Mr. Vales for further information respecting the Colony. Mr. Vales is now-before a general Court-Martial & no doubt will return to Europe.  I do not approve of the matter that led to his arrest and trial but the higher powers must settle this it rests between the Governor and him. Few clergymen are fit for the Colony. It is a very extraordinary place and requires much solid prudence piety and much common sense to do anything with the inhabitants. [61] I mean the whole body those in and those out of power.  I mentioned to you in a former letter that Mr. Vale would not answer he is not at all suited to this Colony though possessed of ability. In the present difference between Mr. Vale & the Governor I think they are both much in the wrong the former as a Clergyman and the latter as a Governor but this time will determine. I should be sorry to do anything by which the Ministry would be blamed. I am glad Mr. Youle has arrived as he will be a useful man where he is going. There has been no Minister in that settlement since it was established more than 10 Years ago and he is a quiet prudent man though not equal to the situation of a clergyman at Port Jackson. I wish you knew of a person whom you could recommend to come out I am much in want of assistance. I am happy to say the Schools are going on well I do not think there is any portion of the globe where the Common people's children are so well instructed as they are here and I feel much pleasure in seeing the young men of the Colony though horn of the most depraved parents in general sober honest and industrious and many of the poor Orphan Girls who were received into the Home married well and become respectable mothers and members of Society. This is a very gratifying sight to me.  In about six months I hope to open a large new building at Parramatta which will contain about 200 girls as an Orphan House and then the benefits will be more extensive. I now want to see a House built for the accommodation of female convicts where they can be comfortably lodged and usefully employed.  When in England I urged this object very strongly upon his grace the Archbishop and upon his Majesty's Ministers but it is not done yet. I have also remonstrated with our present Governor upon the subject but as yet nothing has been done. I have made another application to Lord Bathurst and if I cannot obtain the necessary buildings for these poor exiles (those objects of vice and woe). [62] I have determined to lay their situation before the British Nation and then I am sure it will be done.  You will have heard of my visit to New Zealand and the reception I met with there. I shall try to send your son a little Iron Stone or anything of that nature I can procure as soon as I can. A Captain Brahyn who now returns to England and will shortly come out again to New South Wales may probably give you a Call. He is an old acquaintance of mine though not a pious man we have served many years together. He will bring out a letter from you should you find it convenient to write. Mrs. Marsden my daughters and Charles feel grateful to you for your kindness and beg to be remembered most affectionately to you and yours. Give my Christian regards to Mr. and Mrs. Hughes and Mr. Stokes  And believe me  Dear Madam  Yours in the bond of  Christian Love  SAML. MARSDEN.  On seeing them (a native tribe numbering about two hundred) approach we pulled the boat out a little from the shore leaving Tolo (a leading native) on the rock. We got out our arms and examined them to see if they were in firing order and afterwards held up three or four seals' carcasses and acquainted the natives we wished to trade for kangaroo skins. Tolo ordered ten women to go into the water each loaded with kangaroo skins and flesh. We gave them in return the carcasses and they carried them to their tribe returning immediately to the boat with more skins as payment. We then requested Tolo to fill our kegs with fresh water which he did but we would not let them take more than one keg at a time for fear they would not bring them all back again. Tolo seemed much displeased at this evident want of confidence.  The natives asked if we would bring over more seals on the following day. Briggs (a seafarer who had had many years experience as a sealer) informed them that they were getting scarce and shy of being caught. Tolo considered that we had better take some women over to the island to assist in catching them as they were very dexterous at sealing This of course being agreed upon Tolo ordered six stout women into the boat. They obeyed with alacrity evidently delighted with the prospects of the trip. The wind being fair we ran over to the island hauled the boat up and pegged out the kangaroo skins to dry The women perceiving some seals on the outer rocks were anxious to commence operations.  We gave [...] the women each a club that we had used to kill the seals with. They went to the water's edge and wet themselves all over their heads and bodies which operation they said would keep the seals from smelling them as they walked along the rocks. They were very cautious not to go to windward of them as they said 'a seal would sooner believe his nose than his eyes when a man or woman came near him'. The women all walked into the water in couples and swam to three rocks about fifty yards from the shore. There were about nine or ten seals upon each rock lying apparently asleep. Two women went to each rock with their clubs in hand crept closely up to a seal each and lay down with their clubs alongside. Some of the seals lifted their heads up to inspect their new visitors and smell them The seals scratched themselves and lay down again.  The women went through the same motions as the seal holding up their left elbow and scratching themselves with their left hand taking and keeping the club in their right ready for the attack The seals seemed very cautious now and then lifting up their heads and looking round scratching themselves as before and lying down again; the women still imitating every movement as nearly as possible. After they had lain upon the rocks for nearly an hour the sea occasionally washing over them (as they were quite naked we could not tell the meaning of their remaining so long) all of a sudden the women rose up on their seats their clubs lifted up at arms length each struck a seal on the nose and killed him; in an instant they all jumped up as if by magic and killed one more each. [92] After giving the seals several blows on the head and securing them they commenced laughing aloud and began dancing. They each dragged the seal into the water and swam with it to the rock upon which we were standing and then went back and brought another each making twelve seals the skins of which were worth one pound each in Hobart Town. This was not a bad beginning for the black ladies who now ascended to the top of the small hill and made smokes as signals to the natives on the main that they had taken some seals. The smokes were soon answered by smokes on the beach. We skinned the seals and pegged them out to dry. The women then commenced to cook their supper each cutting a shoulder off the young seals weighing three or four pounds. They simply threw them on the fire to cook and when about half done commenced devouring them and rubbed the oil on their skins remarking that they had had a glorious meal.  19 January 1816. - At daylight having low water the women recommenced their sealing labours. They would not allow us to come near them until they had killed all that could begot on the beach. [93] They killed twenty-six before breakfast. The weather being fine the wind south east the remainder of the day was passed in catching and skinning seals the work being principally done by the women.  January 20. - At sunrise smokes were made on the main; the women said they were signals for us to go over. We were employed until noon killing and skinning; the women swimming to the Outer rocks as the seals were getting very shy. We succeeded in getting 16 skins. In the evening launched the boat and went over to the main; took two of the women and loaded the boat with the carcasses of the seals we had skinned. On arrival at the beach we found Tolobunganah there. The two women told him what we had done. He was delighted to see the boat's freight and told us he had plenty of kangaroo skins to give us in payment for the seals. We threw the seals into the waler and the women dragged them to the beach. Tolo ordered the tribe to take them all into the bush. In a few minutes they returned with ten dead kangaroos and about ninety skins. Tolo enquired how long we would Want the women? We told him about two or three days as the seals were getting scarce and we should not stay longer. He directed the two women to return with us and stop as long as we required them. The wind being from the westward we ran over to the island and hauled the boat up. The four women we left on the island informed us that during our absence they had caught six seals.  January 21. - During the day fresh breezes at south west and fine weather; employed drying and packing the skins in bundles for a start.  January 22. - .. During the day the wind blew strong from eastward and thick weather.  January 23 - The first part of the day fresh breezes from the southward and fine weather. The women killed five seals on the rocks. At noon loaded the boat with carcasses and took them over to the main. On our arrival at the beach Tolo and his tribe came down. They had a few stead kangaroos and about fifty skins; they were very much pleased to see the boat loaded with dead seals. We threw them out of the boat. Tolo ordered them to be put in a heap upon the beach. Briggs informed Tolo that we should start tomorrow from the inland and we should now take leave of them at which the women all began to cry; in fact the whole assembly seemed full of sorrow at our leaving them. Tolo asked Briggs not to go away until they had a dance The mob of them - about three hundred in number - formed a line in three divisions the men and women forming two of them and the children another. Tolobunganah then gave the signal to commence the dance and it was a most singular one. The women in the centre division began a song and joining their hands formed a circle dancing round the heap of dead seals They then threw themselves upon the ground putting themselves into the most grotesque attitudes beating the lower parts of their bodies with their hands and kicking the sand over each other with their feet. The loud laughter of the men and children evidenced their gratification with the sport; and the women having sat down the children went through a similar dance. [94] The men then commenced a sort of sham fight with spears and waddies dancing afterwards round the heap of seals and sticking their spears into them as if they were killing them. This game lasted about an hour. Tolo then informed us that the dance was over. He asked Briggs where we were going and was informed we were bound for Cape Barren and Briggs requested him if he saw the white men (Howe and his party) to tell them we had gone thither. This was intended to deceive them in case they should attempt to waylay us on our way to Hobart Town. The wind being fair we ran over the island hauled the boat up and began to pack our skins ready for a start next morning if the wind and weather should permit.  January 24. - At sunrise the wind north east and fine weather launched the boat got all the skins provisions etc. into her. After breakfast started with a fine breeze at north and steered along short to the southward. The natives made three smokes to say 'Good-bye'.  We found after leaving King George's Island and Rocks we had been there nine days and had procured 122 seal skins and 246 kangaroo skins from the natives the value of which was £180 at Hobart Town.  Parramatta 25th March 1817.  My dear Mrs. Stokes  I always willingly obey my Mother when she requests me to write to you for I know that the goodness of your heart makes you interested with all our welfare and that a few lines from any of us will not be unwelcomely received. I am happy to inform you that the box which was retained so long in England arrived safe some of the things (except the lilac silk) were in the least damaged. How much does your kindness my dear Madam make us all indebted to you for have we not individually received tokens of remembrance from you. [63] My Mother says that you are still the same good Mrs. Stokes you were as when she first knew you & that she has now for more than twenty years been continually receiving some proof of your affection for her. Accept our best thanks for so many favours I hope you had the letters safe we forwarded by Mr. Nicholas. The hearer of this is a young friend of ours who is going home with the intention of entering College. During his stay in London how much shall we feel obliged by your sometimes allowing him to visit you. I believe he is a truly pious young man & the hopes of his being useful to this Colony some years hence (should his life be spared) induces him to leave his friends. He is the son of Mr. Hassall who came out in the Duff as a Missionary to Otaheite you have heard of him no doubt. I think you will be pleased to hear that a Bible Society was formed at Sydney a few weeks since - the Governor was president and upon the whole it was very well attended; my Father gave a short address which was so well received that the Lieut Governor expressed a wish that it might be published. I think I mentioned in my last that a school was established at Parramatta for the native children. There are now 17 children so that in the end I hope it will have the desired effect - Mr. & Mrs. Ellis & Mr. & Mrs. Orsmond have left us for Otaheite & I hope are now near the place of their destination. Mr. & Mrs. Barif remain a short time longer at Parramatta on account. of Mrs. B was confined at the time the ship sailed. The Missionaries at New Zealand were all well when the Active left them. I need say nothing of them as it will be only to repeat what is written in the "Missionary Register" extracted from my Father's letters - That you may have some idea of Parramatta I send you a view of it which is I believe very much like it tho wretchedly painted our house is not in it -but when I have another favourable opportunity I will send you that and the Church.  My Mother requests me to say how much she should he grateful if you would favour her with a few lines; that tho' you write to my Father which is nearly the same thing yet still she wishes to hear from you herself; she regrets extremely that she is deprived of the pleasure of writing to you but both her & us ought to be very thankful that she enjoys her health so well & that her memory is not in the least impaired - My Father is also very well still as busy as ever. Should you see Mr. Thos Hassall he will be much better able to give you every information both respecting us and the Country than I can write. Elizabeth Charles Mary Jane & Martha are all well; My Mother says I must tell you all their names as she finds you did not know them till you saw them in my Father's letter to Duaterra Mary will not be satisfied till she writes to Miss Hughes; she says she knows it was Mr. Stokes that sent out the dolls ribbands etc but she thinks that Miss H must have sent some of the pincushions & therefore she will write to thank her for them. My Father & Mother beg their kindest regards to Mr. & Mrs. Hughes & yourself and believe me to be [64]   My dear Madam  Yours very affectionately  A. MARSDEN  Parramatta  March 27th 1817.  My very dear Madam  This will be delivered to you by a pious young man who is coming to England with the intention of entering into Holy orders as soon as he can obtain the requisite literary qualifications. I hope he will stand in my place and preserve the holy seed in this distant land. I consider him a little like young Timothy and I hope he will be an honor and a blessing to the Church of Christ.  Your long looked for box arrived by the Lieut Governor to the no small joy of all my girls. The day was too short for them to examine your presents and to point out all the beauties of the Dolls & dresses.[65] [66] I shall pay particular attention to your request respecting the Minerals and have sent to the Derwent to see what can be found there.  As I advance in years I am involved in greater difficulties it will be no small portion of the happiness of the Saints to be where the wicked cease from troubling. I have had harder to contend than ever lately and never passed thro' so much anxiety in a given time at any former period of my life. I must prevail in the end though the struggle is very painful.  Should you see my friend Mr. Good he will explain more fully my situation. Unconverted men in power roar like lions at the sound of the Gospel. They shew their enmity in every possible way. Every King of Babylon has his Golden Image and whosoever will not fall down & worship his god must be cast into the burning fiery furnace. I now move slowly like a loaded wagon pressed beneath the sheaves of wheat. Fighting's without and fears within attend me. They that live godly in Christ Jesus must .suffer persecutions This will hold good in all countries and particularly in this. Some Ministers are bold in preaching the Gospel in the pulpit but out of it they are very careful what they say or do lest they should give offence to the ungodly - I see such men but I cannot approve of their plans.  I have lately in some heavy storms stood alone and the storm is not over yet. From a wicked world I expect no favor no peace. The Mission to New Zealand has also added much to my anxiety. All things have gone on there as well as I could have expected as far as concerns the natives but the pecuniary concerns have been distressing to me. They have far exceeded what I had reason to expect from various causes. I wish I was free from these or at least that my Colleagues would enter heartily into the work to assist me. I find it too heavy a responsibility for me.  I am in hopes now that the settlement is formed that things will go on more to my satisfaction and that the expenses will be greatly reduced. I beg my kind regards to all your family and to Mrs. Hughes and Mr. Hughes in which Mrs. M. joins. [67] If I can get anything to send by Mr. Hassall I will.  I remain  Dear Madam  Yours respectfully  SAMUEL MARSDEN.  P.S.-My little girls talk much about Mrs. Stokes. When they heard of the Box every ship excited their anxious wishes to see what was in it - At length it came to their joy.  Parramatta  Decr. 16th 1817.  My dear Madam  I had the great pleasure to receive your letter by the Duke of Wellington with the gloves which you were so kind as to send and the little blocks for the children which created great joy in their little hearts. I wish you could have seen them dancing about the ribbons the night I brought them home. Mrs. M. and myself are thankful to you for your kind remembrances and wish it was in our power to make you any return. Should I visit New Zealand again I will see if I can meet with any minerals &c and send them to your sons. I have sent a few by the bearer and a few seeds for your friends gardens. Miss Hall will I have no doubt deliver them safe. The seeds are quite fresh. I am sorry I have not more for your son but I will not forget him. I have sent a little blue paint from New Zealand in a wafer box whether it is or ever will be of any value I know not. Perhaps your son can inform me when you write again. There are also a few small stones from Cape Barren but I know not that they are good for anything. I will procure more Iron stone from Fort Dalrymple as soon as I can and send it. [68]   I am happy to say the Missions go on well in the Islands. These nations have changed their gods and have cast them into the fire - 2000 Natives in the South Sea Islands can now read and have embraced Christianity as their national religion. God hath done great things for them perhaps his power has not been more visibly displayed since the Apostles time than amongst these Natives. At New Zealand also the prospect bids fair. A good School is established there and all the Missionaries are well and kindly treated by the Natives. I will lay out your five pounds for them when the "Active" returns and am much obliged to you for your kind consideration. It will be many years to come before every New Zealander is worth an Ax. They are all wants they are in a state of Nature and therefore must put a high value upon a needle or a nail. I wish to introduce among them Agriculture. This will immediately apply to their real wants & will be the first thing that will raise them into a civilized nation. I have five now living with me instructing them in Agriculture. I cannot entertain doubt but that the time is now come for these people to be blessed with the Gospel of Peace and that the way is now opened to them. There is great opposition to the work in this Colony but I trust that God in his own good time will remove the enemy and give a little peace. I have been tried more this last year than at any former period of my life but blessed be God I still stand my ground against all the powers that be and hope I shall continue to stand. I often wish to return to the bosom of my Country and frequently resolve to do this but then I am immediately checked with the thought What will the New Zealanders do. What will the Missionaries in all the Islands do if there is none to care for them & administer to their wants and to console them under difficulties. Will England make me happy and relieve my anxiety about the Natives of the South Sea islands. These considerations make me again resolve to meet all difficulties and to contend with them to the last. I have always overcome in time though the contest has sometimes been long and severe. He that hath helped  - me can & will help at all times if we only depend upon his power and goodness. No doubt you will learn somewhat of our late struggles though all has turned out well for the cause of religion in the end. [69]   I am happy to say Mrs. M. and all my family continue well. My daughters are all much obliged to you for your kindness to them and if you will lay out the £5 in bonnets (I mean straw bonnets) which you have instructed me to lay out for you for the Natives of New Zealand I will execute your commands here. I have sent you also by Miss Hall a small New Zealand funnel which will shew you what neat carvers they are and with little or no tools. I beg to refer you to Miss Hall for further accounts. Mrs. M and my daughters desire their kind love to you and your family. The man Massiter whom Mr. Hughes recommended to me put it out of my power to do anything for him. I got him into a good situation or two but he was so addicted to drunkenness and made such a game of everything sacred and religious I was obliged to leave him to himself and I fear he will do something or other that will involve him in difficulties here.  Mr. Vale will have got home before this and perhaps you may have seen him. I do not think he will come out any more here as Mrs. Vale did not like the Country. The rest of my Colleagues are all well.  Remember us kindly to Mr. & Mrs. Hughes and to all your family. We shall always rejoice to hear from you.  I remain  Dear Madam  Yours respectfully  SAMUEL MARSDEN  Sydney NSW August 12 1818  Dear Cousin  by a Gentleman Who Expects to come to Liverpool and which i believe is resident thier I avail myself of the opportunity of letting you know that with myself my Family are all well and that of Announcing the safe arrival of my dear sister and Family all well except herself which suffered severely during a passage of Five months and 2 days. but now thank God she is perfectly Recovered. and which more added to her dissapointment was when she arrivd I was absent at Vandiemans Land whither I had gone to settle my affairs previous to my Coming home as i had Let my shop and Whare houses as also my Farms. but her arrival will detain me sometime longer as I do not wish to leave her. and Mr Foster Expects to get his Land and Indulgences and proceed with the cultivation of it so that he can either let it or sell it. I intend bringing my Eldest Daughter Celia and youngest son George and I believe my three little ones... that I am present Deveided about my son George I was thinking of placing with Mr.. of Manchester. Should we Agree & should it lye in your way to mention it to him I Whould thank you to send his Terms so that I may hasten his Comeing home as he is getting so big. I had him at a Latin School till within this 9 months. ever since he came from England my eldest Son is married became the father of a fine daughter my other Son James which I let your ever Revered Mother know of his Marriage is now on a visit to us and on business. but George is now at Vandiemans Land as I left him to Collect the Remainder of my Debt and rents. when I heard my sister had arrived I was very Impatient to see her so that she has not yet seen him. I went down their in a brig of my own commanded by my Son Thomas and brought her up Loaded with which she is now gone after a cargo of Cedar Wood for Building. Mr Foster is gone in her I expect him in the Course of six or Eight weeks. I have also got a Small Schooner but Trade and Commerce is getting so bad that I cannot sell anything or I should have been Home long before now. I have enclosed you a Couple of our Sydney Gazettes where you will see an advertisement of mine but their is no person here able to purchase them. so I must give over the Idea of selling and live on my income. but I had forgot 2 Farms one of 100 & one of 40 acres at the Hawkesbury and the Estate that I have lately purchased at Vandiemans Land of 2000 as an entail on my children forever and one Agoing I purchased when i was down their of 40 acres. so that my yearly income is one Thousand pounds and should I Come to England immediately I could have Remitted Home seven hundred pounds per Annem after leaving a little for my sons and paying agency - therefore I think it will be as well to leave them as to Sell as to make a sacrifice. my sister begs me to mention a Book Entitle the History of N.S. Wales that she left with a man Byron's next door to the first House as you turn the Corner. that is all the description she can give. she wishes you to get it for her if you Can. she would do very well here Could she have her own way at her Business and Mr Foster too but no one will do well that is not thrifty Correct and Sober. this place is not like England. you are under the Eye of every one and your Character Scrutinized by both Rich and poor altho you may have a different Oppinion of it through the Different Characters that Comes here but are kept in regular order by our Good Govenor Lachlan Macquarie. he has been here these eight years altho it is the orders from home that no Govt should be kept here more than five years but through his good Conduct is Solicited from England to Stay Longer. the young man that I wrote my sister sometime ago by the Name of James Foster Which she tells me she understood to be the same person which Mrs Hilton interceded for is doing very well and a very Respectable young man he is. before my sister Came he told me he knew your Brother John very well. those Houses in Salford which did belong to me & my sister and which she has made over her interest in to your Mother i should wish if agreeable to Repurchase on my arrival in England. the Bill is against me i have Rec'd by the hands of my sister which shall be attended too. i can assure you my poor sister never mentions your Mother but with Tears and the Deepest Sorrow for her loss and altho i had not seen her for 27 years it had a great effect on me for almost the first interchange of words with my sister was to know if my Aunt Hope was alive. i do assure you the meeting of her was one of the happiest moments of my life and still more so knowing it was in my power to assist her as i consider her so deserving the protection of me and everybody who knows her. She did not meet as good Treatment as might be expected on her passage Considering what she paid. but had i been at home while the Capt of the ship was here i whould have actioned him but he sailed the day after i came home.... little Eliza and James go to the same school as my 3 children who are Boarders. they are fine company for each other / little Eliza is... notice by everyone she is such an agreeable little thing. my youngest little girl and her are much alike and is remarked almost by everyone. my sister wished me particularly to mention to you how my Husband came here. he was 2d officer and... of the Britannia Whaler which was laying in the Harbour when i came here and he prevailed on the Captain to let him stay here. [16] [17]   i hope dear Cousin altho unknown to you but for the sake of your dear Mother you will write by every opportunity and by sending your letters to Mrs Smith in London where my sister stayd She will be remitted.. i have nothing more at present to say except my sons and all my children desire their love to you and all your brothers. my sister desires her Respectful Compliments to Miss Ward Mrs Wood Mrs Aspinall Mrs Parkinson and my Aunts Hind and Ramsbottam and to all inquiring Friends and pray Remember me to them likewise and my sincere love to yourself and brothers Jane and Eliza send their love to you [18]   I am Dear Cousin yours affectionately M. Reibey  My sister thinks it whould be the best way to pay the postage to the Lands end of England and they are sure to come safe.  SYDNEY NEW SOUTH WALES APRIL 27 1819.  My Dear Wife  No distance no length of absence nor yet any pleasures or amusements can so far attract my attention as to cause me to neglect writing according to my promise to ameliorate the sufferings of my unhappy family and to satisfy the curiosity of my friends. On the 11th day of July 1817 we were aroused by break of day to enter upon a fresh scene to the one we had lately been used to; myself and many others of my Hulk-mates were ordered to prepare immediately for our departure from the Captivity Hulk to proceed on board the ship Larkers for our destination at New South Wales where we found ourselves guarded safely by soldiers who were placed at the hatchways of the vessel and two hundred and fifty in number of us confined to the main deck couped up as close as sheep in a fair.  Captain Wilkinson allowed us every comfort we could reasonably expect and indulged a certain number of us with the liberty of the deck as far as seemed to him consistent with his safety and when he got better acquainted with the men took off their irons and shewed favour to the deserving. Shortly after we got on board the Larkers we weighed anchor and set sail and again cast anchor at Torbay from which place we finally bade adieu to Old England on the 1st of August 1817 and with a flying top sail sighed our last farewell to our sweethearts wives families friends and relations. But so hardened in infamy are most men in a similar capacity to that in which I am unhappily placed and so abandoned to all sense of fine feeling or affection that instead of serious gloom prevailing nothing but curses and blasphemy was apparent in every eye and countenance. Our ship was very healthy for we lost but three men from our number.   We had a very pleasant passage of exactly sixteen weeks excepting two nights and one day which were something alarming to a landsman but seamen fear no danger and only view such matters with indifference. We arrived here on the 21st of November 1817 and in the midst of anxiety every heart was elate with the news anxious once more to set foot on shore and to learn in what manner the prisoners were likely to be disposed of each man sedulous for his own welfare.  Before I proceed too far I shall think proper to inform you of a robbery which took place; on my coming on board the ship I consigned my box and property into the hand of the chief mate who likewise received property of other persons on board and put the whole down in the hold which from some inattention of the said chief mate was gotten at by the prisoners and plundered in toto and not found out till we arrived at Sydney when it was too late to discover the offenders. Desperate robberies are committed constantly on board such ships bringing convicts to this country - for instead of conviction softening their conduct and leading them to reformation as might be supposed they are hardened thereby and will thieve from a piece of biscuit to the main mast if it were possible they could secret it. Honor they have none they would as soon rob their messmates as a stranger.  On the arrival of a ship of prisoners the Governor's Secretary goes on board accompanied by the principal Superintendants of convicts and the tradesmen in the service of government for instance carpenters bricklayers &c. are selected for the several branches they pretend to. Servants also of certain descriptions are appropriated to such gentlemen as may want them and what remain engaged are then sent to the different outposts to supply the settlers who may seek for their aid. It is no uncommon matter to see a jeweller a clerk or a tailor with a reaping-hook in his hand cutting grain or with an axe falling a tree. Hard work and hard fare is generally the lot of a settler's man but I am fortunate and remain at Sydney.  Government men work from daylight until three o'clock excepting an hour for breakfast and the rest of the day is for the prisoner to employ himself as he may think proper but on Saturdays from daybreak until ten o'clock without a breakfast hour. A man offending those in authority over him is marked and as men are constantly sent to the out-stations he may expect to be sent the first opportunity - thus men are punished. Some offences such as stowing away in a ship to desert from the colony and insolence &c. are punishable with the Jail Gang which gang is employed emptying necessaries and at all dirty and hard work and sleep in the jail and are compelled to wear a dress half brown and half white exposed to public view. [82]   Industrious attentive people steady to their duty will gain a living before idle and disorderly persons; but truth I must tell that a man must be well known before he is entrusted or can do so comfortably as he might wish as so many fall short of their promises and so much artifice and dishonesty prevails. No prisoner can travel from one town to another without a pass signed by a Magistrate on pain of being sent to Newcastle.  Newcastle is the place for sending convicts and prisoners to from our Courts of Criminal Jurisdiction. I shall endeavour to explain in what manner the misery is extended to them. On their landing at Newcastle both legs are put in irons they are set to work in the coal-mines and about the lime-kilns and are looked after with the strictest scrutiny. A man at this place cannot earn any thing by labor as all the work is on account of Government and he is reduced to the lowest state of indigence and poverty which man can possibly bear. All persons at Newcastle are prisoners with the exception of the Commandant the Surgeon the Storekeeper and the Soldiery which makes the misery still further.  A constable obtains half a ration more than the common man; so does an overseer and all petty officers therefore in the midst of poverty such an indulgence and an exemption from the labor of the place makes them vigilant and dutiful even sometimes to more than strict propriety for they are very often found in malicious lies and enmity against their fellow prisoners with the view of favor and when such case is exposed the punishment they intended to administer to another is very deservedly extended to themselves.  The Commandant is a humane good man but the people are such a set of rascals punishment is actually necessary to be frequent for example sake. The punishment generally inflicted at this place is corporeal and that over the breech by the beat of the drum two floggers alternately administering twenty-five lashes until the quantum sufficit be given. Men at this settlement reduced to the last stage of despair frequently run into the woods and live upon what nature in her uncultivated state affords among the wild productions of the forest. But soon the delusion vanishes starvation threatens them close and afraid to return to their duty they make the best route they can crossing rivers and lakes and sleeping in the open air enduring every privation of comfort until if they should survive the fatigue they arrive at some settlement. A man of the name of Creig actually asserts that when he made a similar effort to extricate himself from this state of bondage he came to a spot where he beheld leaning against a tree the skeleton of a man with a musket by his side also against the tree and which he supposes to be a bush ranger like himself. Many are compelled from hunger to give themselves up and very frequently so starved that they can scarce crawl upon their hands and knees to the happy spot of a dungeon. The head clergyman of the colony is Mr. Marsden and there are several assistant divines; there are also a good many methodists who meet with poor encouragement from the lower orders. The several jailers of the colony have more followers than the clergy have yet I must acknowledge religion gains fast in the colony. Formerly marriage was not known but latterly under the influence of Governor Macquarie to his credit be it known that ceremony is very frequently solemnized and people do not depend on each other's word quite so much as usual. However such matters are too common and scores of women I know who have cohabited regularly with different men and lived as happy as man and wife happy with each and with unconcern about it.  Happy! I say wrong! for very little happiness such a man or woman has but I mean without killing each other a few blows and when they can't do why part and no more about it. Women are generally of a very drunken cast and a glass of rum will purchase favors even from married people so very ill habits have they contracted either on board a ship or at home. It is no uncommon matter for women following their husbands to this colony to lose their characters on board the ship coming out - by drunkeness whoredom and the like and the consequence is they have to provide for themselves on landing as their husbands are not compelled to take them under such circumstances.  On the arrival of a ship from England a list of the letters is immediately exposed for view and I have often already looked this over very anxiously but never yet obtained one for me. Remember me most sincerely and affectionately to my brothers Sam and Joe and my father and mother. Tell the children I have not forgot them and tell Jane I hope she is a good girl. Hoping to see you and my dear children I conclude in good will and sincerity to all inquiring friends and in love to you and my family believe me  Your very affectionate though unfortunate husband  JOHN SLATER.  I. . . recd. 2 [letters] from my dear mother. . . I hope in the course of one year I shall be able to send her what will keep her comfortable while she lives all that grieves me is that I did not bring her with me for my life is miserable about her particularly as I have not had it in my power to send her money which I promised to do but unforeseen circumstances prevented me in the first place we drew 12 months pay leaving England and our voyage here was made in five months the money was all spent and we had to live the other seven as well as we could we bought a horse and paid an enormous sum for him he died and we were obliged to give £50 for another we also had to purchase furniture as there is nothing allowd. in Barracks but the empty walls after all this I could have sent something but for Margts. Marriage which took place on the 18th. of last May you may recollect Lieut. Vander Meulen he is a very fine young man and I gladly embraced his offer his Father is rich and as a younger Brother he has 3 thousand pounds one of which has been lodged in the Agents these 2 years for a company when they were married he was under orders to go on detachment to Van Diemens Land one thousand miles from here and I was at great expense in providing everything for them they saild. the week after and I have not seen her since I hear from her almost every month he has got a Colonial situation of Naval Officer and Inspector of Government works which is worth about 3 hundred a year besides his pay. I do not expect they will join the Regt. before we leave this which will be about 2 years - I have a deal of comfort in my dear John he is almost a young man and very much like myself he promises to be a good scholar he is at the best school here I pay £1 - 12 a month for him he is almost as tall as his Father - I never expect to have any more children and do not regret it if god spares me those two my poor Harry and Mary are well provided for in heaven as it was god's will to take them I must he satisfied. . . do not forget to write often.. . if you knew the anxiety of my mind and the pleasure it gives me to hear from you you would write oftener. [96]... I am happy to inform you that poor Wild is in good health and still retains the Adjutancy we are in hopes that he will very shortly get his Lieutenancy which if god spares him will be a good thing for us. ...  This is a very fine country the town of Sydney is very large & the Barracks beautiful fruit and vegetables are plentiful they feed the pigs with peaches potatoes are 1s. a hundred beef and mutton 10d. a lb eggs 2d. each butter 3s 6d a lb milk 8d a quart and wearing apparel very dear the best Mysore tea is 7s 6d and good black 3s. 6d a pound sugar 10d Indian goods are sometimes very cheap but every thing from Europe dear a common wine glass is 1s. and a plate 9d every thing else in proportion we had good rations when we arrived first but they have been taken from us only 6 married privates to each company receive them our present allowance is 12 lbs of good beef 12 lbs of bread and 2 quarts of rum per week and 2s 6d. a day for a horse some of the Convicts have made their fortunes here but if they rode in a Coach and six we dare not associate with them they are all thieves and robbers there are 8 to be hanged this week they have regular events here and people of bad character are transported to New Castle to hard labour. The prisoners are obliged to work for Government from 6 in the morning until 3 in the afternoon. They are then at liberty to earn what they can for themselves their allowance is 7 lbs of meat and the same of bread or flour each week no spirits there are many respectable settlers and good families which makes it very pleasant to us we are often invited to Govrnt. House and in short the military are much respected.  Myself and my husband have had many hard struggles to gain the means of an honest livelihood. To accomplish it we have worked night and day. I thank God that he has crowned our endeavours with success. I rose early in the morning and went to market bringing home my articles on my head to furnish my shop to the best advantage. With the greatest care of our little profits and the greatest frugality in housekeeping we collected together a small sum sufficient to buy a little house. I then applied to the Gentlemen of the Colony for a Licence; which they not only granted but said they would assist me and my husband in any way in their power as they had noticed our industry and that we associated with none but persons of good character.  I often wish my dear friend you could see my little family and they playing round me while I am milking my cows or making my bread. O that my voice could be heard by the young people in England to deter them from evil ways.. - that they might not come to this wretched country where so much evil abounds. For though I have by a regular line of good conduct and great privations arrived at a state of comfort not one in twenty who is sent here obtains even the necessaries of life by their own industry independant [sic] of support from the government.  On the twenty-fourth of March I received the instructions of his excellency the Governor to take charge of the expedition which had been fitted out for the purpose of ascertaining the course of the Lachlan River and generally to prosecute the examination of the western interior of New South Wales.  On the sixth of April I quitted Sydney and after a pleasant journey arrived at Bathurst on the fourteenth and found that our provisions and other necessary stores were in readiness at the' Depot on the Lachlan River [...]   April 25. [...] At two o'clock saw the river which certainly did not disappoint me: it was evidently much higher than usual running a strong stream; the banks very steep but not so as to render the water inaccessible; the land on each side quite flat and thinly clothed with small trees; the soil a rich light loam: higher points occasionally projected on the river and on those the soil was by no means so good. [52] The largest trees were growing immediately at the water's edge on both sides and from their position formed an arch over the river obscuring it from observation although it was from thirty to forty yards across. At four o'clock we arrived at the Depot.  We had scarcely alighted from our horses when natives were seen in considerable numbers on the other side of the river. I went down opposite to them and after some little persuasion about twenty of them swam across having their galengar or stone hatchet in one hand which on their landing they threw at our feet to show us that they were as much divested of arms as ourselves. After staying a short time they were presented with some kangaroo flesh with which they re-crossed the river and kindled their fires. They were very stout and manly well featured with long beards: there were a few cloaks among them made of the oppossum skin and it was evident that some of the party had been at Bathurst from their making use of several English words and from their readily comprehending many of our questions.  April 26. - Fine clear warm weather. The natives were still on the opposite bank and five of them came over to us in the course of the morning; but remained a very short time. During the last night a few fine shrimps were caught; the soldiers stationed at the Depot said they had frequently taken them in considerable numbers. During the day arranged the loads for the boats and horses that they might be enabled to set off early the next morning.  April 27. - Loaded the boats with as much of the salt provisions as they could safely carry and despatched them to wait at the first creek about seven or eight miles down the river until the loaded horses came and then to assist in taking their loads over the creek; intending myself to follow with the remainder of the baggage early to-morrow morning. [...]   April 29. - Proceeded on our journey down the river directing the boats to stop at the creek which terminated Mr. Evans's former journey. [53] The country through which we passed this day in every respect resembles the tracts we have already gone over. The crowns and ridges of the hills are uniformly stony and barren ending as before alternately on each side of the river; the greater proportion of good flat land lies on the south side of the river; there are however very rich and fertile tracts on this side. After riding about eight miles we ascended a considerable hill upon our right from the top of which we could see to a considerable distance; between the south-west and north north-west a very low level tract lay west of us and no hill whatever bounded the view in that quarter. Three remarkable hummocks bore respectively S.72 W. S. 51.5 W. and S. 34.5 W. within which range of bearing the country was uniformly level or rising into such low hills as not to be distinguished from the general surface. The tops of distant ranges could be discerned over low hills in the north-west whilst from north by the east to south the country was broken into hill and valley. The whole of this extensive scene was covered with eucalypti whilst on the rocky summits of the hills in the immediate neighbourhood a species of cypresses was eminently distinguished. From this extensive view I named the hill Mount Prospect [...]   At six o'clock the boats arrived safe the men having had a very fatiguing row and been obliged to clear the passage of fallen trees and other obstructions; so that we determined to give them some repose and halt here for the night.  May 1. [...] Commenced the survey of the river from this point. The flats on both sides the river were very extensive and in general good; the same timber and grass as usual; the stream was from thirty to forty yards broad on an average [...] May 2. - Our journey this day was very fatiguing the grass being nearly breast high thick and entangled. The soil is tolerably good within a mile and a half of the banks; I rode five or six miles out in hopes of finding some eminence on which to ascend but was disappointed the country continuing a dead level with extensive swamps and barren brushes. [...] '  May 3. - Proceeded down the river. We passed over a very barren desolate country perfectly level without even the slightest eminence covered with dwarf box-trees and scrubby bushes; towards the latter part of the day a few small cypresses were seen. [54] I think the other side of the river is much the same. We have hitherto met with no water except at the river and a few shallow lagoons which are evidently dry in summer. I do not know how far this level extends north and south but I cannot estimate it at less than from ten to twelve miles on each side; but this is mere conjecture since for the last three days I have been unable to see beyond a mile: I have however occasionally made excursions of five or six miles and never perceived any difference in the elevation of the country.  May 4. [...] At twelve proceeded about three quarters of a mile down the river and from a small eminence half a mile north of it an extensive tract of clear country was seen bearing N. 50 W. about two or three miles from us having a low range of hills bounding them in the direction of S. 65 W. and N. 65 E. The river wound immediately under the hill taking a westerly direction as far as I went which was about three miles; its windings were very sudden and its width and depth much the same as before.  May 5. - Proceeded down the river ascended the eminence mentioned yesterday and from the top of a cypress tree a very distant view of the whole country was obtained.  The country was in general poor with partial tracts of better ground; the hills were slaty and covered as well as the levels with small eucalypti cypresses and camarinas. [...]   May 6. - Proceeded down the river. It is impossible to fancy a worse country than the one we were now travelling over intersected by swamps and small lagoons in every direction; the soil a poor clay and covered with stunted useless timber. It was excessively fatiguing to the horses which travelled along the banks of the river as the rubus and bromus were so thickly intermingled that they could scarcely force a passage. After proceeding about eight miles a bold rocky mount terminated on the river and broke the sameness which had so long wearied us: we ascended this hill which I named Mount Amyot and from the summit had one of the most extensive views that can be imagined. On the opposite side of the river was another hill precisely similar to Mount Amyot leaving a passage between them for the river and the immense tract of level country to the eastward; this hill was named Mount Stuart. [55] Vast plains clear of timber lay on the south side of the river and which from our having travelled on a level with them it was impossible for us to distinguish before. These plains I named Hamilton's Plains and they were bounded by hills of considerable elevation to the southward; whilst the whole level country thus bounded was honoured with the designation of Princess Charlotte's Crescent.  I have reason to believe that the whole of the extensive tract named Princess Charlotte's Crescent is at times drowned by the overflowing of the river; the marks of flood were observed in every direction and the waters in the marshes and lagoons were all traced as being derived from the river. During a course of upwards of seventy miles not a single running stream emptied itself into the river on either side; and I am forced to conclude that in common seasons this whole tract is extremely badly watered and that it derives its principal if not only supply from the river within the bounding ranges of Princess Charlotte's Crescent. There are doubtless many small eminences which might afford a retreat from the inundations but those which were observed by us were too trifling and distant from each other to stand out distinct from the vast level surface which the crescent presents to the view. The soil of the country we passed over was a poor and cold clay; but there are many rich levels which could they be drained and defended from the inundations of the river would amply repay the cultivation. These flats are certainly not adapted for cattle; the grass is too swampy and the bushes swamps and lagoons are too thickly intermingled with the better portions to render it either a safe or desirable grazing country. The timber is universally bad and small; a few large misshapen gum trees on the immediate banks of the river may be considered as exceptions. If however the country itself is poor the river is rich in the most excellent fish procurable in the utmost abundance. One man in less than an hour caught eighteen large fish one of which was a curiosity from its immense size and the beauty of its colours. In shape and general form it most resembled a cod but was speckled over with brown blue and yellow spots like a leopard's skin; its gills and belly a clear white the tail and fins a dark brown. [56] It weighed entire seventy pounds and without the entrails sixty-six pounds: it is somewhat singular that in none of these fish is any thing found in the stomach except occasionally a shrimp or two [...]   May 8. - Proceeded down the river. Our general course was westerly and the country though equally level with any we had passed improved in the quality of the soil which during the greater part of today's route was a good vegetable mould the land thickly covered with small acacia and dwarf trees.  The banks of the river were I think much lower not exceeding fifteen or twenty feet high and they were rather clearer of timber than before. The camarina which used to line the banks was now seldom seen the acacia pendula seeming to take its place. We stopped for the night on a plain of good land flooded but clear of timber: large flocks of emus were feeding on it and we were fortunate enough to kill a very large one after a fine chase.  May 9. [...] The country we passed through during this day's route was extremely low consisting of extensive plains divided by lines of small trees: the banks of the river and the deep bights formed by the irregularity of its course were covered with acacia bushes and dwarf trees. The river at the spot where we stopped wound along the edge of an extensive low plain being at least six miles long and three or four broad; these I called Field's Plains after the judge of the supreme court of this territory; they are the same which we saw from the top of Mount Amyot. [...]   May 10. - The horses having strayed in the night and it being nearly noon before they were found I determined to make this a halting day.  These plains are much more extensive than I supposed yesterday and many new plants were found on them. The river rose upwards of a foot during the night and still continues to rise; a circumstance which appears very singular to me there having been no rains of any magnitude for the last five weeks and none at all for the last ten days. We are also certain that no waters fall into it or join in easterly for nearly one hundred and fifty miles. [57] This rise must therefore be occasioned by heavy rains in the mountains whence the river derives its source; but it is not the less singular that during its whole course as far as it is hitherto known it does not receive a single tributary stream. Observed the latitude  33. 16. 33. S.  May 11. - the river rose about four feet during the night and still continues to rise. Set forward on our journey down the river. About four miles and a half from this morning's stations the river began to wash the immediate edge Of the plain and so continued to do all along. My astonishment was extreme at finding the banks of the river not more than six feet from the water: it at once confirmed my supposition that the whole of this extensive country is frequently inundated; the river was here about thirty yards broad.  The soil of these extensive plains designated Field's Plains is for the most part extremely rich as indeed might be expected from the deposition of the quantities of vegetable matter that must take place in periods of flood..  May 12. - The fine weather still continues to favour us. The river rose in the course of the night upwards of a foot. It is a probable supposition that the natives warned by experience of these dangerous flats rather choose to seek a more precarious but more safe subsistence in the mountainous and rocky ridges which are occasionally to be met with. The river and lagoons abound with fish and fowl and it is scarcely reasonable to suppose that the natives would not avail themselves of such store of food if the danger of procuring it did not counterbalance the advantages they. might otherwise derive from such. abundance.  About three quarters of a mile farther westward we had to cross another small arm of the river running to the northward which although now full is I should think dry when the river is at its usual level. It is probable that this and the one which we first crossed join each other a few miles farther to the westward and then both united fall into the stream which gave them existence. We had scarcely proceeded a mile from the last branch before it became evident that it would be impossible to advance farther in the direction in which we were travelling. [58] The stream here overflowed both banks and its course was lost among marshes: its channel not being distinguishable from the surrounding waters.  Observing an eminence about half a mile from the south side we crossed over the horses and baggage at a place where the water was level with the banks and which when within its usual channel did not exceed thirty or forty feet in width its depth even now being only twelve feet.  We ascended the hill and had the mortification to perceive the termination of our research at least down this branch of the river; the whole country from the west northwest round to north was either a complete marsh or lay under water and this for a distance of twenty-five or thirty miles in those directions; to the south and south-west the country appeared more elevated but low marshy grounds lay between us and it which rendered it impossible for us to proceed thither from our present situation. I therefore determined to return back to the place where the two branches of the principal river separated and follow the south-west branch as far as it should be navigable; our fears were however stronger than our hopes lest it would end in a similar manner to the one we had already traced until it became no longer navigable for boats.  My disappointment at the interruption of our labours in this quarter was extreme and what was worse no flattering prospect appeared of our succeeding better in the examination of the south-west branch. I was however determined to see the present end of the river in all its branches before I should finally quit it in furtherance of the other objects of the expedition.  May 13. - Returned to the point whence the river separates into two branches; intending first to descend the south-west branch for some distance before the boats and baggage should move down being unwilling the horses should undergo an useless fatigue in traversing such marshy ground unless the branch should prove of sufficient magnitude to take us a considerable distance; conceiving it an object of the first importance that the horses should start fresh if I should find it necessary to quit the river at this point of the coast. [59]   May 14. [...] My present intention is to take a south-west direction for Cape Northumberland since should any river be formed from those marshes which is extremely probable and fall into the sea between Spencer's Gulf and Cape Otway this course will intersect it and no river or stream can arise from these swamps without being discovered. The body of water now running in both the principal branches is very considerable fully sufficient to have constituted a river of magnitude if it had constantly maintained such a supply of water and had not become separated into branches and lost among the immense marshes of this desolate and barren country which seems here to form a vast concavity to receive them. It is impossible to arrive at any certain opinion as to what finally becomes of these waters but I think it probable from the appearance of the country and its being nearly on a level with the sea that they are partly absorbed by the soil and the remainder lost by evaporation   June 23. [...] After going about eight miles and a quarter we suddenly came upon the banks of the river; I call it the river for it could certainly be no other than the Lachlan which we had quitted nearly five weeks before. Our astonishment was extreme since it was an incident little expected by any one. It was here extremely diminished in size but was still nearly equal in magnitude to the south-west. branch which we last quitted. The banks were about twelve or fourteen feet above the water and it was running with a tolerably brisk stream to the westward. The banks were so thickly covered with large eucalypti that we did not perceive it until we were within a very few yards of it; it appeared about thirty feet broad running over a sandy bottom. I think it extremely probable that the waters of both the main branches after losing a very considerable portion over the low grounds in the neighbourhood of Mount Cunningham and Field's Plains have again united and formed the present stream.  Our future course did not admit of any hesitation and it was resolved to go down the stream as long as there was a chance of its becoming more considerable and until our provisions should be so far expended as barely to enable us to return to Bathurst. [...] [60]   June 30. - The first two or three miles were somewhat harder travelling than the greater part of yesterday. Immense plains extended to the westward as far as the eye could reach. These plains were entirely barren being evidently In times of rain altogether under water when they doubtless form one vast lake: they extended in places from three to six miles from the margin of the stream which on its immediate borders was a wet bog full of small water holes and the surface covered with marsh plants with a few straggling dwarf box-trees. It was only on the very edge of the bank and in the bottoms of the bights that any eucalypti grew; the plains were covered with nothing but knaphalium: the soil various in some places red tenacious clay in others a dark hazel-coloured loam so rotten and full of holes that it was with difficulty the horses could travel over them. Although those plains were bounded only by the horizon not a semblance of a hill appeared in the distance; we seemed indeed to have taken a long farewell of every thing like an elevation whence the surrounding country could be observed. To the southward bounding those plains in that direction barren shrubs and dwarf box-trees with numberless holes of stagnant water too clearly proclaimed the nature of the country in that quarter. We could see through the openings of the trees on the river that plains of similar extent occupied the other side which has all along appeared to us to be (if any thing) the lower ground. We travelled in the centre of the plains our medium distance from the river being from one to two miles; and although we did not go above thirteen miles some of the horses were excessively distressed from the nature of the ground.  There was not the least appearance of natives; nor was bird or animal of any description seen during the day except a solitary native dog. Nothing can be more melancholy and irksome than travelling over wilds which nature seems to have condemned to perpetual loneliness and desolation. We seemed indeed the sole living creatures in those vast deserts.  The plains last travelled over were named Molle's Plains after the late lieutenant-governor of the territory; and those on the opposite side Baird's Plains after the general to whom he once acted as aide-de-camp and whose glory he shared. [61] The naming of places was often the only pleasure within our reach; but it was some relief from the desolation of these plains and hills to throw over them the associations of names dear to friendship or sacred to genius.  July 5 [...] Our route lay over the same unvarying plain surface as on the preceding days and after travelling about five miles we again saw the line of trees growing on the banks of the stream; and having performed about ten miles more we halted on the immediate banks of it. These were considerably lower being about six feet above the water; the current was almost imperceptible and the depth did not exceed four feet and was extremely muddy; the trees growing on the banks were neither so large nor so numerous as before and a new species of eucalyptus prevailed over the old blue gum. The north-east side was precisely of the same description of country as the south-east. A very large sheet of water or lake lay on the north-west side opposite to the place where we made the river. The horizon was clear and distinct around the whole circle the line of trees on the river alone excepted. From the marks of these trees the waters appear to rise about three feet above the level of the bank; a height more than sufficient to inundate the whole country. This stream is certainly in the summer season or in the long absence of rain nothing more than a mere chain of ponds serving as a channel to convey the waters from the eastward over this low tract. It is certain that no waters join this river from its source to this point; and passing as it does for the most part through a line of country so low as to be frequently overflowed and to an extent north and south perfectly unknown but certainly at this place exceeding forty miles it must cause the country to remain for ever uninhabitable and useless for all the purposes of civilized man.  July 7. [...] Had there been any hill or even small eminence within thirty or forty miles of me they must now have been discovered but there was not the least appearance of any such and it was with infinite regret and pain that I was forced to come to the conclusion that the interior of this vast country is a marsh and uninhabitable. How near these marshes may approach the south-western coast I know not; but I do not think that the range of high and dry land in that quarter extends back north-easterly for any great distance; it being known that the coast from Cape Bernouilli to the head of Spencer's Gulf is sandy and destitute of water. [62]   Perhaps there is no river the history of which is known that presents so remarkable a termination as the present: its course in a straight line from its source to its termination exceeds five hundred miles and including its windings it may fairly be calculated to run at least twelve hundred miles; during all which passage through such a vast extent of country it does not receive a single stream in addition to what it derives from its sources in the eastern mountains.  I think it a probable conjecture that this river is the channel by which all the waters rising in those ranges of hills to the westward of Port Jackson known by the name of the Blue Mountains and which do not fall into the sea on the east coast are conveyed to these immense inland marshes; its sinuous course causing it to overflow its banks on a much higher level than the present and in consequence forming those low wet levels which are in the very neighbourhood of the government Depot. Its length of course is in my opinion the principal cause of our finding any thing like a stream for the last one hundred miles as the immense body of water which must undoubtedly be at times collected in such a river must find a vent somewhere but being spent during so long a course without any accession the only wonder is that even those waters should cause a current at so great a distance from their source; every thing however indicates as before often observed that in dry seasons the channel of the river is empty or forms only a chain of ponds. It appears to have been a considerable length of time since the banks were over-flowed certainly not for the last year; and I think it probable they are not often so: the quantity of water must indeed be immense and of long accumulation in the upper marshes before the whole of this vast country can be under water [...]   May 20 1818. - Having received his Excellency the Governor's instructions for the conduct of the expedition intended to examine the course of the Macquarie River and every preparation having been made at the Depot in Wellington Valley for that purpose I quitted Sydney in company with Dr. Harris (late of the 102d foot) and after a pleasant journey arrived at Bathurst on the 25th. [63] Our little arrangements having been completed by the 28th we again set forward with the baggage horses and men that were to compose the expedition.  We at first kept nearly upon the track pursued by us on our return from the first expedition in August last; but on approaching Wellington Valley keeping a little more to the westward we avoided much of that steep and rugged road which we then complained of; the country being quite open the valleys and flats good the hills limestone rock. We did not meet with the slightest interruption and arrived at the Depot on the 2d of June where we found the boats etc. in perfect readiness for our immediate reception. [...]   June 6. - Proceeded down the river about four miles when the boats were finally laden. The river in Wellington Valley had been swelled by the late rains insomuch that the water below its junction with the Macquarie was quite discoloured. From the fineness of the soil the rain had made the ground very soft rendering it difficult for the horses to travel.  June 7. - Proceeded on our journey both boats and horses being very heavily laden with our stores and provisions. The river rose but little. Our day's journey lay generally over an open forest country with rich flats on either side of the river: high rocky limestone hills ended occasionally in abrupt points obliging the horses to make considerable detours. The hills were very stony and so light Was the soil upon them that the rain rendered the ground very soft. The river had many fine reaches extending in straight lines from one to three miles and of a corresponding breadth. The rapids although frequent offered no material obstruction to the boats. [...]   June 8. - The river expanded into beautiful reaches having great depth of water and from two to three hundred feet broad literally covered with water-fowl of different kinds: the richest flats bordered the river apparently more extensive on the south side. The vast body of water which this river must contain in times of flood is confined within exterior banks and its inundations are thus deprived of mischief. [64] About six miles down the river a freestone hill ended on the north side of the river: I mention this as the only stone of that description I had yet seen. The trees were of the eucalyptus (apple tree) and on the hills a few of the cypressus macrocarpa were seen: the trees would furnish large and useful timber.   Honoured Sir  My Fellings is Mutch Hurt At the Disponding News I Heard From you This morning That of Being Put off with The Passes As you have given me But Little Hopes After prommising me you Would. Sir! I hope to god you Will Not be Worse than your word; [18] For If so I Never Shall Be Happy; And In Respect To my Conduct Dureing my Absence Hope you have Not So Bad An Opinion Of me As To Think me So Base As To Treat your Kindness and Ungratitude By Behaveing Ill Or Not Comming Back To the Time you may Think proper To Allow me Sir I Prommise you Faithfully I will Not Incrouth one Hour Sir! I Do Not Wish to take Any Rash Stepts with Mr Hedges As He Is Willing To make Acknowledgement providing He As Interview with me. The Reason Things was Not Settled Before Wee parted was Wee Expected I Should have Being Able To have gone To See him with Out Any trouble And being Wholely Out of his power To Come To me makes me To Intreet So Hard For A pass. Sir! If Not Intrueding Lett me Once more Beg For A pass to parramata and If I Cannot goe Any Further I will send For him to meet me there Which Will Not Hesitate One moment In Executing the Command I Know. Wat makes me So Anchous Is the Ship Is going A Waleing And I Am Shure He will Not Stay But very Little Longer. As He would Loose the Season For It. If He Did I should mutch wish if you would send For Ann This Eveing And I will pay the Expence And happey so to do For to Supply my place wile I am gone. Sir! I hope you will Not Denigh me This Request Or I am A Lost Woman. Sir! I have maney Thing To say to him As he will goe To see My Famley which will Be Of grate Concolation To me And Satisfaction To them. For god sake Sir Take It Into Concideration And grant me my Request Though I Acknowledge It very Early To Ask Favours Sir there Seamed to Be a Dought Ariseing Concerning My Being with Child But I am Not Desceved. It would Be well If I was; Nor Did I Entend To Name; But When you put the question To me I Could Not Denigh the Truth.  I hope Sir you will grant This Request To-morrow Or Tuesday As then I should Be Able To Return By The Latter part Of the week And Help with the work.  Sydney New South Wales  August 20th 1820.  My dear & esteemed Mrs. Stokes  My Mother received your affectionate letter dated April 3rd 1820 last week & is happy to find that notwithstanding you complain of the indolence attending old age you are enabled to write to & think of her and hers for my part I find it very difficult to fancy you what you represent yourself as "very old & infirm." I can only remember you as the kind indulgent Mrs. Stokes endeavouring to satisfy my childish curiosity by accompanying me into various toy shops on my first arrival in England; & presenting me with the largest doll I had ever seen What a treasure I thought I was possessed of. Twenty years have rolled away since those events happened & made them "the tale of other times." I am very happy to say we have received the box of bonnets etc safe : it was packed in a case of books directed to the Missionaries in New Zealand which place it would have gone to had not the Rev. Mr. Hill received intelligence that he had some letters in the case & wished it to be opened when our box was discovered. The parcel which you mention to have sent I fear we shall never receive for the young man whose care it was intrusted to forwarded it in his box by the Saracen which ship sailed from Sydney before his arrival. Mr. Hill delivered the letter & boxes which you sent by him for which we return you many thanks. I think you would be surprised to see my dear brother in England it was a great trial to my Mother to part with him but it was obliged to be so or he never would have received an education to have enabled him to support the character of a gentleman. We conceived ourselves highly favoured in being permitted to receive accounts of him within 10 months after his departure. My Mother is surprised to find he has had measles as she thought he had that disorder when he was with her on board the Buffalo. I am sure you will feel much sorrow on Mr. Thos Hassall's account to hear of the death of his Father he died after a very short illness but that was of no moment with him for I comprehended he was many years prepared for his great change whenever it should please his Master to call him. [76] A Bible society has been established lately at Parramatta & a female committee is also formed to act in conjunction with it. I am proud to say the ladies prosper the best. We collect about £5 monthly. The people evince a greater readiness to pay free subscriptions; they do not appear anxious to possess a Bible; our greatest expectations are from the rising generation. We have I am happy to say a good Sunday School about 110 children attend constantly. The little black children make rapid improvement. The girls can read fluently & write & sew very neatly. You have of course heard before that though my Father went out in the Dromedary to New Zealand he is not returned yet although he has been absent six months : we are now daily expecting him. Mr. Cartwright is anxiously awaiting the arrival of Mrs. C from England. Mr. Youl was very unwell the last time we heard front him; his health has been very indifferent for many months past he is extremely subject to an inflammation on the lungs. We are all just recovering from a severe cold which is very prevalent throughout the Colony. My Mother was exceedingly ill for some days & also Elizabeth; they unite with me in kindest regards to Mr. & Mrs. Hughes & affectionate love to yourself & believe me  Your very affectionate  ANNE Marsden  June 20th Landed at Portsmouth 8 o'clock in the morning. Took refreshment at the inn. Set of at 9 o'clock in the coach for London.  Arrived ther at 7 in the afternoon at the Belle Savage inn Ludgate Hill. Took lodgings their. Wrote to Capt. Watson my friend to procure me lodgings but through an omission in my letter of my address he could not find me out therefore was obliged to stay their for 3 nights not liking to go to a strange place. Next morning after i arrived i took hackney coach and went to the office of Bell & Wilkinson having business there. After my arrival the first person i saw to my great astonishment was Mr. Jones who was as much amazed as i was to see me in London. However sat down and had a little talk about our Country and in came Mr. Underwood and of course another wonder was pronounced how i came their. i had then delivered my papers to Mr. Jones who was kind enough to say he would do anything he could and i thought it would be better had he understood the Treasury better than i where i was going after [...] if i had not found him their. Mr. Underwood walked back with me to my lodgings and took me and my daughters out a little to see the Town. Treated us to ice-cream and returned with us again and left us immediately. [24] I was then very anxious about Capt. Watson not comeing not knowing that I had forgot to give him my address. However it so happened that I had a letter from Mr. Atkinson to his father which I mentioned to some person who told him and the old Gentleman came immediately and a finer one and a better man their cannot be. He was very much affected when he read the letter and I believe it was very Favourable to me and Daughters as he immediately asked us to his House and have kept on friendship ever since. He mentioned to Capt. Watson where we was and on the Sunday morning being the third day after our arrival at the Inn he and his Two Daughters and Capt. Watson came to take us away as he has got lodgings for me next door to himself. During the time they was comeing to meet me (I had taken Coach and drove off for his House when Mrs. Watson kindly asked us in dinner was prepared for us. In about a half an hour in came Capt. Watson and very glad he was to see us. After we had dined he called a Coach and we went to the Inn settled my account and took my baggage to my Lodging it being pretty generally known by our Sydney friends and those who had visited Sydney as Capt. of ships and otherwise of our arrival in London and we had a great deal of visitors. I then wrote to my cousin John Hope in Manchester prior to our going down to the Country but did not receive an answer in Course owing to his having been removed about a mile and a half out of town but hearing their was a letter for him in the Post office he immediately answered it by a very kind and affectionate letter and an invitation to stay at his house.   July 17 During our stay in London we visited the two Theatres where we saw the Provoked Husband after... Covent Gardens the Obitiquary. after piece the Millar and his men. We did not visit many of the Public buildings owing to our being so ill. We had a medical Gentleman Dr. White attending us upward of a fortnight who paid great attention to us. we arrived on the 20th June and left the 17th of July for the country making our stay their 27 days and the day before our departure for the country I was bled and blistered and both me and Eliza so ill...Celia was not much better  July 18 to August 6th. We arrived in Manchester the day following after 186 miles without stopping except to change horses. When we came to the Mosely Arms we found my two cousins Mr. Hargreaves Surgeon and Druggist and Mr. John Hope waiting with a hackney coach to take us and Baggage to our Cousin Hope's a very delightful place a little way in the Country where a Surgeon was sent for Dr. Barton a friend of my cousin Haigreaves who took a great interest in recovering us as soon as possible. [25] he paid all attention was possible we began to recover fast and Mr. Hargreaves very often came to take us out walking. He sent us jellys preserves and fruit and everything he could think of for comfort. As soon as we could walk about which was about 11 days we had several invitations the first to Dr. Barton's one of the first Surgeons in Manchester. Mrs B. a very ladylike woman and one of the most respectable about that Country was very glad to see us and treated us very kindly wishing us to renew our visit as often as we could. We took tea with my half cousin Mr. Aspinall. Dined and tead next day with Mr. and Mrs. Hargreaves they made me promise on my return to Manchester that we should stop at their House. We staid at Manchester from the 8th of July to the 6th of August being 19 days.  August 6th We took the coach for Blackburn on the 6th where we arrived about 3 o'clock in the afternoon. Mr. John Hope accompany us. It is impossible to describe the sensations I felt when comeing to the top of Derwen Street my native home and amongst my relatives and on entering my once Grandmother's House where I had been brought up and to find it nearly the same as when I left nearly 29 years ago all the same furniture and most of them standing in the same place as when I left but not one person I knew or knew me [...] but was fully requited by my Cousin Miss Hope who [...] met us at the door with all the affection and love of a sister. Their being beds prepared for us we became a part of the family as we had already done at her brother's in Manchester. My arrival became known to all the old inhabitants of Blackburn who had known me in my Childhood the door hardly ever closed with people comeing out of curiosity or respect... I had often expressed a wish to see my Children confirmed in the old Church at Blackburn. We arrived there on the Saturday evening and the Bishop on the Monday following (who only comes every three years). My cousin John Hope procured certificates from the Curate of St. John's and they was admitted and was confirmed with about 300 more males and females in St. John's Church the old church being shut up.  August 8th. During the time we were at Blackburn we was divided betwixt my father's and Mother's relations. We had a general invitation in all their houses especially Mr. William Haydock son of my Uncle William who is in his 74th year and Mr. Robert Brown son of my Aunt Hindle Brown who is in her 76th year. I believe they thought they could not show me enough of attention but no place was so congenial to my mind as Miss Hope's the most affectionate young woman I ever met with... [26] we met Mr. and Mrs. Little an independent Gentlemen who is one of the trustees to my Aunt Hope's estate.. John Hope and he to settle our little business relation to the Houses...Mr. David Hope came...to Blackburn accord to his promise (27th August).. Was very proud to see each other and I found him to be one of the most affectionate men I ever met with quite a man of business too.  Sept. 5th. Took tea at Mr. Wraith's next day and whent to see the first stone laid of the old church at Blackburn. It is somewhat singular that nearly 30 years ago before that Mr. David Hope and myself was at the Sept laying of the first stone in St. John's Church.  Sept. 7th left for Preston...arrived at Preston in an hour and half...in a post chaise.  15th Sept....went to see Mr. Horrocks Mill and one of the proprietors showed us all through it a most grand sight but the heat from the steam engine being too oppressive for me gave me a complete surfeit...to Blackburn...where I was taken very ill...at my Cousin's Mr. Robert Brown...My Aunt Hindle Brown an old women in her 76th year would insist on sitting up with me part of the night...to see concern and attention was admd...  From Liverpool went to Greenock Glasgow by the Robert Bruce Steam boat Left Liverpool Tuesday arriving one o'clock Friday.  October 212223...Rained very hard...wet feet...a violent cold.  Oct 24 Whent to the Museum passed through the Cottage to the High Church a very grand Cathedral built by the Roman Catholics 700 years ago. a very interesting sight it was. Whent to tea at Mr. Fleming Mr. Hope's partner. Had a little dance among the young people.  Oct 25th Wednesday whent to the see the manufactorys of making cotton balls spinning machines. We took a walk around the Clyde [...] passed the Roman Catholic Chaple a very grand building the Gaol a very spaciuous [sic] building. Ill for 11 days.. the doctor's bill being Five Pounds three shillings and sixpence.. very exhorbitant demand I was bled with leeches at my temple.. [27]   November 14th went to see a singeing iron that the muslin runs over and touching never damages the cloth altho red hot. saw company at Mr Hopes an illumination and bonfire took place on account of the bill being thrown out against the Queen.  15 November Celia sat for her picture Captain Wood called and took us to see the Lunatic Asylum took a walk in Trongate and Argyle Street to see the splendid illumination.  Nov 15 this day I sat for my picture my two daughters went trades hall [...] a lecture on Education of Roman Catholic children which the Protestant clergy has undertook providing they will allow the Bible to be read.  Nov 17 Went this day to Paisley Manufacturing town about 6 miles from Glasgow. a Gentleman of great respectability a fancy gauze merchant of Paisley waiting our arrival at the inn.. we availed ourselves of their kind invitation to dinner after taking a glass of wine and a little Bride Cake (they being lately married) the Gentleman took us to see the different manufactorys and what curiousitys their was but their was very little except the sounding Ile attached to the old Abbey where we saw Queen Mary the mother of Robert King of Scotland..we then returned and dined from a very sumptuous dinner provided by our friendly host.. so ended this day Friday.  Saturday 18th Staid at home all day. Whent to Mrs [?] to tea a party of about 20 Ladies and Gentlemen. Their the young people danced several country and Scottish reels. Left at 1/4 past 11 o'clock. So ends this day...very pleasant society.  Nov. Staid at home... Had several visitors Eliza sat the 3rd time to the painter...whent in the evening to Mr Graham...Mr & Mrs Fleming an American Merchant both of which played the piano very well... They had several dances Scotch reels Shetspeys etc. The Company broke up at 11 o'clock. We staid to supper and left at 12 o'clock in a Noddy...So ends this day.  Nov 21st Staid at home. Visitors... Eliza and Celia sat to the painter. Whent to tea at Mr Stuarts... Miss Cochrane played at the piano accompanied by Mr Stuart with the double flagelot. Had several dances... So ends this day. [28]   Nov 22nd. This morning breakfasted with Mr Walter Wood. Met there Dr & Mrs Chalmers Mr Irvin Mr Pratt a Lieut. in the Army... and another young gentleman. Had a little conversation about indifferent matters... After took a walk to the observatory. Saw their Camera Obscura and the magnifying glass magnified 1400 times... several visitors... Mr Scott Mr Cochrane and sister came to take C & E out walking. We whent to see the Panorama of the Battle of Waterloo...  Thursd. 23rd I sat this day for the painter... Eliza and Celia went to tea to Mrs Chartres had a great party and kept up dancing till 3 o'clock in the morning.  Nov 24th I sat to the painter... Capt. Wood called took out the young ladies.  Nov. 25th Celia myself... whent to Mr John Flemings to tea... Cards was introduced played a short time as Dancing seemed the most wished for. After the Dancing was over a very splendid supper was sat down to where several toasts were given... healths named my family in N.S.Wales was drank. Broke up at 11.  Mon 27th Took a coach and whent to Hamilton... 10 miles from Glasgow... Was shown the Duke of Hamilton's Place where we saw a most grand collection of paintings by Reubens and others amongst them was Daniel in the Lions Den one of the most striking pieces I ever saw. There was also King George the Third and Queen Charlotte on each side of the throne which we ascended and sat down on. There was also a painting of Bonaparte which was done from the original. It was said to be a great likeness.  Nov 29 Whent to see Mrs Grants to a ball in the evening there being a great spirit for dancing 40 couples. I took a few hands of whist... did not break up till 3... Expect company tonight to bid us farewell. Celia sat the last time to finish her likeness.  Nov. 30th Left Glasgow at 11 o'clock for Edinburgh in the Coach. Changed horses at a small village called Cumbernaud. went as far as Gieryama in the Coach where a boat was in readiness to put us on board the Steamboat tug. Arrived at Newhaven about 6 o'clock in the evening. Took coach from there to Edinburgh being three miles. [29] Arrived at Edinburgh half after 7 o'clock Expences being Two pounds Eighteen shillings and sixpence.  Fri. Dec 1st Took a walk around the town. Saw the castle gaol... College and several buildings... At night whent to the theatre and saw performed the Tragedy of Douglas after piece the Vampire...  Dec 2 Mr Hope took us out walking... Each took a basin of hare soup for which the charge 10d a basin... Called on Mrs Robinson... found her very pleasant woman and her two daughters. Had a little conversation concerning the schools in Edinburgh. She recommended me to a Miss Duncan. Whent to the Pantheon saw there great horsemanship by Mr Clarke and others. Also the play the Antiquary after the piece The way To Win A Husband...  Monday 4th Mrs Robinson and her daughter called on us to take me to Miss Duncan the Boarding School Governess who lives in Picardy Place. A most delightful and airy situation. I agreed with her for one year only on account of Eliza's bad health but to continue longer if her health improves well at Fifty Two Pounds Ten Shillings per annum for board and lodgings tuition in different branches about twenty Pounds more for each young lady...  Dec 5th Came home and was busy cutting out the of flannels... and getting everything ready for them to go to school tomorrow.  Dec 7th Called at Miss Duncan's to see how my daughter was. Found them rather poorly owing to sleeping in a strange bed and being up sooner than usual However they was taking a lesson in drawing being their first attempt  We sat down to dinner at half past four... The coach came to the door for us... we left the two young people at the school.  Fri 8th... took leave of my daughters... Arrived at Preston the next at half past 7 o'clock being the 9th.  Monday 11th visited the houses in Salford.  Dec 12th Left Blackburn at 2 o'clock. Arrived there at 1/2 before 2. Arrived Manchester half past 5 o'clock in company with Mr Thomas Brown my cousin. [30]   Came to Mr Hargreaves another cousin where i promised to stay a month... Dreamt my sister was dead.  Dec 15th Friday Mr Hargreaves and I called on Mr & Mrs Marsden. She also took me to a manufacturing warehouse Mr Heathcote's where i bought a piece of calico measuring 41 yards at 1 / -...  Dec 17th. Sunday 17th Staid at home all day. Had company to tea and supper; Mr & Mrs Browns Uncle to Mr Hargreaves... Broke up at 10 o'c.  Dec 18th... Recd a letter from Mr Jones with two enclosed.. and one from Mr Watson's sister in Sydney. Whent to the play and saw Othello performed after piece 3 Weeks after Marriage.  Dec 19th. Mr & Mrs Hargreaves and myself went to the man who is doing my carriage to desire him to have it done this week...  22nd Dec. Friday 22nd. Dec set out for Bury. Mr Hargreaves has taken me in his Gig to a place called Openshawfolie where I had found my old nurse and her husband who was both so gratified they hardly knew how to contain themselves with joy the old lady said she was sure she could not have rested in her grave had she not seen me. They said they was both in her eighty first year of their age and both looked as if they should live 20 years longer. We went to Bury about a mile further where we put up at the Grey Mare an inn about 20 yards from where my mother lived in the wild ( circus circular drive) but all those houses had pulled down to make improvements to the Church. Mr Hargreaves and I took a walk around the town. There was at time a show of wild Beast to be seen we whent in and was highly gratified at the sagacity of the elephant. We dined at the Inn... Mr Hargreaves and I whent to the old Church at Bury to procure the certificate of my age. The clerk and I looked through the Register Book of parchment and I discerned it first. I was born in the year of our Lord 1777 May 12 and christened 29th  Dec 23rd. Mrs Hargreaves and I whent to Market it being so near Christmas.  A very throng Market it was so much so that we lost each other. Called to see if the carriage was finished. [31]   Monday 25th Being Christmas day dined at home. Had no company. Mr & Mrs Hargreaves and I took a walk. Came home had tea and read a few passages in the Scriptures.  Wed 27th. Whent to see if my carriage was finished being Christmas the workmen were away.  Thurs 28th. Whent to see my Nephew Thomas Foster name of the place is Albion Street No. 12 Salford. He had a little son home since last I saw him about 10 weeks old and a very fine child he was.  Dec 29th Recd. letter... from my daughters. Whent to see if the carriage was packed up. Said it should be finished tomorrow. Staid at home all day after being ill of a cold.  Sun 31st. Continued to be very poorly. Mr Buchanan brought me news of the ship Malabar having arrived from New South Wales.  Sydney New South Wales October 12 1821.  I send you these few lines hoping they will find you and the children in good health as they leave me at present thank God for it. We arrived here on the 18th of May all in good health (after being at sea for 5 months.) I was taken off the stores by a Mr. Panton a native of Scotland and Employed by him as a labourer; but not agreeing with me he was so kind as to transfer me to a Captain Irvin and I am to be with him as a house-servant and I am going to remove about 40 miles up the country.  If you think of coming here there shall be nothing wanting on my part to bring you as I have every encouragement from several Gentlemen that can enable me to do so as your presence here will free me from bondage; as any man's wife that comes out here as a free settler can take her husband from Government employment or being a servant to any man. Captain Irvin has promised to do everything for us to make us comfortable. By our friends applying to the Secretary of State at London you could obtain for us 300 or 400 acres of land. It is Andrew Dawson's wish that his wife would come here also and we will endeavour to get you out both together; but if you do not think of coming I hope that you and the rest of my friends will do all they can to obtain a mitigation of my sentence as my mind never can rest till I be with you and the rest of my family.  Sir Thomas Brisbane arrived here two days ago; he is to be our new Governor and the Governor can pardon any man he thinks proper; a great many have obtained their liberty since we arrived here; Captain Irvin Mr. Wyeems Commissary-General and other Gentlemen have promised to befriend us; and the whole of our party is much respected here by the most respectable people in this country and if you will come out a steady man and woman can do well as they are very rare articles to be found here.  Andrew Dawson James Cleland John M'Millan and Allan Murchie are kept in Government employment on account of their being blacksmiths who are very valuable in this part of the world; W. Clarkson and John Anderson is with Mr. Lord a respectable Gentleman who much esteems them; Alex. Johnson is principal servant to the Commissary-General; Thomas M'Farlane and Thomas Pink are with the Barrack Master; James Wright is shopman to a Dr. Phillips; Benjamin Moir John Barr and David Thomson is with Sir John Jameson; Andrew White bookbinder; and Alex. Hart cabinet-maker are in Paramatta with Dr. Douglas; Wm. Smith is also at Paramatta with Mr. Marsden; Robt. Gray and Alex. Lattimer is in Van Diemans Land with Mr. Mulgrave.  This is a fine country and will grow any thing that will grow in any other country and in general have three crops a year. Loaf bread 3d. per lb. butter 2s. per lb. beef and mutton 10d. eggs 5s. a dozen tea 2s. 6d. per lb. sugar 6d. potatoes 10s. per cwt. A free labourer gets from 25s. to 30s. a-week and a tradesman who had a trade to suit this part of the country can make it a great deal better. I see Gilbert M'Leod (late printer of the "Spirit of the Union") often he is very well and is acting as a schoolmaster. The letter concludes with compliments to a numbcr of friends and acquaintances and he requests to be remembered to his shopmates.  THOMAS M'CULLOCH.  Mrs Campbell was very much frightened and ill for three weeks afterwords but fortunately for me I had not the sense to be frightened. Indeed Mrs Campbell was so much frightened that she told me she had miscarried her twintyeth child but gude forgie [god forgive] me I think she hardly sticks to the truth in family concerns she makes them all very young and for Mrs McLeod who has three children and is just about to have the fourth she is only twenty one or two and the young ladies three straping queens are from eighteen to fifteen but the youngest may pass for eighteen and the oldest for twinty six. Well we lost sight of St Jago and then we were becalmed for weeks together and but for harpooning sharks and shooting whales I dont know what the gentlemen would have done with themselves and the ladies generally were disputing which of their lords or brothers or lords to be (for there were some matches made up on the way) that had the merit of sending the poor shooten fishes to their long homes - And then but this is rather a serious story a young man of the name of Nicholson a servant of Mrs Campbell went to sleep in the jolly boat and was struck by the sun. [151] He died on the ninth day afterwards and was buried on the day after his death. I never never will forget the sound of the deep and hollow plunge when the body was consined [sic] to its fathomless bed of rest. It was a calm day and every wave was as still as death till the mornin after his funeral when all at once there was a breeze got up and in twelve hours we were a hundred miles from poor Nicholson.  "No home no kiss no niver never  Sound shall his sleep be forever and ever"  After leaving sight of St Jago and that was on the 17 of July we never saw land again till the 16th October when we arrived at King George's Sound the coast of New Holland. . . I never in my life suffered as much cold as I did for a fortnight before we reached the Cape till within a few days sail of Van Diemens. There we arrived all in good health upon the 28th Octr I did not get a house till the 31st but I got a very good one then and very far superior to any I expected. I see the hills out of my windows and I see beautiful little cottages with there fruteful gardens and hedges of roses and I see a very neat church and stipple and I can see a signal post where they hoist a large flag when ever they see a ship coming in at the foot of the river and this is just what I have been looking at. Brauchild has been away at Sydney and I am expecting him home every day. I have never heard from him since he left this but by chance their was a vessel driven in here that was bound from Sydney to the Cape and brought word of the Grace - the ship George went in - being arrived at Sydney and that all passengers were well - 'Now I shall discribe this country but I cannot do I have never been farther out of the town than seven miles but what I have seen is most beautiful. However it is a very different still [style] of beauty from Jeffrey's Van Diemens Land - all that I have seen is more grand than beautiful. The river Derwent is a broad and deep river abounding with fish of many kinds thickly wooded on both sides excepting here and there a patch of cultivated land with fine thriving crops. The sail up the river from this to Restdown [Risdon] a distance of five miles is very fine quite like the scenery in our highlands of Scotland. Mrs Campbell has taken Restdown for a few months. George thought of taking part of the house but I did not like that. Mrs Campbell does best to visit she will give you a highland welcome when you go to see her but I should not like to be door neighbours. I have been there spending my christmass. . Every thing is dear beyond all calculation excepting mutton bread and tea. . . meat is the same as in England the bread is as good and rather cheeper good black teas from 4 / to 5 / a pound green from 5 / to 6 / 6 butter from 5 / to 7 / 6 per lb - Oh a kingdom per a dozen eggs from 2 / to 3 / a Dozn. I bought a pair of young ducks the other day the coast 6 / and I paid for eight little chickens that had not left there Mother 12 / the potatoes were for a long time 4d a lb but I can buy them now for three halfpennys. [152] Every kind of kitchen goods are modarite in prise if you buy a quantity together. There is an Indian ship here at present and I have bought a bag at 7d per lb theirs a nice pickle. ... O I wish I had brought a great many things here that I have not. I have written a list of things which I really would require if Willie could find it convenient to send them - The society here is abominable. Mr Lord a man worth half a million money is married to a convict woman. The Leut Governor Mr Sorell is married but he left his own wife in England and brought another mans wife with him in her stead. Mrs Lord sent her daughter Miss Lord and her sister Mrs Simpson to call upon me when I came here but I have never returned the call yet nor shall I although wile Governor McWharie [Macquarie] and his lady were here paying there last visit Mrs Lord was Mrs McWharies most intimate friend and I have been advised to visit her but they say "evil communication corrupts good manners" so I shall rather be without the kindnesses that Mrs Lord has in her power to show me than visit her. The Colonel surgeon and his lady are a very pleasant pair she was the only daughter of Coin Davies late Leut Governor of this place and Dr Scot [Scott] is a Scotch man. I find myself at home when I go to see them and Dr Scot is always ready to give his advice when it is asked.  There are a great many settlers come out here this season all of them the grandest people ever I saw they are surely come to spend and not to make money as for their wives and daughters they are so much of fine things that they cannot put on there own clothes they must all have maids to do that for them and there papas are all Majors Colonels and for Captains they are like to knock one another down that is never hard if you may find them clarks to some of the great store keepers here. Major Bell the commander in chief and his wife called upon me. Mrs Bell is a good sort of person but I hate the Major. In short we are all come here to make money and money we will have by hook or by crook so to talk of friendship would be a sad prostitution of the word trust no one but for your own interest appear to trust every one. I shall sertainly here from Scotlan by some of these ship arrived here yesterday morning on one day since I came here there were four large ships anchored here from London. The horses here are dreadfully expensive any thing good will coast £80 or £100 a dollar here is thought no more of than a penny in Scotland this to me is incomprehensible but even so it is. [...]   I believe we shall have very few settlers from England after this I heard the other day that nobody would get more than 200 acres let their property be ever so great. [153] This may not be true but we shall soon hear from Sydney &c &c I meant to have written to Bettie and Jane Mitchell but I find I shant have time you must let them try to read this. My dear Margaret be assured that I am very happy and do not regrate coming here. ...  London feby 14th 1821. From 22 Suffolk street Commercial Road London  My Dear Cousin  You will excuse me not answering your letter of the 2nd feby as I have been so taken up with business their has been a ship calld the Tuscan arrivd from Sydney lately which I got letter by from my family and which I had a difficulty in finding them out as the Come in a private box so that it took me nearly Three days before I could get them you may think my anxiety. however I got very pleasant news they were all very well and happy and has they say they happiness whould be Complete if I near them I have on this day been on board the Brixton laying in the London Docks with a friend of mine to agree about my passage out but the Captain was not on board therefore I have not yet agreed but I shall tomorrow as the accomadation seems very good. she is expected to sail in a month from this date which you see I Shall not have much time to spare. I wrote my daughters on the 10th so I expect an answer by friday next - they had a wish to stay another three months but that they will not be able. but they shall stop their till I go which giving them time to come up to London will be three weeks or a month more as perhaps the ship may not sail by a week so soon as expected but they was to sail the 28th this month. I will thank you to purchase me about 200 yards of different pattern plaids from Kilmarnock 50 yards of each pattern. let them be good and as Cheap as you can that I know I have no occasion to warn you of and let their be attached to each pattern the Clan they are of you will know how to send them to me better than I can tell you direct for me at Mr Jones 53 old broad street and Draw for the amount on him - I should like you when my daughters are Comeing of for London if you had any Business in Eding to see them of in the best smack their and has comfottable as possible but I should not wish you to go over on purpose / as Mr Nash I daresay will be kind enough on your account to do that you may let Capt Wood know of this Conveyance. perhaps he might avail himself of it. Cabin passenger 80 guineas Steerage 40 ditto and Mr Scott he wished me to say what may be good to send out their. I really cannot tell him now as the place is so glutted with goods I shall not take out myself anything like what I intended / they asked me 30 pounds to take out the Carriage I have not yet agreed with them to do so has I think it too much Your letter of advice came too late about the Houses as I sold them for £300 when I left Manchester I desired John to write you which I suppose he did / I am now so busy in making my purchases and London is so large a place it takes me nearly all day to walk from one place to another - I was very proud to hear your account of my daughters being so very well in health. I can assure you it added to my recovery I am extremely obbliged to you for the attention you have paid to them on every occasion and the Interest you have taken in procuring me letters of introduction to the Commissarys brothers but I have not yet read them Mr Thomas Brishan is expected in London every day I should like if you could procure me amongst your friends a letter or two of introduction to him. I understand he does not expect to sail from Greenock as the owners of the ship he wished to go in and he disagreed. You was kind enough to say you whould send me a few apples for which I was much obbliged but I was obliged to leave for London - you may tell Mr Scott that Irish Linins hucaback lining silk Books of different kinds Morsellas super fine broad Cloth & black nails of different sorts and Steel Cutting and (shoes womens) and sundry other articles which I cannot enumerate these are such as I should take out but it is intirely a risk now as their is such an abundance gone out their. their has been a very fine track of Land lately discovd by Mr Throsby the person you may recolect that found the last Track out some hundreds of Thousands acres without a tree and very rich land / it is supposed it will be fine Country I cannot be as explanitory as I whould wish now Has I have a friend waiting to go out with me now but I hope you will course you have an opportunity of letting my daughters know of any part of this letter you may think is nessery - give my respects to all Inquireing friends I am afraid you will hardly make this out but I know you will excuse my Errors I hope Mary is well [42]   I am my dear Cousin yours affectionately  M. Reibey.  Hobart Town Van Diemens Land May 6th1821.  Dear Cousin  I beg to acknowledge the Receipt of a Letter from you to my Mother per Skelton and was very happy to hear you where well.  I hope we shall not be such strangers as we have been for so many years. The manner in which my Mother always mentioned with you and your Brothers and Sister I was always Lead to Respect you. I sincerely hope this will find you well. My Brother Thomas to whom I sent your letter promised to write to you. He is the Eldest and Twenty Five old to Day. He is married and one Little Girl as I suppose Mother has informed you of. I have been Married these Five Years but have no Family. My Brother George who was in the Bank has now left it in Consequence of it nearly failing and they could not keep up such an Establishment. The Cashier had lent all the money out long before my Brother joined but was not found out till lately. He had lent £12000 to a set of Rascals who Refused to pay it back to him again knowing He could not make a noise about it so in fact the Bank had Existed for nearly 3 years Entirely upon the Public Confidence but I will give you a part of his own letter to me on the Subject which I enclose The WESTMORELAND arrived here yesterday I Received the Gazettes you were kind enough to send me together with your Letter of Recommendation in favour of Captain Potton. I enclose you some of our Hobart Gazettes for your Perusal / last week Ten Unhappy Men Suffered the Sentence of the Law which you will see by the Gazette. The most awfull Sight that was ever Witnessed on this Island. There Never was above 5 people Executed here since the Colony was Established.  You wish to know if there is not something suitable in the way of Produce to send to you. The only Produce New South Wales Exports is Wool which goes to London about two Ships Cargoes a year. We export very Little Wool from this Island it being very Coarse at Present altho People are now paying more attention to it than they Did. Wheat we export to Sydney about 50 or 60 Thousand Bushels every year with a Large Quantity of Potatoes. You wish to know the State of Religion in these Colonies. [45] You must know that before the Administration of Govr. McQuarie there was so little attention paid to these Colonies that we hardly ever had a Clergyman in Sydney but There is now at Present 4 or 5 in Sydney one Here that Came out when this Island was first Colonised and one at Port Dalrymple who has been there about a year but both of these Latter Gentlemen I cannot speak of in Flattering Termes. Mr Knopwood who is here has been Regularly brought up to the Church of England but having Run thro a fortune at Home was fain to Accept a Situation out here to Accompany our first Govr. Collins. He is a Very Profane Man and had been what is Commonly Called a Fox Hunting Parson. The other Gentleman Formally was a Missionary out here but went Home and got ordained. I cannot speak anything in favour of his Abilities or Oratory. There is now a Number of Gentlemen of the Vessylian Persuasion in Sydney who have Erected Chapels and I believe have been a Great Acquisition there in Reward to forwarding the Cause of Morality.  You will be pleased to excuse the Shortness of this letter as I have only been in from Port Dalrymple two days a Distance of 126 miles by land to fetch my two Youngest Sisters to go to Schools. I am still very Tired and then the vessell sails at Daylight in the Morning. Namely Regalia Captn Dixon. I have not wrote to my Mother alas I suppose ere this they have left Your Shores for Australia since June. my Wife and two little Sisters Desire their Best Respects to you Hoping you will not fail writing me by every opertunity as I shall not fail to do so.  Remain Dear Cousin Yours Very Truly  James H. Reibey.  New South Wales Sydney May 29th 1821.  My Dear Sir  It is the request of a very Dear Mother and sincere wish of my affectionate Sisters that I should address you but beg firstly to introduce myself as George the youngest Son of your Cousin Mrs M Reibey and as such put forth a claim (Tho but slight) to your friendship - but do not suppose this arises merely from a submission to the will of a Parent or an acquiescence to the wishes of my Sisters No Sir - receive it as a tribute of gratitude offered by the loving Son of Her to whom you showed so much kindness and attention - Nothing be assured calls forth sooner as kindness shown to Her the unfeigned sentiments of esteem or grateful feeling from the breast of any of the offspring of a Mother - whose long anxious and great exertion for the improvement and future happiness was scarcely ever surpassed. [48]   In speaking of those we love an enthusiasm often times carries us far beyond what the cool observing eye thinks due; but these believe me are the genuine sentiments of a Heart impressed with a deep sence of gratitude to Him whose great mercy and kindness bestowed so sure a blessing in the Land of Depravity.  Once again permit me to return not only my sincere thanks but those of all my Brothers and Sisters to you your dr. Brother and Sister and all your kind hearted friends for the very great kindness and unremitting attention bestowed upon Person so Dear to us all.  It is the intention of my Brothers Thos. & James to write to you all it is out of their power to take advantage of this conveyance both being residents of Van Diemens Land one of Launceston the other of Hobart Town on opposite sides of the Island there not being any regular Mail from either of these places they forward all letters for Europe through me which probably they may do before this Vessel sails.  A letter from my Sister Celia Date 26th Octob. at Glasgow when on a Visit to you came to hand on the 26th Inst. She says it was our Mother's purpose to leave England in about three Months from that Date - now therefore we are anxiously and hourly expecting Her.  I forwarded a Paquet about 5 mos. since enclosed in one from a Mr Hollstonecraft a resident here to a Mr Berry a passenger by the Cockburn but being simply Directed "Mrs Reibey". I am apprehensive it did not reach Her as it is most probable He did not know what part of England She was in or how to dispose of it. if so In the event of such being the case I beg you will have the goodness to learn what became of it A letter left at Loyds will find the Gentleman.  I would have given you a description of our Country its manner customs &c (which I presume might have been somewhat interesting) had not my Mother & Sisters got the start of me. one or two circumstances only worth mentioning have transpired since their departure among which the one of greatest importance is Distillation permission for which has been recently granted by the British Governt to the Colonies. [49]   A new Colony has lately been Planted at a place named Port McQuarie about two hours. to the Northwards of Port Jackson Head Quarter its foundation has for its object the cultivation of the sugar cane being much warmer than here / the highest hopes are entertained of its success / if such are realised very great advantages by its means will accrue to the Country - an important Article for Exportation will be afforded which is much wanted it will also detain in circulation a great portion the Colonial Capital which is annually sent out for foreign produce  Mr Commissioner Biggs sailed for England about three Mos. Past finished his Enquiry from the result of which Great Changes are expected Public opinion differ widely as to their consequent tendency whether to the advantage or disadvantage of the Country- one party draw their conclusion from his having from the time of his arrival attached himself to a certain Party existing here whose sole object is their own aggrandisement with the depression of those who have once been Prisoners without any reason to their real Interests of the Colonies.  But cool reflection will show such can never happen that class of People not only the most numerous but the most opulent- neverless if an attempt of such a nature should be made it is not impossible that a second Washington might rise up among us but by the bye as we are not yet independent perhaps such an expectation may be considered too much of Treason which we read of here is often punished with either an Axe or an Halter and speaking sincerely I should not much relish the performance of such an operation on my own Neck / But the English themselves I find by your News Papers take great liberties with their Rulers without molestation. and likely an unconscious or ignorant expression of an Australian Savage might be looked over for once / [50]   I have frequently when here heard my Mother speak of Relations named Hargreaves but forbears mentioning them in any of Her Letters since her arrival in England.  I am quite at loss what to attribute it to whether to forgetfulness on her part or unkindness on theirs I hope there's no exception.  I shall feel great Interest in forming a correspondence with both you & Mr Jn. & Willm. Hope should have written to them by this Vessel but I believe she does not touch any part of England  If the Edinbourg Review could be sent out with convenience to yourself I should consider it as a great favouor if you could transmit it regularly.   Conclude with being My Dear Sir with great esteem  Yours Geo. Reibey.  Mon. Jan 1st 1821. Still confined to my room. Mr & Mrs Hargreaves paying attention to me. My old nurse and her husband came over from Bury to see me. Mrs Hargreaves gave them a bed and every comfort that they required after so long a walk for two old people in their eighty one years. They hardly knew how to express their joy at being able to see me before they died a more venerable and better looking old man i never saw and a more healthy old woman at her age indeed she looked to live twenty or thirty years more..  Tues. 2nd. They set off home again Mrs Hargreaves packing them up some mince pies and a little wine and water and i giving them a few shillings to asist them by the way. They left me with a heavy heart...  Sun 14th Jan.1821 This day the carriage whent by Baches the carrier for London.  Sun. 28th Jan. took coach for Blackburn... Slept at Mr Brown's dreamd Thomas came to England and that he said my little Betsy was very ill and subject to fits.  Mon. 29th. Sold my houses for Three Hundred Pounds. [32]   Weds. 31st Came over to Blackburn... Found a letter from Mr Jones...  Signed over my right to the houses in Salford and recd Three Hundred Pounds for them being a loser of one Hundred Pounds.  Feb. 1st. To Manchester... to bid them goodbye.  Mon. 5th Feb. Packing up this day. Whent to see Mr Hope's warehouse and looked at some cambric and callico. gave him an order for 100 pieces paid him in cash Eight Pounds for money laid down by him for me.. Bank of England No. 28578 28586.  Tues. 6th Feb. Took coach for London paid Three Pounds Three Shillings. My cousin John Hope and his wife and Thos. Foster dined with us at Mr Hargreaves. They all came to see me off in the coach for London. We started at two o'clock in the day. Settled with Mr Hargreaves for cash for me by him. Bothe him and Mrs Hargreaves behaved uncommon kind during my stay. There they wished me to stop another month or two Mrs Hargreaves made my two daughters Jane & Elizabeth at home in Tasmania a present of two books. Mrs Hargreaves made me a present of a book of prayers named Nelsons Festivals and also the medicines both Eliza and i took.  Wed. 7th. All this day in the coach and all the previous evening. We arrived at the White Horse Fetter Lane (nearby St Pauls Cathedral) before 7. I ingaged a bed. Capt. Dagg of the ship TUCAN called and told me he had seen James & George very well. Made me easy. Took a walk in the Cheapside and down Ludgate Hill... He (Mr Jones) gave me news of the Tucan arriving... no letters for me which made me very uneasy all day. Whent to Capt. Watson. Took lodging there. At night went as far as Capt. Atkinsons. He was just reading a letter from his son which he had got out of Mr Berry's box and he saw a packet directed to me but the Officer in Charge would not let them be taken as they must go through the Post Office.  Feb. 9th Mr Jones & I whent to Mr Berry's lodgings No 8 Size Lane back of the Mansion House. He was not within but we left a note on his table to send my packet as soon as he got it which was to be within the afternoon expences of it was 12 / - and the Porter 2 / -. I stood up till after 12 o'clock reading them. [33]   Mon. 12th. Whent to the City called on Mr Jones had a little conversation with him concerning going out to N.S.W and about the affairs of the Colony. Recd a packet of letters from my sister going through Manchester. Double postage on them 10 / - expence.  Wed. 14th Capt. Watson whent on board the ship BRIXTON which was lying at the London dock to look at the accommodation. Found them very good but could get no decisive answer the broker not there. I purchased this day 1 doz. of Bell buttons 1 pr. silver salts 4 salt spoons 1 doz. sugar stand 7 table spoons 18 teaspoons 1 child's Coral 1 silver eye glass 4 ridicule clasps... 19 chairs 5 yards of sarsenet & 7 / 6 for a gown and lost it going home. Also a pair of chandelier candlesticks...  Fri. 16th Called on Capt. McIntosh who lives on Ratcliffe Highway. He had purchased a ship called the HOPE and intending to take passengers to N.S.W. He called a coach and we whent on board she lying in the Canal refitting but she appears to be longer before she will sail than I wish to stop. I can make no agreement. The other half owner Degraves being on board. He also is going out with his small family to settle in Van Dieman's Land and wished for all the information I could give them which I did to the best of my judgement Capt. McIntosh is quite the gentlemen. We all walked back calling in our way at a pastry cooks shop and taking refreshment. We parted and each party whent their own way after they giving me an invitation to dine.  Sat. 17th Whent to the City with a Mr Davison a porter to purchase a desk but there was no one to suit me. He took me through the Mansion House Guildhall and The Bank.  Feb.19th Removed to my new lodgings in Postern Row No 9 Mr Sharp Watchmaker at 16 / - per week to find coals myself. After whent on board the MARINER sloop lying in the Limehouse Canal. The two owners called on me to enquire about the affairs of V. Dieman's land and Port Jackson.  Fri. 23rd Feb. Whent to Moore Lane the Baches the carrier to send a small box to Manester to Mr Hargraves.. Mr Jones called on me to advise me about what ship I must take. The owner of the MARINER called at night and we agreed... [34]   Sat 24th. This day walked to the west end of the town as far as Grosvenor Street the residence of Sir Robert Peel but was down in Staffordshire. Bought a canteen this day for George and 45 vols. of the British Essayist and Gibbons History of Rome 12 vols. from its foundation.  Tues. 27th. Bought this day 12 setts of table matts 12 doz. doyleys... Gave an order for a quantity of cutlery..  Wed. 28th. Staid at home all day it freezing and snowing all day. The ditch round the Tower was frozen over and the boys were skating my window being opposite I had full view of them. This day had in 250 cakes of Windsor soap.  Thurs. 1st. At home all day. In the evening whent to see the Queen go to the Mansion House to be present for the benefit of some poor Society but did not see her. She whent in a private entrance contrary to all expectations.  Fri. 2nd Mar. Took a walk in the City. Whent to Wiston & Herrit Office 37 Old Broad Street to enquire about the MARINER... Gave Mr Davison an order for some crockery ware... very dirty weather...  Tues. 6th. Very bad weather. Gave orders for some stationery. Purchased some Irish linens. A very bad cough on me.  Wed. 7th. Took a walk into Aldgate Broad Street and made me some little purchases...  Mar. 9th Recd. two letters from Edinburg one from my daughters... Wrote one in answer... Purchased Clarke's Family Bible.  13th Mar. Tues. Got home my miniature frames.  Wed. 14th Mar. Whent to Wakemans the carrier to see about 3 cases with Irish & Calicoes. Ordered a double barrelled fowling piece for George Bought the Incyclopedia Britanica 20 vols. 30 guineas.  Thurs. 15. Whent on board the MARINER... Whent to the theatre the Royality a very miserable performance. [35]   16th. Mar. Fri... a Lieut. Thomson relation of Dr Chalmers called brought me a note from my daughter Celia.  Sat 17th... recd. a letter from D. Hope saying my two daughters would be in town if the wind was fair today or tomorrow.  Fri 6th. Whent to the Brokers of the Mariner to see when I could take my things on board. Mr Atkinson and I went to the City Canal. Came home in a waterman's boat. Bought a piece of Irish linen. Gave a woman 10 chemise to make and she has got the stay maker. Brought home 4 pr. stays.  Sat. 7th April Whent to Mark Lane to Buckles Bagsters & Buchanan to inquire concerning Rebecca's pension but got no answer Lieut. Thomspon called  Wed. 11th. Whent on board the MARINER but no appearance of being ready.  Fri. 13th Whent to Buckles Bay and Buchanan Mark Lane 33 to enquire about Rebecca's pension but got no more information than last Sat. Off to Whitehall to get the proper forms made out but called to see William Charles Wentworth. Staid with him too long till it was too late to go.  Sat. 14th.Called on Mr Wm Wentworth...Whent to Whitehall the Admiralty & Army Pay Office to inquire about Rebecca's pension.  Gained all i could after being referred from one to another till I was tired. Got the necessary forms from them...  Tues. 17th. Purchased a trunk this morning gave 21 / - for it. Celia & Eliza gone to order their pelisses & pay the Doctors-bill Five Pounds Twelve Shillings.  Apr. 18th. Wed. Whent to Broad street 53....ordered from Cooper & Eliot some looking glasses a sofa A Mohogany Dressing & writing case. Packed up all my luggage...  Apr. 21st. Sat. Got my goods on board the MARINER. [36]   Apr. 22nd. Whent to the Foundling Hospital a beautiful litle chaple and a most gratifying sight to see such a number of little females in such good order and an equal number of boys...  Apr. 25th. Whent on board. Nothing doing. Mr Williams and I Whent to Clementinas to look at a piano.  Thurs. 26th Mr Thomson called on us and we whent to Greenwhich Hospital by water... saw through the painted Hall and chaple. Came home by coach. Mr T. spent the evening with us.  Apr. 27th. Whent on board the ship. Am afraid she will not sail this three weeks yet.  Sun. 29th. Whent to a Scotch church in Miles Lane... Mr Thomson called and took us.  Apr. 30th Whent on board the MARINER Nothing doing...  May 1st. Was taken very ill of my old complaint on the lungs...  Thurs. 3rd. Eliza & I whent on board the MARINER. Still very ill. Was obliged to go to bed. Mr Thomson brought two tickets of the speaking of the Bible Society at the King's Concert Rooms Haymarket. Only Eliza and Mr Thomson went Celia staying at home with me on acct of me being so ill.  Sun. 6th. Called in a physician Dr Frampton on this day. Gave his opinion to Dr White.  Sat. May 12th... this being my birthday 44 years of age my complaint began to take a favourable turn.  Sun 15th. Celia & Eliza whent to dine at Mr Ross a little way out of town accompanied by Mr Hope and Mr Thomson...  Fri. May 18th. Celia and Mrs Hope going to Manchester. They left the Swan with two necks in the regulater... [37]   May 19th... sent the last of my luggage on board Mr Thomson and Eliza going on board the MARINER.  Sun. 20th Staid at my lodgings Mr Thomson took out Eliza awalking in the afternoon.  Tues. 22nd. Took coach for Gravesend where we arrived about 5 o'clock in the afternoon... We staid all night at the Inn PRINCE OF ORANGE. Mr Thomson went in quest of lodgings. I thought it best to go there for the good of my health.  May 23rd. Took lodgings at Mr Beers Pilot Lower Terrace at 50 / - per week with the servants attendance boarding ourselves...  Sat. May 26th. Mr Thomson and i whent amarketing. Mr & Mrs Dunn passengers in the MARINER... called on us they having been down at Gravesend 7 months waiting for a ship...  Wed. 30th. Whent to market... few things to sell only purchased a few eggs and butter... Mr & Mrs Dunn... took tea with us... Had a few games of whist.  Thurs. 31st. Mr Dunn called to know if I had any commands to London as he was going down to settle some misunderstanding with the Brokers of the MARINER Witson & Hewitt...  June 3rd... Ship LUSITANIA came down to Gravesend ready to clear out.  June Mon. 4th Nothing to do. Mr & Mrs Dunn called and we went out walking to a very pleasant place situate on the River Thames a bathing House a small park adjoining it. There are seats for visitors and where you have most beautiful view of shipping sailing to & from London.  June 5th.......to London.. We hear by advertisement in the Times paper the MARINER is to be down on Sunday next. LUSITANIA sailed from Gravesend.  June. Wed. 6th. i think this will now compleat my twelve months in England as we landed at Portsmouth on 21st. June 1820. i am very afraid we shall not sail for that place before the Day. Recd. a letter from Mr Atkinson requesting me to come to London to put my cabin in order... [38] Accordingly Mr Thomson and i set off 2 mins to 1 o'clock and arrived at the Dundee Arms at 1/4 to 5 o'clock. We immediately whent on board the MARINER. it came on to rain very hard and everyone had done work on board for the day we could not do anything that afternoon...Walked to Mr A. where they kindly received me and I slept there all night Mr. T. going to his lodgings. Recd. a letter from Celia from Manchester. All very well.  June Thurs. 7th. this day Mr Atkinson & i whent on board the MARINER and made a great clearance... and put out of the cabin... trunks nos. 791516 & 20. and 1 small bale 1 box of Mrs Kemps marked 21 down in the hold as owners had charged freight on them... i slept there that night as did also Mr Thomson. Had they been related to me they could not have been more kind.  June Fri. 9th... this day came down to Gravesend... Mr Thomson and Eliza took a walk to see Mr & Mrs Dunn...  Wed. 13th. No ship or signs of it..  Thurs June 14th. Mr Cox (another passenger) came down this evening and brought the news that the MARINER could not proceed on her voyage for want of means. He also brought a letter from Mr Jones... advising passengers to seek redress... They in consequence are going to London tomorrow morning viz. Mr Dunn Cox and Thomson to join Major Homen in complaints to the Lord Mayor. Now this is ever since 1st of april when he first ingaged that the ship should sail i have been living at very heavy expence and in consequence my sickness has increased it and God only knows now when we shall get off but i will put my trust in Him who alone can judge.  June Sat. 16th This morning recd. two letters from Celia and one for Eliza and one for myself wishing to go back with me in consequence i wrote her an answer to come up immediately. The Gentlemen all returned with the news that the ship was to be down on Tuesaday.  June Wed.2oth. This evening the MARINER came down to Gravesend.  June 21st Thurs. Whent on board the MARINER. Had some little dispute about getting into my cabin. [39]   June 22nd. Fri. Mr Atkinson came down from London and brought my daughter Celia with him. I returned with him to settle about her passage. Slept at Mr. A.  Sun.26th We weighed anchor and sailed from Gravesend. whent down the River about 14 miles was obliged to come down to anchor owing to the wind being foul. Most of the ladies were a little sick owing to the motion of the Ship.  June Wed 27th. 1/4 past 11 o'clock in the morning weighed anchor and got under weigh. Very light wind and rather heavy sea. Most of the ladies very sick.  Fri 29. The Pilot left us. Passed Dover this morning.  Sat. 30th Foul winds and beating to get to Portsmouth. Anchored at Ride on the Isle of Wight.. Some went on shore took lodgings at 3 / - per day while on share.  July 2nd. Rained all day could not go on shore... went on shore at Portsmouth found Capt. in difficulties in regard to provisions on the ship. Heard the owner was in gaol. The passengers were obliged to consent paying for their provisions...  Thurs. 5th July. This day the gentlemen went on shore and bought the remainder of the provisions... Had to open the Hatch to get their dollars to pay for it. Sailed from Ride this evening with a foul wind...  I had now before me this most tremendous journey. I was told I deserved to be immortalised for the attempt and that Govt. could not do too much for us for taking such a family to a settlement where none had ever gone before. I mean no family of free settlers and very few others. Every thing that could be done for us was done by officers to make it as comfortable as possible.  In addition to our luggage we had to take corn for the cattle as in the mountains there is not sufficient grass for them and we also had provisions for ourselves and 9 men that accompanied us. In consequence of this we were obliged to leave many things behind. [112] We now commenced with two drays with 5 bullocks each 1 dray with 4 horses and our own cart with 2; they had no more carts to give us. Amidst the good wishes of all not excepting a party of natives who had come to bid us welcome we commenced. We had not proceeded more than a quarter of a mile before we came to a small stream of water with a sandy bottom and banks. Here the second dray with the bullocks sank: the storekeeper superintendent and overseer from Emu witnessing our stoppage came to our assistance. The two latter did not quit us until night. It employed us an hour to extricate the dray it was accomplished without the horses of the other being added to it. We now slowly proceeded about a quarter of a mile further and now my dear imagine me at the foot of a tremendous mountain the difficulty of passing which is I suppose as great or greater than any known road in the world not from the road being bad as it has been made and is hard all the way but the difficulty lies in the extreme steepness of the ascent & descent the hollow places and the large ragged pieces of rock. You will perhaps imagine as I had done that the mountains are perfectly barren. For 40 miles they are barren of herbage for cattle but as far as the eye can reach even from the summit of the highest every hill and dale is covered with wood lofty trees and small shrubs many of them blooming with the most delicate flowers the colours so beautiful that the highest circles in England would prize them. These mountains appear solid rocks hardly any earth on the surface. This land seems as if it was never intended for human beings to inhabit. There are no roots or substitutes for bread no fruits or vegetables on which men could subsist but almost everything will grow which is brought to it.  We now began our ascent up the first Lapstone Hill so called from all the stones being like a cobbler's lap stone the horses got on very well but the bullocks could not so we were obliged to unload have a cart from Emu and send back some of our luggage even then the horses were obliged when they reached the top to return and assist them. We only performed the distance of one mile and a half that day. Our tent was for the first time pitched the fatigue to mother and myself was very great every night after the journey in preparing beds and giving the children their food & the little ones were generally tired and cross little Edward in particular.  It was a very moonlight night and all was novelty and delight to the elder children immense fires were made in all directions we gave them their supper and after putting the younger to bed I came from the tent in which was a large fire our drays and carts close in view. The men nine in number were busily employed in cooking in one place our own man roasting a couple of fowls for our next days journey at another the men (convicts) not the most prepossessing in their appearance with the glare of the fires and the reflection of the moon shining on them in the midst of a forest formed altogether such a scene as I cannot describe it resembled more a party of Banditti such as I have read of than any thing else. [113] I turned from the view took the arm of Hawkins who was seated at the table with the storekeeper and went to the back of the tent. Here we saw Tom and the three elder girls trying who could make the best fire as happy as it was possible for young hearts to be then I seemed to pause it was a moment I shall never forget. For the first time for many a long month I seemed capable of enjoying and feeling the present moment without a dread for the future 'tis true we had in a manner bade adieu to the world to our country and our friends but in our country we could no longer provide for our children and the world from that cause had lost all its charms. You Bowling and all my friends and acquaintances I thought of with regret but the dawn of independence was opening on us. Hawkins was again an officer under Government a home to receive us and the certainty under any circumstances of never wanting the common necessaries of Life you my dear Ann must have suffered in mind what we had long suffered to form an idea of what we then felt. After a little while we returned to the table there were moments of such inward rest that Hawkins took up a flute belonging to one of the party and calling Eliza to us she danced in a place where perhaps no one of her age had ever trod before. [...]   The corporal's wife an old woman who had been transported above twenty years with fawning manners came forward to show us in. We entered the kitchen which contained a long table and form and some stumps of trees to answer the purpose of chairs of which there was not one in the house. Several people were there to rest for the nights journey from Bathurst to Sydney. We were shown into the small back room which had nothing in it but a sofa with slips of bark laid on it for the seat here I felt desolate and lonely it was nearly dark still Hawkins did not arrive we got quite miserable. At length the storekeeper . . . arrived and said to us that he could not get on without some horses being sent to his assistance. It was nearly nine o'clock before he arrived. I went out but such a scene of confusion as there appeared from the glare of the fires the carts and drays the men tired with their days work swearing as they extricated the bullocks and horses it was long before I could distinguish Hawkins. I felt comparatively safe when I did. The old woman a most depraved character and well-known thief with a candle held high above her head screamed out "Welcome to Springwood sir." [114] He said when he looked round he felt sure his welcome would be the loss of whatever she could steal from us he was much fatigued not having had any refreshment all day. It was my intention when I first arrived to have pitched the tent on the green but it unfortunately was on top of the dray left with Hawkins but having my mattresses I spread them in the storeroom the earth was dirty damp and cold we could not think of undressing the children and when in bed all looked most miserable I lay down with my baby a very few minutes convinced me I should get no rest the bugs were crawling by hundreds the children were restless with them and the confinement of their clothes the old woman had contrived to steal some spirits from our provision basket which with what had been given to her made her and the soldiers tipsy all was noise and confusement in doors without swearing and wrangling with the men. Never did I pass a night equal to it. Hawkins remained all night on the green or in the cart watching in addition to the other noises a flock of sheep had been driven into the yard and they to avoid the men came close to the house and kept up a continual pat with their feet. Could any of our romance writers have been in my situation they might have planned an interesting scene to add to the horrors of their volumes you may be certain we were happy when the morning came we got our breakfast and packing up our beds bade adieu to the house at Springwood.  Mother myself and three girls as the morning was fair walked on before it was such a relief to get away from that place that I never enjoyed a walk more. We gathered most delicate nosegays from the flowering shrubs that grew amongst the trees you must understand that the whole of the road from the beginning to the end of the Mountains is cut entirely through a Forest nor can you go in a direct line to Bathurst from one mountain to another but you are obliged often to wind round the edges of them and at times to look down such precipices as would make you shudder. We ascended our cart had now three bullocks as we had so much trouble to get on with two but we were worse off than ever as the ascent became worse they refused to drag and every few minutes first one and then another would lie down the dogs were summoned to bark at them and bite their noses to make them get up the barking of the dogs the bellowing of the bullocks and the swearing of the men made our heads ache and kept us in continual terror that was exactly the case every day of the journey. Frequently it was necessary we should all get out and more frequently our fears made us scream out: "Oh do let us get out I am sure there is danger." At length we came to a hill so steep it seemed as if we could never get up it we alighted and seating ourselves on a fallen tree waiting for the event we were on the side of it in front it was almost perpendicular behind was a valley so deep the eye could hardly distinguish the trees at the bottom to gain the top of this mountain the road wound along the side the first dray with the horses got up they were then brought back to assist the rest with the bullocks but they could not succeed in raising these from one rock to another with great noise a sudden effort was made and one shaft was broken this had to be repaired as well as we could some of the luggage taken off and with the assistance of the other horses it was got up the other was got up in like manner. [115] When at the top the men who were much fatigued sought for a spring of water and with the addition of a bottle of rum were refreshed we again set off and for the last two miles it was perfectly dark attended by heavy rain you can suppose the danger and misery we rode in not being able to see where we went we were obliged to go on until we came to water there our tent was pitched in the road and was dark damp and dirty we were obliged to remain in the cart until the bedding was put into the tent of course we again lay down in our clothes this very fatiguing day's journey we had only accomplished eight miles. For fear I should tire you with a repetition of the same scenes I will now tell you that every day on the journey from Emu to Bathurst we were subject to the same thing such as our bullocks lying down constantly the others not able to drag their load compelled to have the assistance of the horses which caused great delay.  Our provisions consisted of half a pig which was salted for us at Emu and some beef we had flour to make bread tea sugar butter and when we stopped at night we made our tea and had some cold meat it was our man's business every night to boil a piece of meat for the next day and bake a cake under the iron pot breakfast and supper were the only meals we had. I used to take a small basket in the cart with me a little just to keep us from starving and some drink for baby and during the 11 nights we rested in the woods Hawkins never laid down until about three in the morning when the Overseer would get up and watch and never but twice did he take his clothes off as we occupied the tent his only resting place was the cart. It rained the next morning and every thing was very uncomfortable the men went in search of the cattle they were obliged to he turned loose at night to get water and food could not find them at all after waiting some time we thought it better to proceed excepting one dray which the overseer was to watch while his men sought the hullocks. As the road this day was something better we got nine miles to two bark huts which had been erected by the men employed in mending the roads but were now empty we were very glad to take possession of one and our men of the other as it rained all day. [116] In England you never saw anything like these huts and I fear from my description you will not understand them. Some stakes of trees are stuck in the ground the outside bark from the trees is tied together and to these with narrow strips of what is called stringy bark being tough it answers the purpose of cord and the roof is done in the same manner. There was a kind of chimney but neither window nor door but a space left to enter as many men had been obliged to sleep here all around were placed small stakes and across and on the top were laid pieces of bark so as to form a kind of broad shelf all round here we spread our beds. Mother and I soon found it was impossible to get any rest from the bugs and fleas Helen and Louisa were laid head to foot finding them restless we looked and found poor things that from some of the pieces of bark not being close to the outside they had tumbled through and being suspended by their arms we had some difficulty to drag them up. [...]   The next morning was fine and we again ascended the cart this day we accomplished nine miles much in the same way as before. The following morning the 18th a morning never to be forgotten for to all my complaints about the road I was continually silenced by "Say nothing about it until you get to the big Noll." We were now within eleven miles of it but the roads being tolerably good and the morning fine in expectation of something very wonderful our spirits were by no means bad for after this day our greatest difficulties were over. Hawkins shot some birds the boys hunted a kangaroo rat we laughed and talked and went cheerfully on until we were within a mile of Mount York or more commonly called the Big Hill. I desired Tom to ride on and give us some account of it he soon came galloping back. "Oh Ma you will never get up I am sure you won't I can't see much of the road but I can see the valley you are to reach it is dreadful" our courage began to fail by the time we reached the top. [...]   The men began to cut down the trees necessary to chain behind the drays this appeared a terrible precaution to take we thought it better to commence our walk down first Tom led his pony Hawkins his horse we had proceeded but a short distance when it appeared so impossible for any cart to descend the place we were at that Hawkins refused to go any further with me Ann was forced to be carried and Mother and myself had to carry Edward how we got down I cannot tell but I believe the fear lest any accident should happen to him gave us strength and resolution to keep our own footing we were often obliged to sit down on a fallen tree but when we did the pains in our legs and the violent trembling all over us made it difficult to get up again we at last reached the bottom in safety. [117] To give an account of the road is not in my power but you have read Miss Porter's "Scottish Chiefs" where the rocks and glens are so well described but even that can convey but a faint idea of this mountain. The descent is about a mile it is 4000 feet above the level of the sea all rocks and beauties awfully grand to behold but from it being impossible to make some parts of the road safe from the projecting pieces of rock we were rendered very uneasy about our luggage. It was about three o'clock when we seated ourselves on some trees it was extremely hot I had given a piece of sugar candy to one of the children in a small tin we had brought down and as Tom and Eliza found a spring of water the can became useful to us to drink from and the sugar served to quiet the little ones. We waited a considerable time and could hear nothing of the rest and then desired Tom to go and meet them and when he found them all safe to call out and an hour passed and still we heard nothing. Mother and I then thought to walk a little way and listen some times we could just hear the sound of voices and all again was still we returned to our children. It was nearly sun set and in this country it is dark almost immediately. I asked Eliza if she would venture up with the female servant to enquire what we were to do as I was convinced some accident had happened it was nearly dark when they returned with two cloaks lantern and tinder box on account of the first dray having upset at what is called the 49 mile pinch and that the cart would be sent down to us. I soon after heard Tom's voice high above my head I blamed him for keeping me so long in suspense but he said I had desired him to call if they were safe which he did as soon as the dray was unloaded and reloaded tired as we were all were employed in breaking wood and making fires it was quite dark before the cart came in it were two great coats and a shawl a piece of bread and a little arrowroot. I gave it to the poor children to little Neddy I gave the arrowroot and we hushed him to sleep. Mother sat down with him in her lap before a fire Ann and George were wrapped up and laid on the ground beside her the four girls I laid in the cart with a great coat over them I began to feel very weary and chilly about 9 two drays arrived but to stand and listen as I had previously done to the noise of the men endeavouring to cheer the cattle and the dreadful rumbling with which they descended was enough to create a sensation of terror in a very stout heart to see them was impossible until they got close to us. Hawkins was still at the top of the hill remaining with the last drays which from the darkness and fatigue of the horses and men it was found could not be got down that night. They had now to get water and put the tea kettle on and some were obliged to walk up the hill and bring down our provisions and many things which we could not do without and two men to remain and watch the dray. Hawkins came down with the others very much fatigued we now had our supper and the tent pitched. [118] It was 11 o'clock when ready for us we got the children from the ground and cart into it and laid ourselves down.  The next morning we all felt the effects of being exposed so long in the night air and the great fatigue we had after breakfast we walked up to a small rock and sitting down viewed the scene around and felt thankful that the little property we possess was safe for the injury caused by the dray upsetting was trifling. Here as we sat we observed three persons winding among the trees in the valley on horseback they proved to be a clergyman from Parramatta [Samuel Marsden] another gentleman and a servant they spoke in rapture of the country from which they were returning. I now felt myself so ill from fatigue that I was forced to go into the tent and lie down I fell asleep and did not wake until the last dray came rumbling heavily by me. Before commencing the journey again which we did about one o'clock I cannot help remarking on the extreme fatigue the men endured the preceding day without any refreshment from breakfast until their supper at 11 o'clock one man in particular who was the head driver of our cart a Folkestone man a countryman of our own behaved uncommonly well when the dray overturned nothing saved the lives of the horses and our property but the stump of a tree by the road side it was suspended over an immense precipice this man was the first who got to the top and hanging by the ropes laboured hard to lighten the dray he likewise was one who went at night to bring down our provisions. Hawkins told him his conduct had been such that he should strongly recommend him to the Commanding Officer which he has done and in all probability he will either be made an overseer of a party or have a ticket of leave given so that he may work for himself which is reward given to them when their behaviour has been very good.  I should say there never before was such a party of females without any protection for so many hours at the foot of the mountains had any snakes attacked us we should have lost our lives for none of us would have had the courage to kill them. [...]   We again ascended our cart on the 21st we had been sitting for some time on the banks of the river seeing the whole cavalcade cross and when it came to our turn it was with many fears we did the water nearly up to the horses belly and the bottom covered with large pieces of rock and stone enough to overturn the cart and jolt us to death. A man offered to carry little Neddy over in his arms with anxious eyes I watched him through fear his feet might slip and our darling boy have his head dashed against a stone with talking swearing beating our poor bullocks we got safe on the bank on the opposite side. [119] We had now a very long and steep hill before us and as usual they refused to go it was decided that we must have two good horses as it was impossible we could ever get on again Noby Redmond and Lion Lowe (names I can never forget) were placed in a dray with a horse behind and another before them but from its being a constant succession of steep hills we were only able that day to perform 8 miles and rested at 8 in a valley here we were joined by 5 more bullocks from Bathurst.  We set off early the next morning after going 8 miles reached the Fish river after crossing which we had to ascend our last hill which was very long and very steep. I thought I could never have walked to the top the drays were a considerable time in getting up and were obliged to assist each other we now descended into a most beautiful country to Sidmouth Valley we had to go through a very bad swamp before we got to our resting place. . . We had now my dear Ann accomplished our journey over the mountains the last ten miles we had hardly a spot of level ground all was steep hills. We were now 18 miles from Bathurst the country extremely beautiful gently rising hills covered with wood. We passed Macquarie Plains crossed the Fish River and entered on the plains of Bathurst the road was good being determined to reach home that night we almost trotted which jolted us so dreadfully that I thought every bone would be disjointed it was as much as we could do to keep ourselves on the seats and hold the children as if to the very last our journey was to be made uncomfortable a fine rain began which beat in our faces and made us very cold. At length our house was pointed out to us what a welcome sight the rain was now fearful and before we could reach the home we had to cross the Macquarie River the most dangerous of all. You descend the steep bank and suddenly plunge into the water which was as high as the bottom of the cart the first dray got over but the rest being lower we were obliged to seek another ford for them. We remained alone the driver of the first brought one of his horses over put it to ours and in we plunged we felt more alarmed for our personal safety at that moment than we had done during the whole journey we reached the opposite side and all at one moment exclaimed we are over and a few minutes brought us to our house where there was a blazing wood fire to warm and cheer us.  I have now my dear Bowling and Ann brought you to the end of my journey but I cannot close this long letter without adding a little more I tell Hawkins that had it been possible to have gone any further (as he was always famous for moving us about) we should have done it but beyond here there is no road. [120] Mother bore the fatigue uncommonly well a journey of such as I have described of 18 days was at her age a very great undertaking but she has recovered from it and is better than I am for I am very thin and not very strong. Our children are all well and happy. [...]   I think there can be no doubt but we shall do well in a few years prosper but I would never persuade anyone with as large a family as mine and slender means as we possess to leave England for not one in a thousand could expect to be as fortunate as we have been for without the appointment we have and the assistance of the Govt. to bring us here we never could have come on without it we must have been subject to many hard-ships and privations that we have never felt.  Tom and the children are all well George is the most delicate little Edward the plaything of our leisure moments and the darling of all he has ever been a treasured babe from an idea that he was deprived of those little comforts attached to infants he is a most healthy and lovely child and it will be worthy of remark that born in England his first birthday was spent at Bathurst the day on which his father took on himself the duties of commissariat no child so young I should think ever travelled so far.  Tuesday 12. Feby 1822.  At 11. a.m. the 48th Regt. Paraded under arms in the Government Domain forming a lane from Government House to the North Gate leading to the Private Landing Place below Lachlan's Garden on Bennelong's Point; the governor Lt. Governor the Principal Civil and Military Officers of Government and other Gentlemen of the Town of Sydney as well as many from the Interior assembling at the same Hour at Government House to take leave of me on my departure from the Colony.   At Noon Mrs. Macquarie (attended by Sir Thomas Brisbane) our dear Boy and myself set out from Government House accompanied by all those Gentlemen who came to take Leave of us as well as by an immense concourse of the other Inhabitants of Sydney who followed us through the Domain and the Place of Embarkation; manifesting by their melancholy looks and by every other possible desmonstration [sic] their sincere and undisguised regret at our departure from the Colony   Taking leave of those Friends who thus attended us we embarked on board the Government Barge by Half past 12 o'clock at the Private Stairs accompanied by Sir Thomas and some few of our more particular Friends.   From thence we were slowly rowed through the Ships in the Cove which were all manned with Colours displayed and many of them Saluting in honor of the occasion; the Battery saluting at the same time with 19 Guns.   The New Fort (named Fort Macquarie) and all the Rocks on Bennelong's Point as well as Dawes Battery -- and the Rocks on the Western Side of the Harbour were covered with Men Women and Children and a vast number of Boats were also sailing or rowing in the Harbour full of People cheering us repeatedly as we passed along through them. -- This was to us a very grand and gratifying sight -- but at the same time a most affecting scene and could not be viewed by Mrs. Macquarie or myself without the deepest emotion after a residence of upwards of Twelve years amongst these poor attached People!   By 1. p.m. we got on board the Surry where Capt. Raine her Commander and his officers received us with all one attention.   Sir Thomas Brisbane and our other particular Friends who accompanied us on board inspected our accommodations and were much pleased with them.   The Govr. and suite remained on board with us till 2 o'clock and then took a cordial and very friendly leave of us. -- The Ship then got under weigh and worked down the Harbour intending to get out to Sea if possible before Sunset. -- The Wind however blowing strong from the South East obliged us to come to anchor in Watsons Bay for the Night. -- All our Servants Baggage Live Stock and Stores having been Shipped some few days before our own Embarkation we are now ready to go to Sea at a moment's notice -- Capt. Antill and our good faithful Serjt. Whalan remained all night on board with us. ---   Wednesday 13th.  The Wind continues to blow still from the South East we were unable to proceed to Sea.   Thursday 14th.  The Wind still continues full and precludes the possibility of our going to Sea. -- Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde having come off to see us on Wednesday afternoon was obliged to remain with us all that and this day too on account of the very boisterous state of the weather.   Capt. Antill stole off from us this morning -- and did not come near us any. -- The poor good Serjeant however remained still with us -- having this day carried Lachlan on shore to Sydney but came off with him again in the Evening. ---   Friday 15. Feby.  This Wind being fair for our getting out the Signal for sailing was made at 7 o'clock this morning. Mr Judge Advt. Wylde took an early Breakfast and took his leave of us landing at the Pilot's House in Watsons Bay where he had his Horse waiting him.   At 8 a.m. weighed anchor and made sail out of the Harbour and by 9 we cleared the Heads of Port Jackson. We then lay to for about Half an Hour to enable to write a few Letters to Sir Thomas Brisbane and other Friends at Sydney. -- Our good and faithful attached Serjeant and his two sons James and Charley remained with us on board till the last moment and after I had delivered him my Letters for the shore we took an affectionate leave of them; all of us being very deeply affected -- and poor dear Lachlan was particularly so - suffering great distress in taking leave ( -- most likely forever --) of his dear good Serjeant and his favorite [sic] young friend Charley. ---   The Serjeant and Pilot having left us we made sail and proceeded on our Voyage for England via Cape Horn; the Wind being fair and blowing a very fine Breeze at West South West and steering South East with the intention of going round by the South End of New Zealand. ---   The Ship Minerva for New Zealand the Ship Minstrel for the Whale Fishery and the Ship John Bull for Bengal sailed at the same time with us from Port Jackson. By the latter Ship I sent a present of a very fine Pair of large Emus for the Marquis of Hastings Gvr. Genl. of India in charge of Capt. Orman   At 4. p.m. we lost sight of the Light House and the Heads of Port Jackson.  The following Persons (exclusive of Mrs. Macquarie Lachlan and myself) formed our Family and Suite on board the Surry: vizt  Major Taylor & Son - - 2  Lieut. H. Macquarie ADC - - 1  George & Mary Jarvis - - 2  John & Nancy Moore - - 2  Ann James & Child - - 2  Martin Lawlor - Servt. - - 1  James White - Cook - - 1  Carried over - - 11   Brot.. over __________ 11 Persons   Thomas Turner -- Stockman 1  William Walker -- Poulterer 1  Nathaniel Scott -- Groom 1   Wm. Buckle [NN] -- Servt. to Major Taylor} 1  add 15   The Govr. Mrs. M. & Lachlan -- 3  Total Family & Suite 18 Persons  N.B. Provisions & Water for 5 months for the above number of souls were shipped on board the Surry at Sydney.   The following Live Stock and Pets were also shipped on board the Surry at Sydney some few days previous to our own Embarkation: -- vizt.  1 Horse - Sultan  1 Cow - Fortune  3 Goats  42 Sheep  9 Pigs  21 Turkeys  47 Geese  60 Ducks  106 Fowls  N.B. Indian Corn Bran and Hay sufficient for Five Months for the above Live Stock & Pets were laid in at Sydney & put on board.   List of Pets shipped on board the Surry: vizt.  7 Kangaroos  6 Emus  7 Black Swans  4 Cape Barren Geese  2 Native Companions  1 [NN?] Emu  2 White Cockatoos  2 Bronze-Wing Pigeons  4 Wanga-Wanga Pigeons  and also several Parrots and Lowries belonging to Lachlan.   Unfortunately one of the 7 Kangaroos shipped on the Surry was killed by the other Kangaroos soon after coming on board being beat to Death by his own Companions; -- thus leaving only Six Kangaroos on the day of our departure from Port Jackson. ---   N.B. The foregoing Pets were all put on board in large strong Cedar Cases from which the larger were taken out on their coming on board and put into roomy well-aired Pens made for them on the Gun Deck which is considered better calculated for their Health & safety.   List of the Names of the Officers and Crew of the Ship Surry of London. Burthen 443 Tons: -- vizt.  1 Mr. Thomas Raine -- Comr.  2 Dr. David Ramsay -- Surgeon.  3 Mr. John Hall -- Chief Officer.  4 Mr. Robert Powers 2nd [Officer].  5 Mathew Howman -- Boatswain  6 Henry Chambers -- Gunner --  7 Neits Bastian -- Sail Maker  8 William Bruce -- Carpenter --  9 Joseph Cockburn -- Cook. --  10 David Somerville -- Steward.  11 Samuel Pulman -- Boatswains Mate  12 William White -- Cooper. --   Brought Over ---   13 William Waller -- Seaman  14 Andrew Johnson --[ditto]   15 Thomas Costello -- [ditto]   16 George Rood -- [ditto]   17 William Farrow -- [ditto]   18 Robert Mathison -- [ditto]   19 Charles Jordan -- [ditto]   20 William Wright -- [ditto]   21 Seth Weeks -- [ditto]   22 Robert Wilson -- [ditto]   23 Robert Windham -- [ditto]   24 Burford -- Servt.  25 Joshua Leving -- Seaman  26 James Green -- [ditto]   27 John Henshaw - -[ditto]    --- --- --- --- --- --- -Carried over !  Brot.. over !  28 Edward Cope --Apprentice  29 William Nieve -- [ditto]   30 Edward Howman -- [ditto]   Steerage Passengers  1 Bowser Soldier 48th   2 Lambert Eaton -- Free Man  Recapitulation  No. Persons  The Govr. Family & Suite 18  Ship's Company 30  Steerage Passengers 2  Total No. Persons on board 50  The following live trees Plants & Flowers and seeds belonging to me were embarked at Port Jackson in Tubs or Cabins: --vizt.  2 large Tubs -- each containing two Norfolk Pine Trees  2 large tubs containing gigantic lillies! [sic]   2 Plant Cabins -- containing various Plants & Flowers of Australia  8 Separate Parcels of various Seeds of ditto Country for Friends at Home. ---   Monday 25. Feby !  At Daylight this morning we altered our Course to East by South being now clear of the "Snares" and other dangerous obstructions to the Southward of New Zealand. ---   A very smart gale came on the Evening and blew very fresh all Night at North West. ---   Wedy. 27. Feby.  The gale moderated this Evening having blown very hard for the last two dayswith a very high and heavy Sea. ---   Friday 1. March !  We are this day a Fortnight from Port Jackson: -- Latd. 52. ° South -- fine weather Wind fair -- but blowing a smart gale at North West.   Sunday 3. March !  The gale still continues blowing fresh -- but fair.  One of my poor Native companions - (the largest of the two received from Mr. Meehan) died this day in consequence of having had his leg broken in his kage. [sic]   Monday 4. March  The gale has greatly increased the Sea is very high and the ship labours very much -- but the Wind is quite fair -- and we are going at the rate of 8 and 9 miles an Hour.  One of my large Kangaroos ( -- a Buck) Died this day in consequence of a severe hurt he received in his Birth [sic] -- which lamed him so as to render all attempts to cure him ineffectual.  Wednesday 13. March!  The gale has left us and we have had contrary Winds for the last 3 or 4 days but in Wind became again fair for us today -- and we now steer our proper Course.   My youngest Kangaroo ( a Buck and which was born at Sydney -- ) was found dead this morning in his Birth [sic] -- which I am very sorry for as he was a beautiful animal. -- I had him opened but he did not appear to have any internal hurt or disease. ---   N.B. I omitted to mention under its proper date that during the severe hard gale we had on the Night of the 9th. Instant (March) we lost six very fine fat sheep owing to the violent motion and labouring of the Ship and probably also in some measure owing to their being rather too much crowded in the Pen between Decks. -- This we must consider a serious loss in the early part of our voyage.   Friday 15. March !  This day -- month we left Port Jackson and have now happily and speedily got through about two thirds of the Voyage from thence to Cape -- which we hope to double in a fortnight. -- We have fine weather -- the wind is fair -- and we going generally 7 and 8 Miles an Hour. ---   Sunday 17. March !  The youngest of my Native Companions (--which was given me by Mr. Daved Johnston) was found dead this morning in his kage [sic].   Thursday 28. March !!!  This being the happy anniversary of the Birth-Day of our dear beloved Son Lachlan who this day completed his Eighth year it was kept and celebrated with every possible demonstration of Joy that our present confined situation on board ship could admit of.  -- We had the Captain and all the Officers of the ship to dine with ourselves and we also treated the whole of the Ships Company to a plentiful Dinner of Fresh-meat and a hearty drink of Grog! In the Evening we had Fire-works and the Dining Cabins were tastefully fitted up under the direction of Mrs. M. and the Captain with the Colours of the Ship.   It is with infinite pleasure that I am here enabled to record that on this joyful happy Festifal [sic] my dearest Elizabeth Lachlan and myself were in excellent Health and Spirits -- and completely happy. ---   This also proved a most auspicious day as it produced a sight we have been for many days most anxious to enjoy but which we almost despaired of seeing this day. We were however most agreeably surprised on retiring from dinner [NN] and going upon Deck to see the Fire-works preparing there to hear the cry of "Land in Sight" -- echoed out from many voices. -- This was at a quarter past 6 o'clock in the Evening -- just as the Sun had Set. -- The Land however was clearly discernible -- being about eight miles distant from us and bearing North West of us. -- This Land proved to be that which we were so earnestly anxious to see -- namely the island of "Diego Ramirez" a little to the Southward of Cape Horn. -- This island was high and appeared like several detached little Islands. -- The Wind being rather on the Shore we stood off from the Land for some Hours during the Night. -- It was blowing a pretty smart gale when we first saw Diego Ramirez. ---   Our Lat. at Noon this day was 56. ° 30' South -- and Longd. 68. ° 48' West. ---   N.B. In our Progress towards Cape Horn we never went farther to the Southward than 57. ° 8'. ---   Friday 29. March!  At Day-light this morning we had the pleasure of seeing Cape Horn distinctly bearing North West of us and distant about 15 miles ! in appearance resembling the "Lion's Rump" at the Cape of Good Hope - the Land being moderately high. Our Latd. today at Noon was 55. ° 49' South and Longd. 66. ° 14' West. ---   Thus we have happily and safely doubled Cape Horn within the space of Six Weeks - being only this day that space of time from Port Jackson! -- very few vessels having ever made a quicker Passage from that Port round Cape Horn and it is highly gratifying to think that we have done so without meeting with any accident or disagreeable occurrence of any sort. ---   The weather was very moderate in the morning when we saw Cape Horn but the latter part of the Day became squally with heavy showers of Snow and Hail during the Day and succeeding Night. We now steer a Northern course being now to the Northward of Cape Horn. ---   This afternoon a large whale about 50 feet long was seen very near the Ship. - The weather is now very cold -- the Mercury in the Thermometer being down to 34 Degrees. ---   Monday 1. April !  At Noon this day we were in Latd. 52. ° 39' South and Longd. 54. ° 34' West; being now about Ninety Miles to the Eastward of the Center of the group of Falkland Islands. -- with the view of making a quicker Passage to the Line -- as having a greater distance by going more Easterly -- it was Capt. Raine's first intention to steer a course close to the South American shore and pass through the Strait dividing it from the Falkland Islands; -- but the Winds not admitting of his prosecuting that intention he has now altogether abandoned it. ---   Wednesday 3. April !  One of my largest Emus was this day found dead in his Pen and on being Disected [sic] his inside was found a good deal diseased. ---   Tuesday 9. Apr. !  We have had contrary and variable winds for the last 4 Days. -- This afternoon it came round suddenly to South East -- consequently quite fair for us -- and we hope it to be the commencement of the regular South East Trade Wind. ---   Thursday 25. Apr. !  Our South East Wind failed us in 2 or 3 days -- and for several days past we have variable winds or calms.    --- -Memo ! --- -- Saty. 20th April 1822 !!!  This afternoon our dear Lachlan had a very dreadful fall from off one of the Bird Cages -- and got jammed under the Long Boat by which his Forehead was cut and severely bruised. --- L.M.   Our Latd. today at Noon was 23. ° 43' South and Longd. 34. ° 58' West -- We had now a fair wind -- but very light.   At 4 p.m. we crossed the Tropic of Capricorn -- and have now every reason to hope of falling in Hourly with the regular South East Trade Wind -- peculiar to this Latitude. --   Sunday 28. April !  The Winds have been contrary and variable ever since we crossed the Tropic -- and still continue so -- there being no signs of the Trade Wind favoring [sic] us. ---   At 10 a.m. this Day we saw a square rigged vessel to the Westward of us -- steering the same course with ourselves -- being distant about six Leagues.   Wednesday 1. May !  The Winds continue very unfavorable [sic] -- and we are often annoyed with Calms; the Winds blowing from every Quarter but the right one and not the least appearance of the regular Trade Wind tho here we ought to have fallen in with it. -- The weather is excessively hot; the Thermometer in the shade being as high as 82 Degrees.   This morning early a small square rigged vessel passed us at the distance of about a mile shewing Portuguese Colours and steering South East. We did not think it worth while to speak her. ---   Thursday 2. May !  The winds still continue as adverse as ever -- and the greater part of this day we had a dead calm. -- We are now only about 60 miles from the American Coast and passing along the "Abrolhos" Shoal -- which extend 50 or 60 miles from the Shore. -- We sounded this morning and found Bottom at 39 - 37- & 35 Fathoms on a Bed of Coral -- but the Water not the least discoloured.   At 7. p.m. a light Breeze sprung up -- that enabled us to Steer [c] ourse North by East.   Friday 3. May !  The Breeze continues and has done so all Night. --   We sounded again this morning on the outward edge of the Abrolhos Shoal and found bottom at 29 Fathoms.   Our Lat. today at Noon was 17. ° 20' South; and we are entirely clear -- and to the Northward of the Abrolhos Islands and Banks. --   We are this day 11 Weeks from Port Jackson and have not made near so much progress in our Voyage since doubling Cape Horn as we expected to have done being rather sanguine in our hopes of crossing the Line in one month from the time of doubling Cape [Horn] which only adverse Winds prevented.   Saturday 4. May !  We may now consider ourselves in possession of the Trade Winds. The fine Easterly Breeze which set in on Thursday Evening still continuing to blow from the same Quarter -- which enables us to [NN] our course North by East -- and going generally at the rate of 5 6 and 7 Knots. -- our Latd. today is 14. ° 56' South -- and Longd. 38. ° West. Our Voyage from Cape Horn having been so much more longer than was at first expected our stock of water getting and Capt. Raine being in want of & Provisions for his own crew he has determined with my concurrence to touch at St. Salvadore one of the Portuguese Ports on the Coast of Brazil and now within about 120 miles of us in order to obtain water and other Refreshments for the remaining part of the Voyage.   From the distance being so short we expect in case the present Wind lasts to arrive at St. Salvadore in the course of tomorrow. ---   At 1/2 past 4. p.m. we came up with and spoke to a Portuguese Brig bound from Rio Grande (on Brazil Coast) to St. Salvadore ladened with Rice Sugar & Cheese being 35 days out from the former Port. -- N.B. We saw this vessel at a great distance directly ahead early this morning.   My man George having reminded me that this was the anniversary of the storming and capture of Seringapatam on the 4th. of May 1799 we all drank a Bumper to the Health of Genl. Baird and the Conquerors of that important Fortress in which poor George himself was not forgotten.   Sunday 5. May !  We had a fine fair wind all last Night -- and lay-to for 2 Hours for fear of over-shooting our Port. ---   At 8. a.m. Land was seen from the Mast Head and at a quarter past Nine O'Clock we could see the Land very distinctly from the Deck -- right-a-Head and about 18 miles distant from us. -- The Coast here appears rather low -- and broken into small Hummocks.   As we approached nearer the Land we had a very fine [view] of the Country and the Forts immediately adjoining the Harbour -- which was very Picturesque indeed; -- more particularly after passing the several Forts and coming in sight of the Town and the shipping in the Harbour which at this time appeared to be very numerous. ---   At 1. p.m. we came to anchor in St. Salvadore Harbour abreast of the Town and within about a mile of the shore.   At 2. p.m. Capt. Raine went on shore to wait on the Portuguese Governor and the British Consul William Pennell Esqr.   I addressed a Letter to the Consul by Capt. Raine stating the cause of our touching at this Port and soliciting his good offices in facilitating our departure.   At 4. p.m. The Packet anchored in the Harbour from England having Mr Chamberlaine [sic] the Consul General for Rio [de] Janeiro on board. ---   At 9. p.m. Captain Raine returned on board and brought me a very polite friendly Note from Mr. Pennell the Consul giving Mrs. Macquarie myself & Family a kind invitation to take up our Quarters at his House as long as we should remain at St. Salvadore -- and to land and dine with him tomorrow. -- We have accordingly resolved on availing ourselves of Mr Pennell's hospitable and kind invitation. ---   N.B. -- Altho' by our Reckoning from Port Jackson this day of our arrival at St. Salvadore is Sunday; yet we are according to real time and reckoning of this part of the World and also from the circumstance of Capt. Raine having in the Surry circumnavigated the Globe since he last sailed from England one Day more forward in our reckoning than we ought to be. -- He therefore (and of [c] ourse all of us on board the Surry) and of its the reckoning here - by going back a day in his and consequently calls this Saturday!!!   At 4. p.m. the same day of our arrival -- the Nockton Packet commanded by Capt. Joseph Morphew [NN] anchored in the Harbour close to us. -- This Packet sailed from England on the 15th of February last but has touched at Lisbon and several other Places on her Passage out. ---   Henry Chamberlaine [sic] Esqr. His B. Majesty's Consul General at Rio de Janeiro are come Passengers in the Norton. [NN] - It is singular enough that this vessel sailed from England on the same Day we did from New South Wales. -- She brings no News of any importance from England.   Sunday 5. May 1822. --  Agreeably to the invitation we had received we landed this Day at 1. p.m. at St.. Salvadore and proceeded to the House of Mr Pennell Esqr. Consul of this Port his House being situated on the ridge of the Harbour near the Eastern Extremity of the Town. -- We landed immediately under the House and had to walk up a very Steep Hill to it. -- On our arrival there we were received with much kindness by Mr & Miss Pennell -- Mrs. Pennell being in England.   One large Room only (but they could spare no more) was allotted for the Sleeping Dressing of Mrs. Macquarie Lachlan and myself. -- We took also a Man and Woman Servant with us. ---   We found Mr & Mrs. Chamberlain -- and Lieut. Chamberlain R. Artillery living at Mr Pennell's they having landed on the arrival of the Packet from England yesterday; they were introduced to us and we found them pleasant acquaintances.   We had a large Party at Dinner at Mr. Pennell's. He had invited Major Taylor Lt. Macquarie Capt. Raine and Doctr. Ramsay who dined with us besides his own Family which is numerous. ---   After Dinner -- about 8 p.m. Mrs. M. Lachn. & myself accompanied by Lt. Chamberlain and our own friends of the Surry went to see a Portuguese Play and opera performed at the opera House. -- The performance was rather below Par -- and we came Home at 10. p.m. not much amazed. -- We were conveyed in cadeiras.    --- --Memo ! --- --- -- St. Salvador -- Sunday Evening 5th May 1822 ! --   At 12 oclock this Night Mrs. George Jarvis (Mrs. Macquarie's maid servant) was safely delivered of a Daughter on board the ship Surry. --- L.M.   Monday 6. May 1822.  After Breakfast this morning accompanied by Messrs. Chamberlain and Pennell -- and the Gentlemen of my own Family -- I proceeded to the Portuguese Palace or Government House to pay my respects to the Administrators of the Civil Government of St. Salvadore -- consisting of 5 Persons -- who are here called the Junta. -- They received us very politely and with great state. ---   We afterwards proceeded to wait on General Madeisa the Commander in Chief and Governor. -- we also met with a very kind reception from Him; tho' thro' mistake he was not appraised of my intention to visit Him. ---   We had a very large Party again to Dinner today at Mr Pennell's -- and a still larger Party of Ladies in the Evening. -  Tuesday 7. May !  I staid [sic] at Home all this Day to write Letters for New South Wales. -- We had again a large Dinner Party today.   A French Frigate arrived in the Harbour this day from Rio de Janeiro. ---   Wednesday 8. May 1822.  As Capt. Raine expects to be able to sail tomorrow we think it best to take leave of the shore -- and repair again on board ship to prepare for prosecuting our Voyage Home. -- We accordingly got up early this morning -- and Embarked on board the Surry at 8 o'clock from the same Place we landed at. -- We had invited all our friends of Mr. Pennell's Family and a few others to Breakfast with [us] this morning on -- board the Surry. -- They came on board accordingly between 9 and 10 o'clock and Breakfasted with us: their names being the following vizt.   Mr. & Miss Pennell -- 2  Mr. & Mrs. Chamberlain -- 2  Lieut. Chamberlain -- 1  Mr. & Mrs. Johnston -- 2  Miss Thomson -- 1  Revd. Mr. Synge -- 1   After Breakfast all our Pets and other curiosities were shewn to our friends and were much admired by them. -- They returned on shore between 12 and 1 o'clock.   Thursday 9. May !  Mrs. M. Lachlan and myself went on shore early in the morning to see the shops -- and make some Purchases in them. -- We Purchased some articles of Jewellery; and a Monkey Marmoset alias a Sanguin of St. Salvadore and a large green Brazillian [sic] Parrot for Lachlan. ---   We returned to Breakfast on board ship after our shopping Expedition -- very much fatigued. ---   Friday 10. May 1822  Capt. Raine not being able to sail this day as he intended doing Mrs. M. Lachn. and myself went on shore again this Day at 12 o'clock.   We first visited some of the shops where we made a few more Purchases of some articles of ornamental Jewellery.   We then proceeded in hired cadeiras to Mr. Pennell's to take leave of our friends which having done and also delivered my Letters to Mr. Chamberlain for N.S. Wales; we set out to look at a Sugar Plantation and manufactory about two miles to the Eastward of the Town of St. Salvadore; calling at the office (in Town) of Mr. Johnston the Merchant for a guide to conduct us to the Plantation. -- Mr. Wm. Mitchell a fine young Lad attached to Mr. Johnston's accompanied us as a guide in a cadeira I hired for him.   We had a very pleasant Ride to the Sugar Plantation and Manufactory -- which last we went through and examined -- and saw the Sugar Cane growing along the face of an adjoining Hill. -- We went about half a mile farther beyond the Sugar Works from whence we had a delightful Prospect of the adjoining Country the Shipping in the Bay and the Town of St. Salvadore.   It was dark before we got back to Town to Mr. Johnston's Office where we found Capt. Raine waiting for us and the boat being on shore and ready we went immediately on board the Surry -- where we arrived only a little before 8 o'clock -- very tired and very hungry; not having eat [sic] any thing since we Breakfasted on board Ship. ---   It must not be omitted that on our Halting at the Office of Mr. Johnston this afternoon to get a guide to accompany us to the Sugar Plantation we came out for a few minutes of the cadeiras Lachlan leaving his fine large Hat with some Bread and Bananas in it in his Mama's cadeira; but on returning again to these Machines soon Lachlan's fine Hat & Provisions were not to be found. -- In fact they had been stolen in the most barefaced manner the moment he quitted his Chair.   This occurrence occasioned Lachlan in particular and his mother and myself also much vexation; as the Hat was a remarkably fine Straw one made in Chile on the West Coast of South America -- and was given very lately by Capt. Raine as a Present to Lachlan.   Capt. Raine having now Settled all his accounts on shore he has determined on sailing early tomorrow morning.   Saturday 11. May 1822.  At 7. a.m. weighed anchor and at 9. a.m. made all the Sail we could out of the Bay. -- At 10. a.m. passed Fort St. Antonio and got clear out of the Bay of "All Saints" -- or "Bahia" -- as this fine extensive Bay is more commonly called by the Portuguese themselves.   The Town of St. Salvador is beautifully situated stretching along the Ridge of a high Hill which the Bay forms into a crescent. It is a very large Town; is said to contain 140000 Inhabitants; and is a Place of very considerable Trade; having many opulent English merchants residing in it. -- Refreshments of all kinds are reasonable here; and easily procured. ---   The Wind being rather scant we were obliged to stand away nearly South all this day and Night in order to clear the Land. ---   Sunday. 12. May !  We made little progress during the last 24 Hours but today we are laying nearly our course along shore. ---   Monday 13. May !  The Wind continues rather scant -- and light -- but we are able to steer nearly our course along shore. ---   Towards Evening the Breeze freshened and enabled us to haul more off the Land and steer a better course.   Tuesday 14. May !  We have lost sight of the Coast of Brazil -- the Wind is fairer and fresher and we are now steering nearly our true course namely -- North East by East. The weather is fine but warm.   Sunday 19. May !  We were this day at Noon in Latd. 4. ° 37 ' South; fine weather and tolerably fair Wind steering North East. ---   At 5. p.m. The Island of "Fernando Noronha " (-- a small Island whither the Portuguese Government of the Brazils transport their Convicts to -- ) was seen at a considerable distance about 25 miles north west of us.   A strange sail was seen at the same time near the Island but we continued our course without attempting to speak her. -- The wind is from the South East.   Monday 20. May !!!  We were this day at Noon in Latd. 2. ° 57' South and Longd. 30. ° West. -- At 5. p.m. we had the misfortune to lose our Cook James White alias Wait very unexpectedly.   He was only taken ill on Saturday morning last and every possible attention was paid him by Doctr. Ramsey. His complaint was Cold and Fever but he never was at all considered in any Danger and his Death was consequently as unexpected as it was sudden.   He had gone on shore without any permission to St. Salvador on the Day before we sailed and there got violently intoxicated with the ardent Poisonous spirits of that Place to which in part his sudden Death is principally to be ascribed and which we all sincerely lament; as he was in all other respects a very well behaved man. -- He had obtained from some time since an absolute Pardon (-- being only under seven years sentence) and was now on his way Home to join his wife and Family; having embarked on board the Surry as my Cook for the voyage to England. --   Tuesday 21. May !  The Remains of the late James Wait ( -- alias White -- ) were this morning at 8 oclock committed to the Deep in all one form; the ships company being all present and Capt. Raine have read the Funeral Service on the melancholy occasion.  An inventory was afterwards [word missing] by Capt. Raine in my presence and in that of all the officers of the ship of all the Effects of the deceased -- consisting only of a few Necessaries; the whole being locked up again in his own Chest which was also sealed with a List of its Contents; Capt. Raine retaining a counterpart thereof -- to be forwarded to the wife of the deceased.   We were this day at noon in Latd. 1. ° 17' South; -- so that we have every reason to hope we shall cross the Line tomorrow morning.   Wednesday 22. May !!!  We crossed the Line or Equator some time this morning between the Hours of 1 and 3 oclock with a very fine 7 knot Breeze from the South East. -- At Noon we were in Latd. 0. ° - 48' -- North and retained this fine fair Breeze all day. -- We crossed the Line in between 29. ° and 30. ° of West Longitude.   The usual ceremony of Neptune coming on board -- shaving etc. etc. were dispensed with our dear Lachlan and George's Infant being the only Persons on board who had never crossed the Line before. -- But to make amends to the Sailors for their disappointment in respect to this ceremony we treated them with a good Dinner and some Grog! --   This day 13 years ! -- I sailed with Mrs. M. from St. Helens in England for N. S. Wales on board the Dromedary !   Thursday 6. June 1822 !  We this forenoon crossed the Tropic of Cancer - being this day at Noon in Latd. 23. ° 58' North Latitude -- We are now in hopes of seeing dear old England in 3 weeks from this date!   Monday 10. June 1822.  We were this day at Noon in Latd. 30. ° 42' N. and in Longd. 41. ° 30' West. -- We spoke and passed at 11. a.m. a Ship belonging to the Portuguese Nation bound from Parnanbucco (?) to the Western Islands.   We have now a very fine fair Wind from the South East - and going generally six Knots per Hour with very fine fair weather -- and a smooth Sea -- Capt. Raine thinks we shall see England in fifteen days from this date.   Thursday 13. June 1822 !  We have been the greater part of yesterday and today becalmed and consequently have made very little progress - being this day at noon only in Latd. 35. ° 37' North. ---   A great number of Sperm Whales were this forenoon seen at about Half a Mile distance from the Ship playing themselves -- and spouting beautifully.   We saw two Strange Vessels this day to Leeward of us about Ten Miles standing apparently the same way with ourselves; but being at so great a distance we did not attempt to speak them.   This being the anniversary of my beloved wife's Birthday her Health was drank in a Bumper after dinner for many many returns of it. --- There was a fine Turtle weighing 42 Pounds weight caught this day which we are to feast at Dinner on Sunday next. -- It was seen swimming past us in the afternoon and we lowered a Boat to catch it. ---   Two more large Sperm Whales were seen close to the Ship this Evening playing and Spouting. -- A large Shark was also seen close astern this morning -- and was very [sic] caught by Mr. Hall.   This auspicious Day has therefore been very remarkable for Sights of all sorts. ---   Friday 14. June !!!  This day 4 months (16 weeks ago) we sailed from Port Jackson. --It being almost a dead Calm since yesterday at Noon; and consequently we have made little or no progress for the last 24 Hours. ---   There are no less than Six Sail of strange Vessels in sight this afternoon -- all steering the same course with ourselves; -- One of them a few miles ahead of us appearing to be a large English East Indiaman.   Saturday 15. June 1822.  We spoke one of the Strange Sails (seen yesterday) this forenoon and she proves to be the ship "Charles" of Jersey from Rio Grande Homeward bound. ---   At Noon today we were in Latd. 37. ° 5' North and in Longd. 38. ° West. -- The wind is now perfectly fair for us and we are going at the rate of 7 Knots per Hour. ---   Sunday 16. June 1822 !  We have had a very fine fair Wind for the last 24 Hours -- but it is very slack today -- tho' it still continues fair. -- The Indiaman -- and the ship we spoke yesterday are still in sight but the former has got the start of us by about 12 miles. ---   This Day at Noon we are in Latd. 38. ° 46' N. & Longd. 34. ° 10' W. ---   Monday 17. June 1822 !  This day at Noon we were in Latd. 39. ° 56' North -- and in Longd. 31. ° 24' West. -- We are now therefore clear of the Western Islands -- or "Azores" -- being 24 miles to the northward of "Corvo" the northernmost of them; and if we have any tolerably good luck we shall arrive in the English Channel in 12 Days from this date. ---   There are two large ships ahead of us steering the same course. ---   Tuesday 18. June 1822.  We Telegraphed with the nearest to us of the two Strange Sails in sight this forenoon and she turns out to be the ship "Wm. Milles" from Calcutta bound to London. -- She is a Free Trader -- and has no news. -- At Noon today we are in Latd. 41. ° 15' North and Longd. 29. ° West. -- The Wind is quite fair -- and we are going Six Knots per Hour.   The weather is now very fine & mild but occasionally cloudy. We spoke the "Miles" [sic] in the Evening.   Wednesday 19. June 1822 !  We have been quite becalmed since Day-light this morning. At Noon we were in Latd. 41. ° 54' N. and in Longd. 26. ° 37' W.   One of my largest and best Swans died this afternoon.   Thursday 20. June 1822.  It has continued almost a dead Calm all yesterday and last Night. -- We are this day at Noon only in Latd. 41. ° 56' North and in the same Longitude as yesterday. The Calm still continued.   Friday 21. June !  We have still a continued Calm -- and consequently unable to make any progress in our Voyage. -- The Ship "Wm. Milles" is close to us all this day. -- In the afternoon her Commander Capt. Samuel Beadle came on board to visit us. - We mutually interchanged some few articles of Provisions we reciprocally required. --This Ship touched at St. Helena and sailed from Bengal in January last having a great many Passengers on board from that country.   Capt. Beadle informs us that the Marquis of Hastings is going Home immediately and is to be succeeded by Mr Canning.   Saturday 22. June 1822.  A light Breeze of Wind from the Westward Sprang up this morning about 2 oclock -- and enabled us to steer our proper course.   It rained the greater part of Last Night -- and continues still to do so at Noon which prevented our getting an Observation of the Sun. ---   The Wm. Milles continues still near us -- the two Ships sailing very equally. ---   Wednesday 26. June  We have had very Light or Baffling Winds from Saturday last till yesterday morning when the Wind came round to North West -- and blew a fine Breeze. --   We are this day in Latd. 45. ° - 34' N. and in Longd. 18. ° - West. -- The Wind continues fair for us -- and we are going Six Knots. -- The Ship Wm. Milles continues still in company. ---   I had the misfortune to lose one of my Cape Barren Geese this morning it having found Dead in its Pen. -- am very [word missing] for this loss as I had only four of these rare Birds altogether. ---   Saturday 29. June.  We are this day in Latd. 47. ° 48' N. and Longd. 8. ° 50' West at Noon. -- We are in hope of striking Soundings this Evening in case the present Breeze continues and seeing the Lizard Point in dear old England by Sunset tomorrow Evening. -- We had a very fine strong and fair Wind all Thursday -- but it yesterday slackened very much and also Headed. -- We ly [sic] our right course -- and have a five Knot Breeze. -- the Ship Wm. Milles is still to be seen far astern but nearly out of Sight. -- at 8. p.m. Hove to and try to sound with 115 Fathoms but found no bottom.   Sunday 30. June 1822.  The Wind was rather scant for us all this Day -- but we nevertheless were able to lay up our proper Course of North by East for the English Channel -- which we are now approaching very fast -- being at Noon this day only 135 miles from the Lizard. -- We find there is a Strong Current against us all this day setting us a good deal back of our Dead Reckoning -- ; so that we have now no chance of seeing Land this Day. Latd. 48. ° 51' N. and Longd. 6. ° 25' West. At 12 oclock at Night we sounded and found bottom with 43 fathoms of Line clearly indicating that we are now in the Chops of the English but still too far from Land to see it or even any of the Lights on the Coast. ---   Monday 1. July 1822.  At 1/2 past 2 o'clock this morning Captain Raine awoke us to report that from his last Soundings he knew that we were now advanced some way into the English Channel -- and had passed the Lizard last Night -- or rather very early this morning.   At Day-light Land was clearly seen from the Deck and by 3 A.M. we were abreast and in sight of the "the Start" sailing up Channel with a very fine strong fair Breeze; there being no less than 12 or 14 Sail of Shipping in sight at this time some going up Channel and some upward Bound. -- When I got up and went upon Deck at 8 o'clock we were in sight and nearly abreast of the Bill of Portland -- distant about Ten miles from the shore; the coast looking beautiful.   Our Latd. this day at Noon was 50. ° 24' North and our Longd. 4. ° 30 West.   We were at this time nearly abreast of the Isle of Wight -- the Breeze still continuing fair for us -- and blowing pretty strong. Two Cows -- Pilot Vessels Spoke us this forenoon; but we do not take a Pilot on board until we reach Dungeness.   We ran a distance of 220 miles during the last 24 Hours. ---   Tuesday 2. July 1822.  Early this morning we were boarded by Mr. Henry Griggs one of the Branch Pilots Stationed at Dover for Piloting Ships and Vessels from the Channel to Gravesend in the River Thames. He accordingly took the entire charge of the Ship.   We passed Dover at Noon -- then Deal Hythe Ramsgate Margate &c. &c. &c.   At 11. p.m. we came to anchor 3 miles below the Nore near the mouth of the Thames; our distance run this day being 160 miles.   Wednesday 3. July --  We weighed anchor at 5. a.m. and got under weigh with the Tide of Flood; -- but the Wind being fore we had to beat up the River; there being about 20 Sail of Shipping in Company. ---   At Noon we came to anchor in the River on the turning of the Tide abreast of the Town of Lee in the County of Kent.   We passed on our Right in the county of Essex that beautiful Watering Place for Sea Bathing called "South-End."   Several large and some of them particularly beautiful passed us after we had come to anchor today full of Passengers coming from and going to London. A great number of Ships & Vessels also past [sic] us coming down and going up the River Thames.  At 1/2 past 6. p.m. weighed anchor and began working up the River with the Tide of Flood - but the Wind still continues fore.   At 1/2 past 10. p.m. we came to anchor close to Gravesend on the Tide of Flood getting slack; -- A great number of Ships being in Company. ---   Thursday 4. July !  We weighed anchor at 1/2 past 8 o'clock this morning at the beggining [sic] of Flood Tide.   At 1/2 past 1 p.m. we came to anchor immediately abreast of Woolwich from whence we see St. Pauls and the Spires of some other Churches in London being here only 8 miles distant from that Capital by Land. ---   We this day passed through a most beautiful rich and fertile Tract of country as any in the World on each hand as we sailed up the River. -- Some of the Seats of Nobleman and Gentlemen near the River are very striking and beautifully laid out; particularly Lord Eardley's (?) near Schooters Hill in Kent -- and Mr Avelock's at Green-Lythe in Essex; and also Mr Zachariah Buttons in County of Kent.   Friday 5. July !  At 1/4 before 12 at Noon we weighed anchored and stood up the River with the Tide of Flood. -- At Half 2. P.[M.] we came to anchor at Deptford.   At 3. p.m. I set out by Water for London in one of Thames wherries and landed at the Stairs near the Tower at Half past 4. p.m. -- From thence I took a Hackney Coach I called at Messrs. Coutts & Co's Banking House to get some money (£50 Str.) and took up my residence immediately afterwards at Osborn's Hotel in the Adelphi. -- A few minutes after my arrival there my old friend Mr. Archd. Campbell the Army Agent called on me and staid to dine with me giving me all the Highland news; and informing me that my dear Brother Charles had been some little time since dangerously ill but that he is now (thank God!) fast recovering.   In the Evening I went to call on my excellent and highly esteemed friend Chas. Forbes Esqr. M.P. of Fitzroy Square; but I had not the good luck of finding him at Home having left Town a few days since for Oxford but from which he is expected in the course of tomorrow.   I then proceed [sic] to call on my old worthy friend Mr. Alexr. Gray of Mary la bonne St. whom I found at Home and spent Half an hour with. -- From his House I returned to my Quarters between 10 & 11 oclock and went immediately to Bed.   Saturday 6. July !  Mr. Archd. Campbell Breakfasted with me at 9. a.m. -- At 10. I went out to make the necessary calls. -- I first visited my much esteemed friend Jas. Drummond Esqr. M.P. of Great George St. Westminster and found him and Lady Emily at Home. -- I sat with them for Half an Hour. -- Mr Drummond was then so good as to accompany me to take Lodgings which we were so fortunate as to obtain in the adjoining Street to his own namely at No. 22. Fludyer's Street Westminster -- where I hired very commodious furnished capable of accommodating my whole Family for Five Guineas a week. -- Mr. D. then accompanied me to the Treasury and Downing Street. -- At the former I was promised a Treasury Order for Landing my Baggage & Furniture and Presents etc. &c. free from Duty at the Custom House.   At the latter office I was informed that Earl Bathurst would be there between 3 and 4 oclock which would be my best time to call on Him. --   Mr. D. and myself then parted and I returned to the Hotel -- from whence I took a Hackney Coach and went to call on Genl. Balfour Mr. Thos. Wilde(?) and my friend Mr Chas. Forbes. -- The two former were not at Home; but the latter was just returned from Oxford and he received me in the most kind and affectionate manner. I remained with him till 3 o'clock. -- I then returned to the Hotel to call for my Dispatches and Papers with which I immediately proceeded to wait on Earl Bathurst arriving at the Office 5 minutes before 4 o'clock.   His Lordship received me immediately on my Name being announced to Him and gave a very kind and gracious reception. -- Our Interview lasted nearly Half an Hour. -- I then proceeded to leave my name at the Duke of York's House in Stable-Yard and afterwards at the Adjt. Genl's Office and the Office of the Duke's Mily. Secry. at the Horse-Guards then at Mr. Greenwoods and finally at Mr. Archd. Campbell's office in Regent Street; but these several Gentlemen had left their offices before I called. -- I then returned to the Hotel and took a hasty Dinner alone. ---   At 5. p.m. I set out from the Adelphi by water in a wherry to join the Surry at Rotherhithe where she was to be today.   On arrival there there being no tidings of the Surry I proceeded down the River as far as Deptford where I had left her yesterday. Here I was informed she had proceeded up the River with the morning Tide intending to go into and land her Cargo in one of the Great Docks. ---   I accordingly returned up the River and on my approaching the London Docks I learnt the Surry had put into them early in the afternoon. -- I landed therefore immediately with George and my Portmanteau but as the Dock Gates shut up regularly at 8 oclock at Night and it being near 9 o'clock when I landed I was at first refused Entrance.   I had therefore to wait on the Captain of the Docks (Mr. Walton) who after making many difficulties was at length prevailed on order the Gates to be opened -- and to permit me to enter the docks alone; being obliged to send George with my Baggage to sleep in a house in the Neighbourhood of the Docks till the Gates should be opened early on the following morning. I got on board the Surry lying near the Sea Entrance into the London Docks about Ten minutes before 9 o'clock and had the happiness of finding my dear Mrs. M. and our beloved Boy both in good Health - and only anxious for my arrival.   As no lights are allowed on board Ships in the Docks we all went to Bed after taking some Refreshments. --   Sunday 7 July !  I got up very early this morning and went out of the docks in search of George and my Baggage in Wapping and having found Him I brought him along with me on board the Surry; which we purpose making our Head Quarters now till we get all our Baggage etc. etc. etc. landed and passed the Custom House.   At 1. p.m. my good faithful and highly esteemed friend Charles Forbes Esqr. M.P. of Fitzroy Square his Daughter Kitty and youngest son James came on board the Surry to visit us and to see all our Pets Horse etc. etc. -- They staid [sic] to dine with us and left us at 6 o'clock. ---   Lachlan made Miss Kitty Forbes a present of one of his two Cockatoos.   Monday 8. July !  At 11. a.m. this day Mrs. M. Lachlan and myself left the Surry to proceed by Water to London for the purpose of seeing and sleeping for one Night in our newly taken Lodgings.   We took Boat near the Entrance of the docks and had a pleasant Rowe [sic] up the Thames to Whitehall Stairs where we landed -- and from thence took a Hackney Coach in which we drove to the House of our friend James Drummond Esqr. M.P. in Great George Street where I left Mrs. M. and Lachlan with Lady Emilly Drummond whilst I went to make some calls in Town; Mr. Drummond himself not being at Home.   I returned to Mr. Drummond's at 5. p.m. for Mrs. M. but found she had set out under charge of our friend Mr. Drummond to our Lodgings in Fluyder [sic] Street where I immediately joined her. -- She was much pleased with our Lodgings -- and had ordered a little dinner for us at Home -- George was out with Lachlan walking in the Park but came Home soon after my arrival.   Mr. Drummond Lady Emilly [sic] and their young Family -- and their friend Mr. Gordon of Abergeldy (?) had appointed tomorrow for visiting us on board the Surry in the London Docks. ---   Tuesday 9.  We Breakfasted at our Lodgings this morning and I went out soon afterwards to make some calls in Town -- but returned again before 12 o'clock. -- We then set out for the London Docks; it being arranged that the Drummond Family should join us there at 1 o'clock.   We only arrived about a quarter of an Hour before them on board the Ship; so that Mrs. M. was much hurried in making the necessary preparations for their reception. -- They joined us accordingly at 1. p.m. dined with us and remained on board with us till 5.p.m. when they took their Leave and returned to Town; having expressed themselves much pleased with every thing they saw from New South Wales -- and more especially with the neatness and spaciousness of our own accommodations on board. ---   I this day hired a Scotch Vessel called the Thane of Fife for Seventy Pounds Sterling to convey all my Baggage Furniture Pets Cow &c. &c. to my own Seat of Jarvisfield in the Island of Mull; -- with permission to fill her up with coals or anything else I chuse [sic] to send thither; her Burthen being Eighty Tons and commanded by Capt. James Wilson who has been formerly in that Country. ---   Wedy. 10. July 1822  I went to Town to transact Business and pay visits. I obtained a promise that the Lords of the Treasury would exempt my Baggage Presents &c. &c. ( -- with a few exceptions -- ) from paying Duty; and that Orders to that effect would be sent to the commissioners of the Customs & Excise in the course of tomorrow. -- I took an early Dinner in Town; and returned to the London Docks in the Evening.   Thursday 11. July !  Went to Town after Breakfast and came back again to Dinner. ---   Friday 12. July !  The Orders for landing my Baggage etc. arrived this day from the Treasury and the officers of the Customs & Excise came on board to inspect and pass the same; which ceremony commenced today but it appears it will take a week to go through the Business. -- I went to Town in the morning and came back to the Ship in the Evening. ---   Saturday 13. July 1822.  I went to Town after Breakfast to transact business and make a few calls. -- I hired and Jobbed (?) a Carriage (Coach) and Pair of horses agreeing to pay 25 Guineas per month for the same besides paying the Coachman Board Wages at the rate of 2 / 6 per Diem; the whole expence [sic] commencing on and from this same day.   I sent Horse Sultan this day to stand at Gullan's Livery Stables at the rate of 3 / - per Diem besides Board Wages to my own groom at the rate of 2 / 6 per Diem. --  Wednesday 9. Jany. 1822.  I set out from Sydney this morning in the Carriage accompanied by Mrs. Macquarie and Lachlan at 7 o'clock on a short Excursion to visit the Revd. Mr. Reddall & Family at Macquarie Field and the Cow Pastures; having made an appointment with Sir Thomas Brisbane to meet us at the latter Place. --- We arrived at Liverpool at 1/2 past 9 Breakfasted at Dillon's Inn and staid afterwards at Mr. Moore's till 12 o'clock. We then pursued our Journey to Macquarie Field -- where we arrived at 1 p.m. -- and were most kindly & hospitably received by the Host & Hostess.  I found Mr. Meehan here who had arrived from Bathurst on the day preceding. ---   My Servants & Baggage for my Tour to Illawarra had also arrived here last Night. --- We sat down to Dinner at 5 o'clock and went early to Bed. ---   Thursday 10. Jany.   We got up early and Mrs. M. and Lachlan set out with me in the Carriage a quarter before 7 o'clock this morning for the Cow Pastures intending to spend a couple of days at Cawdor the Government Principal Station there. ---   We found the Cow Pasture Road generally very rough and bad for Travelling and it took us two Hours and a quarter from Mr. Reddall's to the Ford over the River Nepean at the old Government Hut which is only a distance of 14 miles.  The Ford itself and both Banks being very steep we found much difficulty in passing; but we accomplished it without sustaining any accident. --- From the Ford it is near 4 miles to the Government Cottage at Cawdor -- where we arrived at a quarter before 10. a.m. the weather being extremely hot at that time. --- Mr. David Johnston met us on the Road on the Eastern side of the River Nepean and conducted us at Cawdor. Here we found Mr. De Arrietta a Spanish Gentleman who has lately obtained a grant at the Cow Pastures. ---   This is the first time of Mrs. Macquarie's visiting Cawdor which she admires very much.  Nancy Moore followed us in the Curricle from Mr. Reddall's with Edmund Sorell -- whom Lachlan had asked to accompany him to Cawdor. --- We had our Breakfast soon after our arrival. ---   At 2. p.m. Sir Thomas Brisbane attended by Major Ovens Mr. Oxley Capt. Antill and Mr. Murdoch joined us at Cawdor. --- The Day being excessively hot we did not dine till 6 o'clock when we sat down Eight Persons to Dinner. ---   The Govt. Cottage at Cawdor has lately been very much improved and enlarged since I was last here -- and is quite sufficient to accommodate us all. --- We went early to Bed intending to ride out very early in the morning.  Friday 11. Jany.  I got up at 5 o'clock this morning -- and soon afterwards Sir Thos. Brisbane Mr. D. Johnston & Mr. Murdoch set out from Cawdor to Brownlow-Hill to inspect the Govt. stock at that Station. --- We had a very pleasant Ride along that rich Tract of Pasture Land extending from Cawdor along Mount Hunter Creek to Brownlow Hill distant 8 miles from the former. --- We inspected the Govt. stock there accordingly -- and returned Home to Breakfast at 1/2 past 8 o'clock. ---   After Breakfast we mounted our Horses again and rode to Mr. McArthur's Farm of Camden -- where we inspected all his Improvements and Stock and returned Home again at 2 o'clock; having been this day 7 1/2 Hours on Horse-back. ---   Mrs. M. Lachlan Teddy and Nancy Moore went all in a Cart on our return Home to view at a distance Mr. McArthur's Improvements -- and returned Home by 5 o'clock. ---   We dined at 6 p.m. and went early to Bed intending to rise very early tomorrow morning.   Saturday 12. Jany. 1822.  We all got up this morning at Half past 4 o'clock -- and set out from Cawdor at Half past 5 o'clock; Sir Thomas Brisbane travelling with Mrs. M. me and Lachlan in our Carriage. --- We crossed the Nepean at the Ford of Macquarie Grove a Farm belonging to Mr. Hassall and thence we travelled by the Cow Pasture Road to Mr. Meehan's Farm of Macquarie-Field -- where we arrived at 8 o'clock. --- We had Breakfast soon afterwards. --- After Breakfast I accompanied Sir Thomas Brisbane to Liverpool to inspect the Public Buildings there and remained with him till his departure for Parramatta -- when I returned to Macquarie Field. The Revd. Mr. Reddall had Mr. Moore Mr. Throsby Dr. Hill and Mr. Meehan to Dine with us besides his own Family today. ---   Sunday 13. Jany. ---   Mrs. Macquarie Lachlan and myself accompanied by Mr. Meehan -- and John and Nancy Moore -- went this morning before Breakfast to see John Moore's Farm in Minto District adjoining that of Mr. Brooks. --- We viewed and examined different parts of it -- and Selected the fittest Place for building the House & offices on which John Moore marked out accordingly. --- This Farm is distant about 3 miles from Macquarie-field -- and Eight miles from the Town of Liverpool.  In honor of their young Master John & Nancy Moore have named their farm "Lachlan-Valley". We returned to Meehan Castle at 9 o'clock to Breakfast. ---   The Revd. Mr. Reddall went to perform Divine Service at Campbell-Town -- but returned Home to Dinner. ---   We dined at 1/2 past 5 -- and went early to Bed. ---   Monday 14. Jany.  Got up at 1/2 past 5. a.m. At 1/4 past 6. Mrs. M. Lachn. Edmund Sorell & Nancy Moore set out in the Carriage for Sydney -- whilst I accompanied by Mr. Meehan set out at the same time on my intended Tour of Inspection to Illawarra through the Districts of Airds and Appin; the Revd. Mr. Reddall accompanying us to Campbell-Town. --- On our arrival there we ordered Breakfast at Bradbury's and whilst it was getting ready I accompanied Mr. Reddall to see his Glebe and the Site he had selected for Building his Parsonage House on. --- The Glebe is about 2 miles distant from Town and very pleasantly situated commanding a fine extensive [view?] of the rich and beautiful District of Aids. --- We were absent about an Hour and a Half absent [sic] -- and then returned to Bradbury's where we took a good and hearty Breakfast at Ten o'clock.  After Breakfast we proceeded to take a survey of the Township and the New Church -- and which is a very pretty Building. The walls are up to their full Height and fit to receive the Roof which is preparing and will be put on in the course of the ensuing week. We fixed on the Site of the Burying Ground within a convenient distance of the Church -- and which is to consist of 3 acres of Ground. --- The principal Inhabitants assembled to meet us and expressed themselves highly pleased at the arrangements made on this occasion. ---   The Revd. Mr. Reddall took his leave of us at 1/4 before 12 at Noon -- and returned Home whilst I and Mr. Meehan pursued our Journey for Illawarra. ---   Mr. Bradbury is now building a very good two story Brick-House on his own Farm and on a very pretty Eminence immediately adjoining Campbell-Town as an Inn for the accommodation of the Public and having asked me to give his Farm a name I have called it "Bradbury Park". ---   Campbell-Town is 13 miles from Liverpool -- and 8 miles from Mr. Meehan's Farm of Macquarie-Field --; it is a very beautiful and centrical situation surrounded by a rich Populous Neighbourhood and making a good stage for Persons travelling to the Southern and Western Districts. ---   The Road through Aids and Appin for the first 20 miles from Campbell-Town is tolerably good -- but from Mr. Broughton's Farm all the rest of the way to the Mountain Pass of Illawarra is most execrably bad for any sort of wheel-carriage. --- This very bad Road commences at King's Falls where we crossed the Head of George's River very near its source and from thence nothing can be worse -- it being almost impassable for a Cart or Gig -- and I confess I wondered at my Baggage Dray and Gig getting on at all without breaking down.  After scrambling over about 8 miles of this horrid rough Road we arrived at 4. p.m. at a Stream of Water in a Deep Valley about 9 miles from Mr. Broughton's Farm which I have named "David's Valley" in honor of Mr. David Johnston who joined us here just as we were about sitting down to Dinner at 6 o'clock; and in this Valley we Pitched our Camp for the Night. ---   Tuesday 15. Jany.  We got up at Day-break and had our Baggage Packed up and arranged sending back the Curricle and Dray with the heavy Baggage to Mr. O'Brien's Farm in Appin; the Road being too rough and bad to admit of their proceeding farther on the Journey to Illawarra. --- We therefore put all the Baggage and Provisions required for our Journey on three Pack Horses. ---   Mr. Cornelius O'Brien joined us at this station just as we were ready to set out. ---   At 10 mins. past 6. a.m. we set forward on our Journey; and after passing over some very bad Road and crossing the Cataract River near it's [sic] source we arrived at the summit of the great mountain that contains the Pass to the Low Country of Illawarra -- the Top of this mountain being three miles from our last station. --- On our arrival on the summit of the mountain we were gratified with a very grand magnificent Bird's Eye view of the Ocean the 5 Islands and of the greater part of the low country of Illawarra as far as Red Point. --- After feasting our Eyes with this grand Prospect we commenced descending the mountain at 20 mins. after 8 o'clock. The Descent was very rugged rocky and slippery and so many obstacles opposed themselves to our progress that it was with great difficulty that the Pack-Horses could get down this horrid steep descent. --- At length we effected it but it took us an Hour to descend altho' the Descent is only one mile & a Half long. --- The whole face of this mountain is clothed with the largest and finest Forest Trees I have ever seen in the Colony. --- They consist chiefly of the Black-Butted Gum Stringy Bark Turpentine Mountain Ash Fig Pepperment [sic] Box-Wood Sassafrass and Red Cedar; but the latter is now very scarce most of it having been already cut down and carried away to Sydney. --- There are also vast Quantities of the Cabbage Palm and Fern Trees growing in the face of the Mountain the former being very beautiful and of great Height. ---   Finding that this mountain has never yet received any particular name I have christened it the "Regent Mountain" as it was first descended by Mr. Throsby in the year 1815 when our present King was Regent of the United Kingdom.  We arrived at a Creek containing a very pretty Stream of Fresh running Water about 1 1/2 miles from the foot of the mountain at a qr. past 9 o'clock and here we halted to Breakfast and to refresh our men and Cattle. --- I have named this stream of Fresh Water "Throsby's Creek" in honor of Mr. Throsby who first crossed it on his descending the Regent Mountain.  Having Breakfasted we pursued our Journey at 11. a.m. along the Sea shore towards Mr. Allan's Farm at Red Point riding chiefly on a soft Beach for 12 miles -- and through very barren unprofitable Land. --- We crossed the Entrance of Tom Thumb's Lagoon which was at this time dry -- and soon afterwards arrived at Mr. Allan's Lands meeting there with about 100 Natives who had assembled at this place to meet and welcome me to Illawarra. They were of various Tribes and some of them had come all the way from Jervis's Bay -- and they all appeared to be very intimate with Mr. O'Brien. --- They all knew who I was and most of them pronounced my name (Govr. Macquarie) very distinctly. --- They were very civil and I regretted exceedingly that I had no Tobacco for them. Having remained with them for about Ten minutes we resumed our Journey to Mr. Allan's Establishment. It is a pretty enough Farm and a good deal of it is cultivated but it is too near the Sea and falls far short of the fine description I have heard the Proprietor and others give of it. --- We ascended a Hill at the Eastern extremity of this Farm from whence we had a very fine view of the Coast to the Southward as far as Basse's Head as well as of the grand Sheet of Inland Water or Lake called Allowrie or Illawarra -- which is about 20 miles in circumference and has a communication with the Sea by a very narrow channel. ---   From Mr. Allan's Farm we proceeded on to Mr. Jenkins's and thence through Mr. Brooks's to Mr. Brown's Establishment situated on the Western Bank of the Lake. --- Here we arrived at 1/2 past 7 o'clock and took up our station for the Night. --- Our Baggage however did not come up till 8 o'clock altho' it came by a shorter Route than that we took which was circuitous. The Lands we travelled over from Mr. Allans to Mr. Browns were chiefly open Forest Land of good quality -- and well wooded and watered. ---   We have Travelled this day at least 30 miles from David's Valley to Mr. Brown's Establishment.  We had rather a late Dinner today -- not having Dined till 1/2 past 9 o'clock and soon afterwards we went to Bed. ---   Wednesday 16. Jany.   We set out from Mr. Brown's at 1/2 past 8 o'clock to explore the Country to the Southward and Westward; having first sent off our Servants and Baggage towards the Mountain over which the new Road from Illawarra to Appin has recently been made by Mr. O'Brien.  We proceeded through a very rich Country in a southerly direction for two miles till we arrived on the left Bank of the Macquarie-River a very pretty Stream of Fresh Water about 20 yards in Breadth which falls into the Lake -- and is full of Fish -- with Cedar and other good Timber growing on its Banks. From the Macquarie River we travelled on in a westerly direction to Col. Johnston's Farm near the foot of the mountains. This Farm is a very fine one well watered and contains some very extensive beautiful Meadows bordering on the Lake and River. We continued our Journey still in a westerly direction to Mount Throsby -- which we ascended for the purpose of having a view of those parts of Illawarra which I had not time to visit. On our arrival on the summit of this Hill. we had a most extensive fine view of all the low Country to the Southward and Eastward of us -- including the Sea the Lake and the River. --- At 12 at Noon we descended Mount Throsby -- and then directed our course backwards through a fine open Forest towards Mr O'Brien's new Road which we arrived at 2. p.m. --- Having rested ourselves & Horses at a fresh water creek at the foot of the Mountain we were to ascend for half an Hour we commenced ascending the first Range at 1/2 past 2; -- and at 4. p.m. we arrived on the Top of the Mountain; which having obtained no particular name before I have christened it "Mount Brisbane" in honor of the new Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane. I rode up the whole of the mountain which is about two miles long exclusive of the Ranges leading to the foot of it -- which are at least two miles more in length. --- The Road is perfectly safe and passable for Cattle and is what may be termed a good Bridle Road; -- and it might he made a good Cart Road with very little more trouble. --- In ascending a very steep part of the mountain through some carelessness in the Driver one of our Pack Horses with his Load slipped and tumbled over three [text missing?] several times till he was stopped by a large Tree. --- We all concluded he was killed but the Load preserved him and after being disengaged from it he got upon his Legs again without being in the least hurt or wounded. --- We came up with or rather overtook the Baggage about Half way up the Pass which was fortunate as we were thus enabled to afford the People in charge of it our assistance. With exception of this accident we all got up Mount Brisbane perfectly safe and with great ease to ourselves. ---   The face of this mountain is also studded with very large fine Timber of the same description as that on the Regent Mountain but there are more Cedar Trees on the former than on the latter. --- I had one noble Cedar (Red) Tree measured on this mountain which measured 21 feet in Diameter and 120 feet in Height; the size of it being greater and the Tree itself a finer one than I had ever seen before. --- The part of it which measured 21 feet in circumference was Ten feet from the Root of it and continued to be of the same size for 60 feet above the ground. --- I also saw here the largest and finest Box Trees I had ever seen in the Colony.  We had a noble extensive view of the Ocean and part of Illawarra from the Summit of Mount Brisbane. --- We rested a few minutes on the Top of the Mountain and then pursued our Journey towards Appin at 20 minutes past 4 o'clock over a very good Bridle Road tho' a little rough and stony. --- At 10 minutes past 7 p.m. arrived at a very pretty thick Forest with good grazing for cattle distant about Ten miles from the Top of Mount Brisbane. Here we took up our Ground for the Night our men and cattle being rather tired. This day's Journey is about 32 miles. --- Mr. O'Brien has named this Place Lachlan Forest in honor of my beloved Boy. ---   Thursday 17. Jany.   We got up early and Breakfasted -- then had our Baggage packed up and sent off and set out ourselves from Lachlan-Forest at 1/2 past 8 o'clock a.m. After riding Five miles over a tolerable good Road through an open Forest Country we arrived at the Cataract River at 1/2 past 9 a.m. the Banks of which are immensely high and rocky -- and almost perpendicular. Here Mr. O'Brien succeeded in cutting out and forming a tolerable good Pass on either side of the River and altho' very steep he has brought over a Cart & Team of Bullocks through the Passes thus made on each side of the River. It is frightful to look at -- but perfectly safe for Cattle and Persons on Horseback. I rode down the Pass on the Right Bank of the River and up that on the Left Bank without once dismounting.  It appearing to me that Mr. O'Brien has great merit in constructing this Road (which was by subscription) with such few Hands and slender means I have christened the Pass of the Cataract River after him namely -- "O'Brien's Pass". --- He had only six men employed on this Line of Road (about 21 miles from Appin to Illawarra) with Sixty Pounds subscribed by the Principal Gentlemen who had large stocks of Cattle at Illawarra. Having crossed to the Appin side of O'Brien's Pass we pursued our Journey. --- I called on Mrs. Broughton at "Lachlan Vale" 3 miles from the Cataract River and remained an Hour with her & her Family. I afterwards proceeded on my Journey calling at Mr. O'Brien's Farm where the Baggage was ordered to Halt -- and wait our arrival. --- Here I quitted my Horse for the Tandem and set out in it for Sydney at 1/2 past 12 o'clock leaving my Servants & Baggage to follow next day at their leisure. ---   I stopt [sic] at Liverpool to change Horses for Half an Hour then set out again and arrived at Government House Sydney at Ten minutes past six o'clock; finding my dear Mrs. M. and our Darling Boy in good Health and sitting down at Dinner with a few friends namely Major Antill Dr. Ramsay and the Revd. Mr. Reddall.  I had almost forgot to mention that I left my Travelling companions Mr. Meehan Mr. David Johnston and Mr. O'Brien at the House of the latter where they were engaged to dine previous to their proceeding to their respective Homes.  L.M.   N.B. At least 20000 acres of good Land still remains unlocated in Illawarra. ---   L.M.   [...] will save them so much unhappiness Miss Black and De Mestro were married a few days ago. they are now well paird. both being of the Pygmy race but are to use a common expression `little and good.' He is in my opinion one of the most worthy little fellows in the Colony Her amicable disposition is well known.  Two other marriages are to take place tomorrow at Parramatta which have causd. a great deal of Interest throughout the whole Colony You would be a long time in guessing who the Parties are if I did not choose to tell you that they are two Pair of our Sable Countrymen and Women the latter brought up and civilised by the Native Institutions the former lately breeched for the occasion. Farm with Farming Utensils &c is given them for the purpose of commencing the Business on a large scale. They have my sincere wishes for their welfare and Prosperity. But still think a Man possessed even of my small share of foresight if asked His opinion on it might safely answer It is all a Bottle of smoke. They certainly are the most degenerate Mortals in the universe between them and the Brute Creation there scarcely is a Step. in my opinion their Ideas will never attain to more than the knowledge of a good Belly full. your old Shipmate Miss Browne married to Brown of the Mary shortly before He left for India. Died of a short time back in Child Birth. I saw her the evening before in perfect health and spirits early next morning she was Dead the uncertainty of Human Life never before made so great an impression on my mind by [sic] am not yet sufficiently methodised to expatiate on the awful visitation of God.. If this was from Geo. Allen this Subject would see the end of at least two or three Sheets having become almost a Rank Methodist. Three of four of the Government vessels are going off tomorrow for the New Settlement laden with Prisoners and Soldiers under the command of Captn. Allemond of the 48th Regt. I believe they intend cultivating the Sugar Cane as the Climate is supposed to be very favourable for it. [54]   Whyte and his wife saild three Days ago for Port Dalrymple they intend I believe sealing there He I suppose join Messrs. Montgaux Whyte Read & Co.  You may tell Rebecca not to expect Her Bonnetts by the Speeds having heard Mrs. Foster making frivolous excuses for not having them done when they sent about them and also say as She had no sent up a Box for them she would not do them. I mention with the view that the great disappointment if they do not come may not be to sudden as probably it might affect her fine flow of Spirits. besides I wish to show her how ready and willing her sincere friend Mrs. Foster is to oblige her on all occasions.  Your old Friend Grimes arrivd. here a short time back from a most unsuccessful Sealing Voyage having procured but 800 and lost his Chief Officer and six Other of his men. He saild. again three day ago for England by way of Otehete freighted by Marsden He desired me to be sure and remember him to you. You say in one of your letters you enclosd. some certificates you must afterwards have changed your mind as I did not receive them. with regard to the money you owe me not being in immediate want of it I think I had better lay it out at interest until Mother arrives. Hamilton & hughes return to England by the Shipley. they absolutely detest this place but are extravagant in their praise of Hobart Town. they were not noticed here as much as they expected Hamilton I believe writes to you by their vessel  You will receive a visit shortly from the commander in chief by the Midas / Mrs Lang (alias Mrs Underwood) and Dick go down also by Her for the purpose of trading and buying up Wheat in exchange - by the way do not forget the Hint I have given you touching the Wheat - a few thousands in a short time will pay well. The Gazettes from 13th of January up to the 10th inst. accompany this / I have written almost enough this time therefore conclude with love to Rebecca and am my dear Brother James  your very loving and affectionate Brother Geo Reibey Sydney  Sydney 14th February 1823. Mr David Hope  Dear Cousin  I shall endeavour by the length of this Letter to pay up my arrears being at present in debt for your favours of the 28th Decem. 21 and 28th Feby 22. accompanying the latter I received 8 Numbers of the Edin. Revue... free from the hands of Mr Browne for which receive my acknowledgements to have them second hand as you observe will serve my purpose quite as well as at the full price. indeed much better / though not myself of a very thrifty saving turn I can admire a judicious economy whether displayed in trifleing or momentary affairs I shall aim at following the practical example of so good a Standard / it pleased me to find that you believed me to be above the weak vanity which would much rather pay for the whole Feast than another should have the first taste / with respect to the merit of the Edin. Review I agree with you and think that it exceld every other work of the Kind in Europe which led me to make choice of it in my first letter to you however I beg it to be understood that my judgement is confined to Britain being pretty well read in most of her best Authors. France may or may not have a production of equal merit. ignorance on this head compels me to shut my mouth and of course to suppress the opinion  I learn that France is a Nation deeply learned and far advanced in literature consequently it behoves one to be cautious in speaking upon the merits of our own Authors lest we are supposed from National prejudice to overlook or not duly appreciate the labours of any other individuals whether French Italian or Turk. [61]   The character of Mr Jeffry I have been acquainted with some time of his powerful talents I am a great admirer and cannot say that I dislike his politicks   Were you to ask me my reasons for this preference perhaps the answer would be common place and unsatisfactory; some men range themselves at once on the side of the weaker party without giving the merits of the quarrel any consideration perhaps this is my case - and perhaps you will think me an egoist for saying so. I have observed the Wig faction possess in a much greater proportion men of real talent who by dint of ability only are enabled to keep anything like a footing against the all powerful influence of Tories and Placemen. many of these it has struck me crouch under the Arm of power from a conviction of what would be their comparative insignificance were they to join the Party among whom to be in any wise distinguished. Common sence is a great requisate / if what I have said should clash with your ideas tell me so and I will endeavour to convince myself of my error and get rid of my present prepossession in favour of a set of men whom I have principally known through the medium of Newspapers. perhaps calculated to convey but a very limited Knowledge of their true motives and principals. I am frequently told that an examination for a short time of men and manners in England would change my sentiments upon many subjects. this I cannot believe notwithstanding Goldsmith himself tells us  "That life is a Book of which he whose observations have been confined to his own Native Country has only read a single page"  I trust however that I should at all times be open to conversion.  Should I want Books at any time I will avail myself of your obliging offer to send them out to me but we obtain them here almost with as great facility as in England by giving a discretional order. / you might send some that I have already my collection now being pretty good. The works of your ingenious Countryman Sir W. Scott I have long since read / scarcely one of His Poems or Novels have escaped me from the Lady of the Lake to the very inferior production upon Waterloo from Waverly to the Buccaneers / this last disappointed my expectations / whether it or the Monastery is best I cannot determine and perhaps it will become me better to withold an opinion lest a remark which I have some where read should be applied to me  "That every Man especially at an age when most... of experience and apprehension of being mistaken should put him upon his guard ought to be very cautious how he passed judgement upon Writers of established merit for fear it should happen to him as it does to a great many to blame what he does not understand." [62] If I thought Henry Grey Bonner could turn your extract from my Letter to our advantage I would surprise him with something more of the same kind from myself but I doubt it. That same Right Honble Gent you must know has had the misfortune (tho a Wig) to fall a little under my displeasure for his very unwarranted attack upon Genl. McQuarie our late worthy Governor than whom a more strictly upright and Moral Man will never again rule over us nor one who will show himself more truly alive to the best interests of the Colony by his laborious assiduity for its advancement and reformation / I am much astonished to find that the Revd. Mr Marsden has found means to create so general and so strong a feeling in his favour throughout Britain and at the expence of the worthy Personage abovementioned we here can best judge which of the two deserves it most. The great host of Religionists headed by the great Wilberforce seem to have long sought the ruin of a meritorious Man acting unwittingly upon the most exaggerated and unfounded complaints; in the Country however the Revd. Gentn. alluded to stands alone his spiritual Brethren on their arrival here invariably change sentiments towards him.   The Commissioners Report I find is at last come forth a few copies are now in the Colony but I have not yet seen one. McQuarie as we expected is severely lashed and Marsden much excelled.. it is now almost the sole topic of the Day nothing I believe ever excited a stronger sensation here which is increased by the Copies being so scarce and the utter impossibility at present of getting them out of the hands of the few individuals to whom they are sent. everyone therefore is enquiring of his Neighbour if he has seen the Report or heard anything that is in it. Should this chance to be the case whatever it may be it is swallowed with the greater avidity. Should I be lucky enough to get it into my hands before the Vessel sails by which this Letter is forwarded I will let you know what will be the effect that in my opinion it is likely to produce in the event of the British Govt. adopting the Measures it may recommend though from what I can collect a total silence is observed upon the score at present that everything respecting the future direction of our affairs will be treated of in a continuation a great many individuals well known here are rather roughly handled and some deservedly but if all I hear is true a great portion is irrelevant abuse foreign to the purpose of his mission and in no way calculated to further its ends while I admit that it was his particular province to make a faithful representation of the public Actions of public Men I think it made no part of his duty to animadvert upon the private conduct of private Men deserve it or not supposing however that he had the right to do so its impolicy is obvious. indelible disgrace is fixed upon them which does not perish... but is handed down to their Posterity - and if in this place the Sins of the Fathers are to be visited upon the Children every scheme for reformation will be thwarted - every laudable excursion paralysed - if an enquiry was instituted into the Character of every man in the British Dominions very few among those whom the World designate just and honourable if weighted in the balance but would be found wanting and without any real claim to such distinction. We know that the man does not breathe who can take a retrospect of his past life with guiltless satisfaction- Should not some attention be paid to the way in which a Person sent here has conducted himself since he committed the offence that made him for a time an outcast if it has been exemplary will any feeling liberal minded man say he ought not be reinstated in Society? - No to what end?. and then are these wounds so sensibly felt by him and healed by good behaviour again torn open and he once more to answer as it were for crimes which by being harrowed up after the lapse of so many years places him in the same degraded point of view in which he stood as a culpret answering for them at the Bar of justice - Perhaps you will think the above stricture premature as I have not yet read the Report but those that have say that it contains a great deal of abstract matter and a very few palpably erronious statements. if so they will not fail in appearing before the British Public in a proper shape. two of the principal personages attacked are now in England Messrs Redfern and Eagar. men possessed of good abilities and great local Knowledge therefore quite competent to cope with Mr Bigge. [63] [64]   in fact one of the objects of their voyage was to meet that Gentn. upon his own Ground and reply to the aspertions they knew he was about to cast upon them. both it is true unfortunately came Prisoners to this Country but have maintained an unimpeachable character ever since their arrival - which together with their superior talents have procured them much influence and esteem among those who came here under the same circumstances. they have consequently been looked upon as the Leaders of this party between which and a certain set here a violent enmity and jealousy exists - these latter pride themselves upon having come out free but not content with conscious superiority which this circumstance assuredly gives them they catch at every opportunity to evince their contempt and dislike by the most arrogant demeanour and unfeeling expressions the real cause is a jealousy of the increasing importance which the superior wealth of this class of the community is daily giving to them no hesitation is made in saying that a fellow who has been a convict should not be allowed to hold property and they would fain make it appear that in virtue of their condescension in coming among such vile refuse - the distance too considered - all the Loaves and Fishes should be wrested from the creatures and given as a compensation for the honour done the place by their presence. this feeling was carried so far as to be broached in one of our Courts of Justice the Judge of which is a person I have mentioned / He took great pains to search for and examine musty old statutes and succeeded in finding one which provided that no subject once convicted of a Felony shall at any after time be allowed to possess Property in his own right / this has never been acted upon here but was delivered with great emphasis to a crowed court as the Law of the Land. The great proportion of the people are here for Offences do not come within this statute - therefore the sensation excited by such a declaration was not very great however upon being more maturely considered it was received as a dangerous point gained that might lead to something more comprehensive - the whole body of what are termed the Emancipists took the alarm called a general Meeting and came to the resolution of appealing to the British Parliament. In pursuance of which Messrs Redfern and Eagar were deputed to lay their representations before the House of Commons to enable them to meet every expence in doing so - they were furnished with about £1000 Subscribed by the Meeting - though if it is true that the Commissioner himself recommends that the abovementioned Law which places the Effects of the Emancipated Felons in jeopardy should be abolished all further proceeding on the part of Mr Eagar will be unnecessary. Should it ultimately turn out that we have formed an erroneous estimate of the value of Mr Bigg's mission to the Colony I opine that you will set us down as a narrow-minded - prejudiced set - if you are not heavily sick tired and impatient of the tedious length of my treatise upon colonial politicks you will read on and hear the excuse I should make in such a case. but if on the contrary it is as uninteresting as I suspect and poor patience being worn to a skeleton expires here the luckless Australians! what conclusions will be drawn to your disadvantage by my sober calculating headed Cousin. How is it he will say that these opinions are so widely diffused - upon what have these frail mortals at the Antipodes founded such notions and formed such gloomy anticipations when things it appears have turned out so diametrically opposite - they do not consult the Entrails of Beasts or the flight of Birds as in days of yore neither can I attribute it to the climate which is not of a nature to produce that vapourish disposition to view always the dark side of things - what is it then he will say to himself. Why nothing short of downright Rank prejudice - and I will prove it - out of the mouth of one of their own body will I convict them who forsooth has had the effrontery to say in one part of this letter that he has become prejudiced in favour of a set of men here without being able to assign any thing like a reasonable reason why - what therefore is this person's predominant passion? it does not require an answer - consequently as I believe him to be a fair specimen I conclude that they have all been activated by the same feeling in their speculations upon the results of Mr Bigg's Report and not worthy of a sensible Man's further notice. - But stop - it has just occurred to me that I have said in one of my Letters. That I take great interest in the affairs of this Country to give them up too precipitately will not seem so and upon second thoughts. I had better first read a little more of this tiresome letter. [65] [66]   When I tell you that the Commissioner immediately on his arrival attached himself closely to the party I have spoken of as so hostile to the interests of the Emancipated Colonists and was evidently both in word and deed thoroughly infected with their illiberality you will think with me that they had great cause to apprehend the words from him. My good Cousin resumes - well this is a tolerable apology and may do but had they been anything better than short sighted dolts without one particle of penetration they would have at once seen the refined policy of Mr B's conduct in adopting the best method of drawing out all these real sentiments by a deceiving sympthay This my dear Cousin was a motive I at one time was willing to attribute to him it doubtless would have been wise plan had there been a sincere desire on the part of Mr Biggs to secure [?] the interests of one part of the community against the power and malignity of the others but the nicest resolver of doubtful cases would view this in the light only of a possibility and to be rejected in favour of a conclusion drawn from Word and deed. Notwithstanding however all that has been said and done the words of the people are satisfied that whatever may be the ulterior purposes of God [?] with regard to New South Wales it will continue to preserve its character for justice and moderation should we unfortunately be mistaken other sentiments than those of loyalty and attachment to the Mother Country will develope [sic] themselves as time advances; the Native born's of even the first generation are not so void of reflection or common sence as not to value themselves upon personal freedom and equal system of laws: before I conclude this subject I cannot refrain from once more recommending the character of the Govr. Macquarie to your notice. I am anxious to impress upon your mind a thorough persuasion of his worth - it would give me much pleasure if my humble efforts should be any wise instrumental in doing justice to a man whose most heartfelt pleasure during his arduous administration here was to promote the welfare of such as manifested a return of virtuous [?] feelings and good conduct what can be a nobler undertaking than to [?] snatch a poor lost fellow creature from the vortex of Sin and misery - to restore a useful agent to society by those well directed means which had Govr. McQuarie been weak or vile enough to give up in favour of the opinions of the Set here who are shameless enough to contend that for Convicts this is a place of punishment exclusively and that for example sake no other consideration should influence the conduct of the Govt towards them had this injudiceous system I say been pursued those that now form the most important and valuable part of the population of New South Wales would have been languishing in Slavery and wretchedness not the protectors but the disturbers of Society: does he then whose disinterested benevolence has made so many of his fellow-men happy desire to be thought and spoken of with horror (as is the case in Scotland) as the determined opponent of all good works - the merciless persecutor of that paragon of holiness Saint Samuel were the good people of your Country those I mean who deem themselves specially called upon to execrate the name of the tyrant and foe of religion but whose zeal I am afraid hurry them to judgement upon ex-parte evidence were they coolly to examine should an opportunity offer the portly carcase - round fat jolly red face and laughing eyes of the said Saint of ours whom I have no doubt they have been accustomed to view in imagination as the very type of mortification and woe with the pale emaciated visage thin spare form and dozen sorrowful etceteras the usual consequence of deep care me thinks it would strike them that the appearance of the Man indicated very little suffering either in mind or body which together with the testimony of every old inhabitant in the place ought to be proof sufficient to refute the unfavourable opinions entertained of Genl. Macquarie respecting his conduct to Mr Marsden - you may judge for yourself of the degree of estimation this worthy man is held in when I tell you that on his ensuing Birthday there are to be no less than four Public Dinners in the single Town of Sydney - If Mr Wilberforce was aware that instead of those mighty things atchieved among the Savages of New Zealand by Mr Marsden there is comparatively nothing done for the advancement of Religion and civilisation and that through mismanagement and the bad Conduct of the Missionaries the Natives have taken a disgust at the former which many years will not efface his present opinion of Mr M might be a little staggered.   you will scarcely credit what profligacy that some of these Ministers have attained it is a fact that one of them keeps several of the Native Women under the very eyes of his Wife. Some credit would have been due to Mr Marsden if he had turned his attention in the spiritual way to our own Aboriginees but it unluckily happens that these poor wretches have neither Pork nor Flax to give for the saving of their Souls; when our native institution was suggested by Govr. Macquarie Mr Marsden could not be prevailed upon to give his assistance or countenance to it upon what principle I could never learn but it is thought that he was chagrined that any but himself should have been the first promoter or that his opinion of their intellects was so contempable [sic] that he despaired of ever being able to bring them to the Knowledge of a God the result has provd [?] that such a surmise would have been fallacious for under proper treatment these truly benighted race have manifested a degree of intelligence which I thought was not in their nature they are notwithstanding the lowest species of human beings and consequently it is an arduous task to undertake to draw such from a state of barbarism and adapt them to the purposes of Society - That they have degenerated from a state of nature is clear from a comparison with other newly discovered people by the most wimsical casuist it cannot be contended that nature who has bestowed such various faculties on man should originally have designed these for so abject a condition Inured to privation of almost every kind they find in ease apparently their only comfort From habitual indolence they have become supine and slothful their ideas extending no further than the objects within their view and from thence it follows that their language must be very confined as it can embrace little more than the names of places and the Animal and Vegetable productions of the climate In their infancy they must be treated tenderly in order that as they grow up they may look back with aversion to their primitive condition and feel the more sensibly their obligation to providence and to us as its immediate instruments in releasing them from a state of misery and want. They should feel as we do that to the continuance of the comforts they enjoy something must be necessary as nothing can be obtained without an endeavour to procure it. These endeavours closely connected constitute a life of industry to the measure of which a short experience would acquaint them those enjoyments would be proportioned and industry arising from necessity would be as acceptable to them as to any of the people. [67] [68]   The emigration to our shores is just now very great every vessel lands a swarm no less than seventy (70) persons came out upon one Ship a short time since. as these seemed with scarcely an exception respectable I went on board for the purpose of examining how suitable accomodations could possibly be provided for so many in so small a Ship and upon viewing the small comfortless holes I then met with did not before believe that Men would tolerate an existance in such a place though ever so eager to come out here and partake of the Milk and Honey which the sanguine minds of many together with the high coloured representation of Mr Jeffrys and others leads them to believe flows without end. Ours is undoubtedly a fine Country both as to Soil and Climate but nothing extraordinary nor worthy of the extravagant praise that has been bestowed upon it by such enthusiasts as Mr J the best guide for a Settler to go by that I have yet seen (excepting the valuable Worth [?]) of my Countryman Wentworth [?] is a small publication written by a Captain Dixon the commander of a ship called the Skelton that was out here about 2 years ago. it has no pretensions to literary worth but is a simple and unvarnished relation of facts. it represents as far as the truth will warrant the advantages resulting from Emigration to N.S.W. without concealing any of the difficulties that present themselves to the surprise and disappointment of most Settlers several have returned in disgust but these I am happy to say are such as we shall never have to regret the losing of - indeed we have had many character imported of late years whose absence could have been borne without any serious injury to the interests of the Country who like sickly stagnant waters taint the atmosphere without fertilizing the Soil / [69] They journey this far you would suppose for the sole and generous purpose of showing the latest fashions and most approved Airs and attitudes with no small share of self respect and importance they walk and strut a very little more than an hour upon our stage before they are hurled back to their native insignificance a short experience shows that something more than a well made coat and imposing manner is necessary to persuade us they are genuine Gentlemen; a disappointment in this respect frequently operates in depriving our Society of those honourable members. and by the bye in several instances lately in such a way as left no choice to the parties for you must know some of our most immaculate Settlers have been in a very rude manner shipped off with some disaggreable appendages to the legs called Irons to the Settlements of New Castle and Port Macquarie places appropriated for the reception of Malefactors from this place it is I believe a reasoned maxim that an Ass can wear a Lion's skin for a season only the moral is applicable to these Gentlemen there is something that we call behaviour that is amediately and uniformly understood The plainest peasant or labourer will say of a man whom he esteems in a certain way He is a Gentleman every bit of him and he is perfectly understood by all who hear him not rank in life but a turn of mind a tenor of conduct that is amiable and worthy and the ground of confidence. Formerly it was very common for Settlers to remain here only a sufficient length of time to get their land measured - to take up the Grant - and then to steal away having first taken care to pocket a little cash the proceeds of the Farm which was amediately [sic] Sold to one of the Residents. this very fraudulent practice has been effectivally remedied by some late Order regulating the distribution of Land and which will have the judicious tendency of proportioning the Grant to the Capital. heretofore recommendatory letters to Men in power have in a very many instances been suffered to have an undue influence that a poor Emigrant possessed of these have succeeded in obtaining larger Grants than the real Capitalist [?] who had the means of carrying into effect every thing required of him by the Govt. and added a real benefit to the Colony by the introduction of his property the present system requires the Emigrant for every Hundred Acres located to him to support a Man from his own means permanently. consequently for 1000 Acres he must take ten men. I hear such an incumbrance as this will require no mean Capital which consideration will induce every one who is not imprudent enough to risk the loss of his all to take no more than upon a calculation he will find he can safely support some have indeed laid the foundation of their inevitable ruin by departure from this line of conduct among whom is your friend Browne if he really is such by the way I must in confidence tell you I never could suffer this Gent. to bear the same relation to me not that I know any thing of him inconsistant with the character of an honest man but there is something so disgustingly obtrusive and unrefined in his nature with which the longer is your acquaintance the less you feel disposed to that `Sweet communion of Souls' which characterizes true friendship and esteem; if he did not quarrel with every Passenger coming out his manner and disposition bred such a dislike of him that all with scarcely an exception keep him at the greatest distance / [70] if Mr Miller came by the same Vessel I think a very worthy young man Mr Thomson and he are distantly related from standing in the same degree of affinity to a Mr Young who gave them both Letters to Sir Thomas Brisbane but I am sorry to say very little notice has been taken of either one or the others. Mr T indeed from having a little personal Knowledge of his Excely. recd. the most attention but these consisted in empty professions and unperformed promises. the truth is that his Philosophical speculations ocupy so much time that little can be spared for friend or the duties of his Govt. which I am grieved to say are most shamefully neglected instead of the affairs of the Colony being in that flourishing and rapidly improving state which characterized the active administration of Govr. Macquarie. they have been cramped and almost ruined by a series of injurious measures a want of energy and a total disregard for the interests of the Country in the present Rulers This is a sweeping charge you will say but I assure you it is not the less true.   I have written so much this time otherwise would enter more into particulars upon this subject however will not fail to do so some time or other suffice it to say that Sir Thomas either from supineness of reluctance to abstract himself in the least from more momentous affairs [?] upper regions has thrown ours entirely into the hands of Mr Gouldbourn the Colonial Secty. (a mere understrapper from Downing Street) a person who has neither ability or inclination to do us good. Mr Thomson is now at Port Dalrymple V.D.L. waiting patiently for the appointment of Naval Officer to that place which I believe is to take place shortly upwards of 12 Months have elapsed since he had the first promise of it from Sir Thomas who led him to expect that immediately on his arrival at Port Da. the Situation would be given to him in consequence of which Mr T. set off for that place forthwith where to his great surprise and disappointment he learnt from Lieut. Govr. Sorrell that the appointment was about to be confirmed to Lieut. Kenworthy who was then doing the duty this person held another situation at the same time equally as good which is inconsistant with our Colonial laws when vested in the same person permanently the propriety of a division therefore suggested itself and Mr T. was in hope either one or the other would be given to him by an order from head quarters as soon as an explanation had taken place with Sir Thomas. but he was disappointed and after a vexatious and expensive delay of several months returned in despair to this place accompanyed by Mrs T. and infant Daughter. Our Mother who was then on a visit to the part of the family [?] residing at Port Dalrymple - advised him to this step and came back the same time. [71] As soon as Captain Wood who lives on the Hobart Town side of the Country heard of the departure of Mr T. he waited upon Lieut. Govr. Sorrell and expostulated with him upon the treatment Mr T. had recd.. the Govr. then told him that if Mr Thomson would return he would in a short time arrange it for Mr T. to have the Naval Officership and Kenworthy the other for a permanency instead - Captn. Wood amediately [sic] wrote to Mr T. strongly advising him to try his luck once more in Van Diemens he has done so however before his departure he had an interview with the Govr. in Chief who furnished him with another letter to Sorrell desiring that he might have the appointment which by the next arrival we are in hopes to hear has taken place. In about three Weeks I myself leave this (Sydney) for Port Dalrymple having under my protection Mrs Thomson who was left here with us until Mr T. was certain he was not again deceived. indeed it behoves one to provide well against the bad faith of the present Govr. Sir Thomas had power without doing injustice to any one to appoint Mr Thomson at once and have saved the delay and anxiety which he occasioned him by his undecisive letters which were couched in such a style as to leave it almost optional with Sorrell whether he noticed them or not.  My principal business at Port Dalrimple [sic] is to take possession of Fourteen Hundred Acres of Land which Sir Thomas has given me upon the present system of a Man to each 100 acres I shall return to Sydney in about four Months unless my Elder Brothers advise me to remain and turn Farmer but I do not Know how I should at present be able to reconcile myself to such a life my desire is first to make a voyage to Europe and see something of the World but to accomplish this requires better friends than my own individual Self is in possession of and to go solely depending upon our good Mother is an incumbrance I never could think of loading her with. Oftentimes I have wished that His Majesty had me for one of his Military Servants and a more Zealous and loyal one perhaps he may not have though a far distant Australation [?] how unlucky it is that the said illustrious personage is not fully aware of the great acquisition I should be to his interests Why in imagination alone I have in the field atchieved [sic] the most wondrous deeds if therefore they wish them done in reallity [sic] give me but a Commission and an oppertunity and then If it was my fortune to posess a friend in some very great Man (as for instance Dr Chalmers) I should apply to him forthwith to use his interest in obtaining for me what at present is my greatest ambition a Commission in the Army Stationed though almost any where but here this you know would be my passport in all climes as a Gent and would put me in possession of the means tho [?] at first moderate of obtaining Wisdom I mean that since Knowledge of the World which I have laboured hard to gain through the medium of Books in this Country the means of enlarging the mind by observation and intercourse with your fellows is very confined especially as jealosies and party feeling runs so high moreover the great bulk of our Society is composed of Adventurers and others whose main object is the bettering of their condition. [72] The conversation therefore seldom runs upon any topic save what may amediately concern the speaker and such as no one whose mind is bent upon any thing but money making would feel any interest in. My Brother James has entered into Copartnership with our elder Brother Thomas and gone to reside at Port Dalrymple this is indeed rather an inconsiderable place compared with Hobart Town and not by any means so flourishing but the competion had of late become so great at the latter settlement in consequence of the amazing influx of Settlers as to produce a very sensible effect upon the profits of James business and as an improvement was not likely to take place Thomas and he wisely agreed to unite their Capital and carry on business at Port Dal. where they comparatively would have little opposition as their joint means would enable them to command the Market; at this place too all their landed property Cattle and Sheep lie. They purpose blending Commerce with Agriculture the latter to be conducted by Thomas and the former by James thrive they must both are too prudent to enter into any wild Speculation neither is encumbered with debt and their property in land and Stock is now very considerable. of the former they possess upward of 3000 Acres without the burden which as I have before stated is urged by the present system of Horned Cattle they have nearly 500 Head and of Sheep about 2000 - all of which is exclusive of their Stock in Trade House &c -  Of the Marriage of our Sister Eliza I need not speak by the bye if we guessed right you were desirous that a great part of the World should be made acquainted with such an occurance as we have seen it in many of the Scotch and English papers which we concluded got in through no other channel than yours if this is the case you will observe that you made a mistake in saying that Mr Thomson came out as one of the Suit of Sir Thomas Brisbane. [74] [75]   Before you are no doubt made acquainted with the Marriage of our Sister Celia to Mr Thomas Wills of whom I believe you had previously heard a little such an event was to me a gratifying circumstance as from our infancy him and I have been on terms of the strictest intimacy and friendship. our tempers and dispositions are heretofore well known to each other and I will venture to say very few in the World possess characters more amiable and honourable than his in every respect add to this a handsome person and gentlemany manners but these you will say are secondary considerations true with the moralist but not the ladies and I have my suspicions that they had no small weight with my good Sister long before She visited your Shores You see I have pestered you a good deal with our family affairs but your very kind attention to our Mother and Sisters the very high terms in which they at all times speak of you as well as your evident interest in our family matters we regard you as a member of it more nearly allied to us than our real tie of consanguinity warrants. henceforth I shall consider you as a brother and as a consequent to this title endowed with all the privileges thereto appertaining which I take to consist in the right of giving wholesome advice and admonition intermixed when necessary with a proper share of censure - an unreserved development of opinions and sentiments which I trust will at all times be mutual.  By the Minerva I send you Sydney Gazettes from the First Nov. to the Sixth of February 23 also an allmanack for the present year I would have sent according to you desire the Australian Magazine had I thought it worth your notice. according to your request I addressed the Parcel cont. the Newspapers and Almanack to the care of Charles Corran & Co. Leith  I have written to your Brother Mr John Hope but have not yet received any answer If I was sure Wm. could spare the time taken up in answering a letter (but which I conclude his Elder Br. had not at disposal) I would drop him a few lines upon the state of Religion here.  I believe I have nothing more to say in this letter in my next I shall touch fully upon the present Govt.  In conclusion I have Dear Sir to assure you of the affection & esteem of Geo. Reibey  I will trouble you with one small Commission - it is to send me out McKenzies treatise upon "Phrenology."  Launceston Port Dalrymple Van Deimans Land Septr. 17th 1823  My Dear Cousin  I Received your various favours as likewise the Newspapers you was so kind to send which in the distant part of the Globe is always a thankful treat Mr Macarthur the Scotch Clergyman kept your Letters for 4 or 5 months at Hobart Town after his arrival nor did he send them over even after I got our agents to apply to him for Letters for me & Mr Thomson Mr Moodie the Commissary at last enclosed them to me in a frank.  You will wonder to find my Letter dated in this place but I have now to inform you I have been there 9 months having joined my Brother Thomas in Copartnership in Cattle Sheep and trade generally I found by staying at Hobart town I was losing considerably. I found it best to come & join Thomas who had been soliciting me to do so for some years but owing to my dislike to Launceston I was a long time in making up my mind to one thing while at Hobart it was a plan of mine tho probably foolish not to Run in debt having never purchased without Cash in hand However this Rule was beneficial in my leaving Hobart for I was able to leave in a very short notice packed up my Stock in trade as it was in the Stores freighted a Brig put that & all my furniture on board & came across the Country 127 Miles in a Gig. [79]   Our Cattle here jointly consists of about four hundred Head about two thirds my Brothers about two Thousand Sheep joint equal shares besides various farms which are principally my Brothers Stores & premises in town which the Government offered two thousand Pounds for but my Brother (this was just before I came over) asked four thousand - our Stock in trade amt. about 3000 Pounds I have made considerable Improvements outhouses which by contract cost us three Hundred Pounds this is joint Property equal Shares. My House at Hobart Town which I threw into the concern rents for One Hundred & Thirty Pounds pr. Annum Eight Horses &c besides these my Brother is building a beautiful House on his Estate called Entally which has now cost him about Six Hundred Pounds. you will Rather wonder probably how I have got on so well without any assistance from my Mother for you are probably aware that my Mother discarded me after my marriage there was just reasons for her doing so then I was only Seventeen years of age and my wife unknown to her. Tho She has often said since I have made a wise choice in fact I have for it is now nearly Eight years since we where first marriage we have lived as Happy as possible & she has been a good helpmate to me I often think now how saving I was then and how sedate we began a little Shop with a Stock of £40 which I obtained Credit for in Sydney and by Return the same vessell I came down in I Remitted the amount. my Wife who was Widow then 21 & was a Widow four year had a House tho in a very unfurnished state & built of Wood we managed to get two Small rooms Habitable & every Shilling that was taken was preserved with a great deal more care than I now do fifty Pounds. My mother found from various reports I was steady and doing well she forgave me & we have been good friends ever since but she thought I did not want any assistance in fact I was as well without it probably but when she was in England she wrote me word to take possession of Half the Sheep at this place about 400. Then you see my dear cousin I am not treating you as a stranger I have endeavoured to think while writing this Letter that you stood as a Brother rather than as a Cousin as you wish to be called in various Letters I have seen to my Sisters. I have given you a History of our property as well as I am able and hope it will be acceptable to you.  I will now give you some account of the family. Rank first my mother she is well and hearty in Sydney I heard from her a few days ago Thomas & his Lady are quite well they live in the Country about Eight Miles off. he has now three children a Boy he had about [?] weeks ago named after me. then comes me and my wife who are thank God quite well & now my dear Cousin comes some very sorrowful news namely my Brother George is so very ill I am very much afraid he will not Recover the Doctor says he does not think he will. [80] he came down here about 4 or 5 months ago for the good of his Health he was ordered into the Country by his Physician. he was rapidly Recovering & as exercise was recommended to him used to amuse himself with cutting trees down at last one fell on him which nearly killed him he lay about 100 yards from the House for above an hour nobody having seen him he at last crawled into the house my Brother Thomas Immediately dispatched a man on Horseback to town for Medical assistance but unfortunately the River which is in front of his House was very high over the Banks not fordable and the Canoe he was used to cross in was washed away the day before. the man had to ride about Ten Miles up the River to a Canoe and being very dark when he got there the people where afraid to cross him that night. he had to wait untill morn & then could not cross his horse he had to walk to town then 15 miles thro mud up to his knees all the way (you cannot conceive the state of the Roads here in Winter times. no made roads every Valley a River- he got in about 12 O'clock with a note to me. This was about 22 hours after the accident happened altho only 8 miles as direct Road & to complete the Misfortune the Doctor was in the Country in another Direction attending another patient however he came in about half an hour after and we immediately set off and tho we had to swim our horses 2 or 3 times in places that now are quite dry. we got out to the River in an hour and fortunately my Brother had just before found a Smaller Canoe which we passed over one by one at the Imminent danger of our lives my Brothers House is just on the opposite Bank. The Doctor who is very clever (Priest) took from him 50 ounces of Blood that Evening and stopped two days with him and used to go out every day the Roads began to mend daily & my Brother had found his big Canoe so he used to go with more facility he was recovering fast from that calamity but has had a Relapse and we are now very much alarmed for his life he is now in the country very Ill too much so that he could not write to his Mother. Poor George the Pride and flower of the flock to be snatched away at 21 years of age in the prime of life it is heartbreaking to think of it and what adds more to the misery of the family is that my oldest Sister. (Celia) is from what I can learn in a similar state her complaint is I think something like George's after giving Birth to a Daughter (who is named Alice) she was not able to suckle and has been very Ill since my sister Jane writes it is a Consumption. I have been writing my Mother to advise her to bring Celia down here & then she can nurse George (altho he is well nursed now) Mrs Thomson & her husband is living a stones throw from us here in Launceston he is Naval officer here the most respectable in the place next to the Commandants / [81] his Income now not above Three Hundred (£300) a year but will Increase he was a good deal hurt about your putting in his marriage in the Gazette as many copies came out here & as he was not on the staff of the Governor nor then in any situation whatever it certainly made him look foolish it appeared that he had written home so. my other two Sisters are quite well. John Atkinson a Son of Old Atkinson of London (you know him I believe) has offered Jane marriage some time he is a worthy young man & well off but she is too young to think of marriage just turned fifteen. I have not seen her since my Mother took her to Sydney but they tell me she is Handsomer and more clever than the two Eldest I know she has a most excellent genius and very apt. she is much larger than the others but stout in proportion. He wrote us about it from Sydney desiring our consent & good wishes our answer was he had our good wishes but must wait a little longer he is rather sickly which is the only objection against him.  In the morning I am going out to my Brother Thomas's to take out all the Medical advice in the place which consists of three Gentlemen all very good one a Scotchman named Cameron came out first voyage in the Skelton but he is not so Clever as the others and is rather brutish in his manners. Poor George I am very much alarmed for him but as I shall not yet close this Letter I will acquaint you how he gets on & the Result of the Medical Survey.  I am very happy to find you are appointed agents in Glasgow to this New shipping company their Capital is too Large & I am afraid it will not answer very well at all Events I would strongly advise a ship to be sent to this Port Direct occasionally. it must not be too Large or Else she will not be able to come all the way up the river but a North Country Built Ship which generally are a light Draught of Water about 250 or 300 tons Burden would answer Better than a large one most all the Letters now come here at a very heavy expence of transporting their Goods a Second time the Freight from Hobart to here is £3.10 p / ton and very seldom you can get a chance of a vessell coming round others again Cart some of their things across at double or treble the Expence of the freightage At all events I should strongly advise a ship coming here every Six months at present Otherwise by & by. the place is Improving wonderfully there has never been a Direct arrival from England here but one about 4 months ago. a Cutter Eighty Tons (she is now lying at my Door) with a Mr Lawrence on board her owner an adventurer or rather an Emigrant to these parts a Ship of 1000 Tons has laid at Geo Town about 4 Miles inside the Heads. at present Geo Town is the Head Quarters but it is to be abandoned & Head Quarters is coming up here again. this is a Large Town but there is no buildings at Geo Town but Government only one free man in the place except the Officers Col Cameron of the Buff; is now Commandant here he is only just come but a very good man what I see of him George was telling me he had written you a very long Letter about thirty pages. [82] Thomas has promised to write to you but he is a strange a fellow he cannot bear to write or look over accounts. he has got in Disgrace with all his friends for not writing his wishes for your Health & happiness are the same as ours Septr. 28th  I have been out spending a week with George. I took out the Medical Men on Monday last they have held a Survey & Consultation. they agree as to the method his Physician has been using towards him to be correct. they give unfavourable hopes but advise a Sea Voyage which he will undertake as soon as Possible to Sydney  I have enclosed you one Gazette with Mr Thomsons appointment in but I have written to a friend of mine at Hobart Town to Enclose you Copies of an attack made by the Agricultural Society in Sydney against Van Diemans Land & the two Replies one of them written in Sydney the Illiberality of the Attack made by Mr Justice Field is so well known in the Colony that it has brought down Contempt on its author.  I am a sad one at writing a Letter I just put down my thoughts as they flow & never can bear to look over a Letter after having written it in order to Correct as I know very well it will not please me so I ever let it take its fate.  The Land this side Van Diemans Land is far better than on the other both for grazing & agricultural purposes fine plains not a tree standing on them nothy to do but put the Plough in. but at near distances to the Towns it is pretty well occupied there has a vast accession arrived lately of Settlers particularly Scotch the whole with a very few exceptions have Settled in Van Diemans Land particularly along the Banks of the Macquarie River a Space occupying about Fifty Miles that twelve Months ago was not a Hut on it is now nearly all occupied by the New Emigrants Having Settled along its banks. the General Grants of Land given to the Emigrants is from five Hundred to Two Thousand Acres according to the Amount of the Capital they Invest in the Colony a person bringing out Three Thousand Pounds is Entitled to a Grant of Two Thousand acres or much less if you bring out good Letters to the Governor or Lt. Governor & stand high in Character or in his good opinion  Do you think you could engage a Good Man about you that can undertake the Management of a flock of Sheep to Improve the wool &c. If you could do so for me I would give him £40 or £50 pr. Annum or I will leave it to you to make the best arrangement you can for me. you can engage him a Steerage passage in one of the Company's Ships and Draw on me for the Amt. which shall be immediately honoured you must engage him for at least five years by a Written agreement & bind him tight [83]   I think I have said all I have to say & will now conclude this Letter by assuring you of my unalterable Esteem and sincere gratitude for your Brotherly Kindness to my Mother & Sisters in Scotland. & Remain  My Dear Cousin Yours Sincerely James H. Reibey  PS. Mr P. Broadfoot I have not seen by reason of my being here when he arrived but your Letter came over safe. Our agents at Hobart Town are Messrs. Welsh & Heylin  Thursday 1. Novr. 1821.   Having for some time back resolved on going on a Tour of Inspection to the New Penal Settlement of Port Macquarie -- and also to that of Newcastle on my way back from the former and every necessary arrangement having been previously made for this purpose I took leave of Mrs. M. and our beloved Boy at 2 o'clock this afternoon (-- they being both at Sydney at present --) and Embarked on board the Government Brig Elizabeth-Henrietta commanded by Mr. --- Gray accompanied by Lieut. Macquarie A.D.C. Mr. Meehan Dy. Surveyor Genl. Mr. Nicholson Master attendant and Lieut. Robt. Johnston R.N.; the two latter Gentlemen having volunteered to be of my Party.   The Snapper Cutter commanded by Mr. --- Fish accompanied us as a Tender to land us at such Places as might have too little depth of Water for the Brig. --- The two Vessels got under weigh at 1/2 past Two with a fine fair Breeze at South West and got entirely clear of the Heads by Half past 3 o'clock. --- It rained a little all the afternoon and the Breeze freshened a good deal by the time we had cleared the Heads. --- The good faithful honest Serjt. Whalan remained with us on board till we got down to the Heads and then left us along with the Depy. Harbour Master Milton. --- My old faithful Valet George was too unwell to accompany me on this Voyage. --- Joseph the Coachman Martin the asst. Cook Hammond and Corpl. Macquarie formed my Establishment of Servants on this occasion besides Five Men of my own Barge's crew to man the Master attendant's Boat which as being so much lighter than my own Barge I have preferred taking with me on the present Service.   On going on board the Elizabeth Henrietta in the Cove I could not help being greatly struck and highly pleased with the excellent order extreme neatness and judicious arrangement made for my accommodation and comfort in every respect. For all this as usual I am indebted to my dear Mrs. M. who had unknown to me gone on board and given directions for all these comfortable arrangements being made some days before.   We sat down to a very good Dinner at 4 o'clock; but the motion was so great that none of us ate much. By sunset it came on a very smart Gale -- with a high Sea -- and we were going 8 Knots! --- I went early to Bed and instead of a swinging Cott I slept in one of the Standing Bed Places the Cabin being rather too small for a Hanging Cott to swing easy & comfortably in such severe motion. --- I found the Standing Birth indeed the more comfortable of the two and slept very well in it. ---   Friday 2. Novr.   At 6 a.m. the Wind headed us blowing very strong with a high sea and current against us which drove us to leeward and off the Land. --- The Wind continued foul till 4 p.m. when it again shifted to the South West and continued to blow so all Night. ---   Saturday 3. Nov. !!!   This morning early we were abreast of the "3 Brothers"and in sight of "Smoky Cape": --- Port Macquarie laying about halfway between those two great Head-Lands. At 10 a.m. we got so close in with the Land that with our Glasses we could plainly see the Houses of the new Settlement of Port Macquarie; but the wind shifted round to North West at 11 a.m. and precluded the possibility of our getting in this morning which we were very sanguine of being able to do by 12 o'clock.   We had therefore nothing for it but to endeavour to keep what we had gained -- by making Short Boards to prevent our being blown off the Land. --- At 4 p.m. we were most agreeably surprised to see the lost Cutter in shore -- and apparently coming out from Port Macquarie. --- She joined by 5 o'clock and brought us out the Pilot of that Port who had set out to come off to us the moment we hove in sight. --- The Cutter had not sustained any accident on Thursday night -- but finding the Sea run so very high her Master had thought it prudent to leave us and keep close to the Shore to avoid danger. On the Cutter joining us the Pilot came on board the Brig but gave us no hope of getting into Port Macquarie before tomorrow forenoon the Wind being directly against us. --- We continued working up the Bay the whole of the Night the Weather being very fine and moderate with a Bright Moon.---   This day being the 14th anniversary of our Wedding Day we all drank my dear Elizabeth & our Darling in a hearty Bumper! ---   Sunday 4. Novr. 1821.   We took an early Breakfast this morning and at 8 o'clock we removed on board the Snapper Cutter in the hope of her being able to land us some Hours sooner at Port Macquarie than we should do by remaining on board the Brig. --- We had not however been on board quite an Hour before it fell calm; and therefore it was determined that I should proceed on to the Port in a Boat accompanied by Mr. Nicholson; leaving the other Gentlemen our Servants and Baggage to follow us in the Cutter. --- The Brig and Cutter were at this time distant about 7 miles from Port Macquarie the Houses of the Settlement being then in Sight quite distinct.   We put off from the Cutter at 9 o'clock attended by the Pilot to convey us safely over the Bar into the Port.   We arrived at the outside of the Bar at 1/2 past 11 when the Pilot made a signal for his own Whale-Boat to convey us across the Bar; our own Boat not being considered so safe to cross it. --- This took about Half an Hour to arrange. We then removed to the Whale Boat got quite easy and safe across the Bar and landed at the Settlement of Port Macquarie at Half past 12 o'clock; Capt. Allman the Commandant receiving us at the Landing Place at the Head of his Company which was drawn up under Arms on the Beach; the Convicts with their Supdt. at their Head being also drawn up on the Beach a little distance to the Left of the Troops to receive us and on my stepping out of the Boat on shore gave me three Cheers.   We proceeded from the Landing Place immediately to the Commandant's House where Mrs. Allman with her Family of Children was ready to receive and give us a Hearty friendly welcome in a very comfortable neat Cottage; in which both she and Capt. Allman made a point of taking a Room to sleep in instead of sleeping in a Tent as I purposed doing. I accordingly availed myself of their kind invitation.   At 2 o'clock the Snapper came to her anchorage in Harbour having crossed the Bar very easily. --- We now became anxious about the Brig as we feared she drew too much water to cross it without touching. --- Our apprehensions proved groundless for at 4 o'clock we had the pleasure of seeing her cross it in perfect safety and in ten minutes after she came to her moorings in the Harbour. --- This is by far the largest Vessel that has ever yet crossed the Bar of Port Macquarie. --- I was not a little shocked and mortified at seeing my old friend and acquaintance the Lady Nelson high and dry on the Beach the inside of the Bar where she has lain a wreck ever since her being stranded here in April last when Capt. Allman came to establish the Settlement and at which time similar disasters befel [sic] the other two Vessels forming the Expedition namely the Mermaid Cutter and Prince Regent Schooner; but the two latter Vessels altho' considerably damaged were ultimately saved. --- It affords me however sincere pleasure to learn from Mr. Nicholson that the poor old Lady can be not only saved but also rendered as useful as ever. He is to set about this very important work tomorrow accordingly. ---   We all dined with Capt. Allman this day -- but he and Mrs. Allman have agreed to live with me the rest of my stay here. ---   Monday 5. Novr. !   Not feeling myself well and my Bowels being a good deal out of order I took some Physic this morning intending to remain all day quietly at Home.   Lieut. Wilson & asst. Surgeon Fenton (the only Gentlemen now belonging to the Settlement besides Capt. Allman) dined with me today Camp-Fashion my two Tents having been Pitched close to Capt. Allman's Cottage. We sat down Ten at Dinner including Mr. Gray the Commander of the Elizabeth Henrietta.   The 4 Cows & 4 Calves brought down for the use of the Settlement in the Elizabeth Henrietta were landed this afternoon all well and in high condition.   Tuesday 6. Novr. !!!  Immediately after Breakfast this morning I proceed by Water along with Capt. Allman and Lieut. Wilson to see a most rich beautiful Tract of Forest Land within a mile of the Settlement situated between the River and the Creek particularly well adapted for Cultivation and forming a Government Agricultural Establishment on a large scale. I landed on it and walked over part of the Ground which produces at this moment very fine Herbage -- and grass of very fine quality fit to be mowed down for Hay. --- I named this Tract of Land "Allman Plains"in honor of Capt. Allman. ---   I afterwards proceeded to view and examine the Ground most fit for the Site of the future Town. --- Having so done I could find none more suitable and convenient than the Ground recommended and pointed out by Mr. Oxley in his last Report to me on this subject in December 1820. --- I therefore determined at once on adopting his recommendation which I consider a very judicious one as combining Beauty with convenience. --- This Ground runs Parallel with the Harbour and Beach consisting of a Flat or Plain extending from the foot of "Allman's Hill"(on which the Military Barracks are built --) to the east Bank of Shoal Arm Creek being a distance of nearly 1/2 a mile along the Beach and Harbour and extending in Depth southerly to "Oxley's Terrace" in distance 1/4 of a mile to the foot of that fine rising Ground and thence in the same direction to the Narrow arm of Shoal Creek but better known by the name of "Shoal Arm"; which forms a marked natural Boundary line for the Town on the Western and Southern sides thereof; the Sea or Harbour forming the Northern and "Allman's Hill"the Eastern Boundary thereof.---   This is a most convenient site for the future Town it being so very close to the Harbour and very well supplied with Fresh Water Stream which runs nearly through the middle of it and falls into the Harbour where Ships & Vessels can easily be supplied with as much fresh Water as they can possibly require. --- There is also abundance of most excellent Timber for Building growing close in the vicinity of the Town and along the Banks of Shoal. --- There are very fine verdant Hills immediately in the Rear of the Town which afford excellent rich Pasturage for Cattle; and it is intended to reserve those Hills for a Common for the use of the Town after enclosing a certain proportion of them for a Government Domain. ---   Having thus fixed on the Site of the future Town of Port Macquarie I directed Mr. Meehan to lay down the Plan of it on Paper and submit it for my final approval.---   The necessary arrangements having been made yesterday and this morning for that purpose the first attempt was made this day at Noon to haul up the poor old Lady Nelson to a Place of safety on the Beach where she will be out of the reach of the Tides so as to admit of her being repaired and again rendered useful for the Public Service. They succeeded in hauling her up above three feet; but the Purchase on her not being sufficiently strong it gave way and they will be obliged to make a stronger one before she can be hauled up a sufficient distance from the High Water-mark which they expect to be able to do tomorrow Mr. Nicholson being indefatigable in his exertions to execute this very important Service. ---   We dined as yesterday in my Tent today -- and had a very good Dinner drinking Prosperity to the new Town laid out this day in a Bumper.   Wednesday 7. Novr. !   Wishing to see and explore the River Hastings as far as could conveniently be done in one day I set out in my own Boat accompanied by Capt. Allman and Mr. Meehan between 7 and 8 o'clock this morning after Breakfast for this purpose; --Mr. Nicholson and Lt. Johnston having remained at the Settlement to haul up the Lady Nelson. ---   We rowed up the Hastings as far as the westernmost End of Rawdon Island which is about 15 miles above the Settlement of Port Macquarie; we then returned and landed on the South Bank of the River in a beautiful rich Tract of Forest Land where we remained for an Hour and a Half to rest and refresh our Boat's Crew. ---   The whole of this River as far as we went is very finely wooded on both Banks is a noble Stream of Water and of a sufficient depth to admit of small Vessels of 30 Tons navigating it as far as the Western end of Rawdon Island. --- The medium Breadth of it is about a quarter of a mile but it is much broader in some Places and there are some Reaches of it at least two miles long. --- We saw some Natives at a distance -- but we were not near enough to speak to them. --- They have lately manifested a very hostile spirit towards our People here by frequently throwing spears at the men employed up the River in procuring Rose-Wood & Cedar on one of which occasions a very useful man was killed by a spear passing through his Body of which wound he immediately died. This violent attack and Treachery only took place about a fortnight ago since which the Natives have been very shy -- and never come near the Settlement; concluding they would be severely Punished if caught for their Treacherous cruel conduct. ---   After a very pleasant excursion up the Hastings we got back by 3 o'clock to the Settlement; and on our arrival received the gratifying intelligence that the Lady Nelson was now out of all danger having been hauled up in the course of this day no less than 36 feet higher on the Beach which will admit of her being now repaired and fitted out for Sea. --- Great credit is due to Mr. Nicholson for his persevering exertions in executing this Service.   I inspected Capt. Allman's Company this afternoon at 5 o'clock and found the men in good order and excellent Health. I also inspected the barracks of the Single and married men and found both in good order clean and commodious.---   We all dined together today again -- but dined in Capt. Allman's Cottage instead of my Tent which I had ordered to be struck and put on board preparatory to our Sailing tomorrow morning -- which we intend -- and hope to be able to do; with which view all our heavy Baggage was put on board the Elizabeth Henrietta this afternoon.---   Thursday 8. Novr. 1821. !   We all got up very early this morning expecting to sail at 7 o'clock when it would be High Water so as to enable our little Fleet to cross the Bar. ---   At 6 o'clock I mustered and inspected all the Convicts 94 in number and found them all looking well and Healthy -- well clothed and without any complaint whatever. ---   At 1/2 past 6 we sat down to Breakfast and at 7 the two Vessels weighed anchor -- and made sail to cross the Bar; the Boats being obliged to tow them out on account of it's [sic] being almost a dead Calm. --- A strong Breeze however came on from the Eastward which knocked up all our hopes of getting out for this day -- both Vessels being obliged to return to their former anchorage. --- This was a sad disappointment to me; as I was most anxious to get away today all my Business here being now completed and being now absent a week from Sydney.   Friday 9. Novr. 1821!!!   Another attempt was made this morning by the two Vessels to get out. --- They weighed and began to warp out it being then almost calm but there was much appearance of a Westerly Breeze springing up every moment. --- We were again however disappointed in this expectation and to our great regret a strong Sea Breeze set in from the Eastward which obliged the Vessels to return to their former anchorage.   The Elizabeth Henrietta was warped out however some few Hours afterwards on the Tide of Ebb making strong through the narrowest and most dangerous part of the Channel and anchored about one Hundred Yards beyond the innermost Large Rock between which & the North Shore the Tide runs the strongest. This was done with [the intention?] of being ready to cross the Bar with the first spurt of Wind from the Westward or North West. --- Having sent all my Servants and Baggage on board in the forenoon I determined on Dining and Sleeping on board tonight. --- I accordingly took leave of Mrs. Allman and embarked at 1/2 past 4 p.m.; being accompanied on board and to Dinner by Capt. Allman Lieut. Wilson and asst. Surgeon Fenton; Lieut. Wilson having received my permission to proceed to Sydney to bring down his Sister forms now one of my Party on board the Elizabeth Henrietta.   Between 8 and 9 o'clock Capt. Allman & Dr. Fenton left us. --- At 9 being then high water a very nice Breeze at North West & a fine moon-light Night the Pilot assured us he could get the Brig safely over the Bar; a Boat with a Light being placed on the Sunken or Beacon Rock immediately at the entrance over the Bar. We accordingly got under weigh and made easy sail; there being 3 Boats also towing us out. --- We got on very well for the first 200 yards. --- The Brig then struck the ground lightly and continued striking less or more for about 100 yards further -- sometimes rather violently; -- and just as we had got to the Tail of the Bar and within a Pistol shot of the Boat with the Light on the Sunken Rock the Wind unfortunately headed us and rendered our proceeding further impracticable although in five minutes more we should have been over the Bar and clear of all danger. --- We were of course constrained to put back and get to a safe anchorage as soon as possible which we accomplished about Ten o'clock; having however struck slightly two or three times in getting to our Birth [sic] for the Night which was not a very pleasant one being surrounded on all sides by Rocks Shoals and Breakers; but the Pilot and Master considered it a sufficiently safe one. --- Concluding all was safe I went to Bed at 11 o'clock and slept very sound during the rest of the Night.   Saturday 10. Novr. !   At Day-Break I awoke from a violent shock which I thought at first was only one of the Boats striking against the side of the Brig --- ; but on this shock being repeated I jumped out of Bed and went up on Deck. --- I then found the Brig dragging her anchor -- which was occasioned by the immense Strong Tide then rushing in through the narrow channel we lay in. --- All Hands were immediately called and not a moment was lost in sending out Warps to remove the Brig from her present very dangerous Position. --- To add to our Perils we found on examination the Vessel would not steer -- the Rudder being rendered useless from the Pintels being broken on the occasion of the Brig striking so violently during last Night and this morning. --- To remedy this misfortune every possible exertion was made by all the officers and men on board to save the Vessel and convey her by warping and other means to her original anchorage at the Natural Wharf. --- The exertions and judgment of Lieut. Robert Johnston on this critical and trying occasion were most conspicuous and did him a great deal of credit. --- Indeed I know not what we should have done without him; for Mr. Nicholson had undergone so much fatigue yesterday in particular & for some days before in getting the Lady Nelson hauled up out of Danger that he was last Night taken very ill and was incapable of any exertion this morning.   By 10 o'clock we fortunately at length succeeded in getting the Elizabeth Henrietta to her old anchorage at the Natural Wharf; and during her Progress thither we had also succeeded in unshipping the Rudder bringing it on Deck and setting all our Carpenters and Smiths at work to repair it and make new Pintels &c. &c. all which we expect to complete and also to be able to Ship and Hang our Rudder again before Sunset this same day so as to be able to sail tomorrow in case the Wind should then favour us. A Party of Soldiers which were fortunately sent on board yesterday to assist in warping out the Brig were found very serviceable in the laborious exertions of this morning. I took a walk on shore before Dinner to look again at the old Lady Nelson -- which I found now Hauled up in excellent safe situation on the Beach ready to undergo the necessary previous Repairs to enable her to go to Sydney -- which are to be commenced upon immediately -- and which are expected to be completed in about Two months hence! ---   I also saw and inspected a very fine Raft of 22 Logs of Cedar & 1 large one of Rose-wood brought down by McManus the overseer of the wood cutters yesterday down the River Hastings from the First Falls. The Cedar is large and of excellent quality. --- The Rose-wood Log is fifteen feet long and 2 1/2 feet in Diameter. --- I have ordered two of the largest Logs that can be found of Rose-wood and Cedar to be cut down and sent me up to Sydney for carrying Home with me as specimens of the wood of Port Macquarie.   Capt. Allman & Dr. Fenton dined on board with me today also and took their leave after Tea.---   The Rudder was completely repaired and finished by Sunset and was immediately Hung and shipped; it being now greatly improved by being much reduced in weight. --- We therefore hope to be able to get [out] with tomorrow's High water Tide.   Sunday 11. Novr. 1821. !!!  At 8 a.m. it being then about 3/4 Flood Tide and blowing a fine Breeze of Wind from the South West the Brig got under weigh and made sail out; but the Tide was so powerfully strong running in with all the violence and rapidity of a Mill-Race that it was with the greatest difficulty she could stem it at all till after we got through the narrow channel with every possible exertion that could be used. --- We finally however surmounted all the obstacles opposed to us and to our great joy got over the Bar by 1/2 past 9 o'clock -- and clear out from all Danger of Rocks Shoals and Breakers. --- The Snapper Cutter followed us immediately and got out safe also. --- The Wind is now against us but we hope it will change by Sunset this Evening.   --- Continuation of Journal !   Sunday 11. Novr. 1821.  Having to land the Soldiers who came out to assist in towing us over the Bar we lay too [sic] for some time for that purpose and did not stand out to Sea till 12 o'clock at Noon when we pursued our Voyage for Newcastle. ---   I have brought one old (-- a Forester) and two young Kangaroos -- and one young Black Swan from Port Macquarie as Presents from Capt. Allman for my dear Lachlan all of which are in good Health.---   We had no sooner cleared the Land than the Sea rose very high and it blew a very fresh gale directly against us and continued so to do all day; occasioning a violent motion and making us all very sick and uncomfortable. --- During the Night it blew still more violently and we shipped several very heavy Seas one of which stove in the Bulwark of the Starboard side of the Main Deck. --- The violence of the motion occasioned the loss of our Lamp which was broke to Pieces by one of the Lee Lurches. --- I could not sleep owing to this violent motion. and never suffered so much from Sea Sickness in my life. ---   The Snapper Cutter which sailed .with us from Port Macquarie kept company with us till 12 o'clock at Night -- after which she was lost sight of and was supposed to have stood in closer to the Land on account of the violence of the Gale. ---   Monday 12. Novr. 1821.   The Wind still continues foul blowing a hard gale but the Sea not quite so man as yesterday. --- Our Latd. at Noon was 32 ° 8' which fortunately proves we have had a Current in our favor -- as we have advanced 42 our Voyage since yesterday at Noon altho' the Wind is directly against us. Towards Sunset the weather moderated and we saw Land about 20 miles ahead.---   Tuesday 13. Novr. !   The Wind fell and the Gale abated entirely in the course of last Night -- and this morning at Sunrise it was a dead Calm. --- We have now Land in sight. --- At Noon our Latd. was 32 ° 25' which shews we have only gained 18 miles of Southing during the last 24 Hours which places us within 60 miles of Newcastle. --- It is now a dead Calm. --- At 1 p.m. we caught a fine large shark measuring no less than 11 1/2 feet in length. ---   At 1/2 past 3 p.m. a light Breeze from the North West sprang up in our favor -- and by Sunset we were abreast of Sugar Loaf Point which is only 45 miles from Newcastle; so that we hope to get in there in the course of tomorrow.   Lachlan's youngest Kangaroo being hurt during the late heavy Gale died this afternoon altho' every pains were taken to save his Life. He was a pretty little fellow and I was very sorry at losing him. --- Lachlan's remaining Pets are doing very well. ---   Wednesday 14. Novr.   It is a dead Calm this morning and has been so almost during the whole of last Night; so that we have made little or no Progress in our Voyage. --- At 8 a.m. we were in sight of Port Stephens about 12 miles to windward and ahead of us. --- The Snapper Cutter hove in sight at Day-break about 10 miles astern of us and close in with the Land. --- There is at present very little appearance of our getting in this day to Newcastle it still continuing a dead Calm; being this day at Noon by Observation still 34 miles distant from that Settlement.   At 1. p.m. a Light air of Wind at N. East sprang up and we began to make a little way in our proper course. --- At 1/2 past 2 p.m. we were abreast of Port Stephens and I could very distinctly see "Meredith Island"( so named by me in Decr. 1811 ) which divides the Outer from the Inner harbour. --- We saw at the same time a small Schooner going into Port Stephens.   At 1/2 past 4 p.m. we came up with the Govt. Sloop Sally (Mr. Kinnier Master) which had just come out of Port Stephens whither she had been driven by the late Gale of Wind after leaving Newcastle for Sydney with a Cargo of Coals. This Vessel sailed from Sydney on the Evening of the 7th Inst. and informs us that on that same day the new Governor Sir Thos. Brisbane had arrived at Port Jackson from England on bd. the Private merchant ship "The Royal George"! and that the "John Barry" with male convicts had also arrived on the same day. ---   The Breeze freshened a good deal at 5 p.m. when we were going about 6 Knots and fast approaching towards our destined Port. --- At Sunset we could see the Settlements of Newcastle and the Light soon afterwards; Nobby Island being distinctly seen before it became dark. --- At 9 p.m. we anchored in Newcastle Harbour. --- Before we came to anchor my old friend & acquaintance Major Morisset the Comdt. came on board to wait on me and delivered me some Letters from Sydney; one of which was from my dearest Mrs. M. -- which was the only one of them that I then read -- & was rejoiced to find all was well. --- Major Morisset having strongly urged me to land and take up my residence at the Govt. House I yielded to his pressing kind invitation and accordingly landed at 1/2 past 9. p.m. the officers of the Settlement receiving me at the Pier Head. --- I found everything prepared for my comfortable accommodation at Government House.   Thursday 15. Novr. 1821.   Being limited for time and wishing to see as much of the Interior of the Settlement of Newcastle as possible especially of that part of it on the Right Bank of [the] Hunter named "Wallis's Plains" lately settled I made last Night the necessary arrangements with the Commandant to enable me to carry my wishes into effect. --- Major Morisset having strongly urged that myself and Suite should live with him and be considered as his Guests for the few days I intend remaining here and having accepted his kind Hospitable Invitation he has sent forward Boats early this morning to Wallis's Plains with Provisions &c. for our Excursion up and down the River. ---   Having accordingly taken an early Breakfast at Government House we set out at 9 o'clock on our Voyage up the River; the Comdt. and myself-going in his Barge and the Gentlemen of our respective Suites -- vizt. Lieut. Johnston Mr. Nicholson Mr. Meehan Lieut. Close Lieut. Wilson and Lieut. Macquarie in two other boats.   We halted at two separate Places on the River -- vizt. at the Hollow Tree -- and at Nelson's Plains to refresh the Men & give them a Dram. --- At the latter Place there is a very neat Govt. Cottage which Major Morisset had very lately built on hearing that my dear Mrs. M. had some intention of accompanying me to this Settlement. He calls it the Nelson "Auberge". --- It is very commodious neat and clean -- and built in the Rustic Style. --- It is about 30 miles distant from Newcastle by Water. --- From this station after Half an Hour's Rest we prosecuted our voyage and at 3 p.m. arrived and landed at the Green Hills 45 miles from Newcastle; and sending the Boats round by the River to Wallis's Plains we set out by Land for that Place across an Istmus [sic] or Neck of Land not more than 5 miles from where we landed whereas it is 30 miles by the River. --- Major Morisset had a Horse belonging to one of the Settlers ready for me to mount on my landing at the Green Hills which conveyance I was very glad to avail myself of as it was rather too great a distance for me to walk. --- Himself and the other Gentlemen were however obliged to foot it.   I had a very pleasant Ride through a very fine rich Tract of Country to Wallis's Plains and the Settlement thereon there being 11 separate Families now settled on their Lands in that District. --- At Half past 4 p.m. we arrived at the Government Cottage which Major Morisset had built some time since and very kindly called it "Lachlan Cottage"in honor of his young friend Lachlan our beloved Boy. --- It is a neat rustic Building very commodious and most beautifully situated on the summit of a pretty Eminence having a large Lagoon of Fresh Water in front besides the large Creek I named Wallis's Creek and Commanding a fine view of all the Farms on Wallis's Plains. --- Here I found Bungaree Chief of the Boan Native Tribe with all his own Family and 30 more of his Tribe waiting my arrival having come on purpose to meet me. --- Our Boats not having arrived till 6 o'clock we had rather a late Dinner not having sat down to it till 9 o'clock. --- We had then however a most excellent one and we all partook very heartily of it. --- Bungaree and his Tribe entertained us with a Karaburie after Dinner and we did not go to Bed till 11 o'clock.   Friday 16. Novr. --   We got up very early and Breakfasted between 6 and 7 o'clock so as to send off our Baggage and Boats in good time to meet ourselves again at the Green Hills. --- We walked about the Government Grounds and the Settlement till 8 o'clock when we set out on our return to Newcastle by the same route we came. --- I was provided with the same Horse I rode yesterday Major Morisset being also provided with one; and arrived at the Green Hills at Half past 9. a.m. In a quarter of an Hour afterwards our Boats arrived and at 10. a.m. we set out from the Green Hills by Water; -- making the same Halts as before to refresh our Boats crews who exerted themselves to the utmost to get us on. --- On our way back to Newcastle we touched at the Station of the Lime Burners for the purpose of inspecting them. --- Their number at present consists of 95 men. --- I found them Healthy -- and very well fed and comfortably lodged with two Large Gardens full of Vegetables for their use. --- We set out from the station of the Lime Burners at 1/2 past 5 p.m. and arrived at Newcastle at 1/4 past 6 o'clock; the Troops being drawn out to receive me -- and the Battery saluting. --- This Ceremony also took place on my setting out yesterday morning. We dined soon after our arrival -- the civil and military officers of the Settlement having been invited to meet me. ---   Saturday 17. Novr. --   Intending in case the wind should be fair to embark for Sydney this Evening I commenced my Inspections at this Settlement immediately after Breakfast this morning. --- I first inspected the Troops their Barracks and Hospitals and afterwards the whole of the Male & Female Convicts their Barracks and the Colonial Hospital. --- I then proceeded to inspect the Lumber Yard the New Pier the Jail the Store and all the other Public Buildings; concluding my Labours at 3 p.m. by receiving Petitions and Memorials at the Police Office. --- I was very highly gratified with every thing I saw and expressed my unqualified approbation to Major Morisset of the manner in which he conducts his arduous Duties here and the excellence of the system he has laid down and pursues so successfully. ---   The Wind being quite foul & directly against we have abandoned our intention of embarking this Evening; trusting however we shall be enabled to do so early tomorrow morning. --- We sat down to an excellent Dinner at 6 o'clock. --- I named a very fine large Lagoon of Fresh Water about Half way between the Green Hills and Wallis's Plains "Morisset's Lagoon" in honor of the present Commandant finding on enquiry here it had no particular name before. It is two miles in Length -- and is a very pretty sheet of water. ---   Sunday 18. Novr.   On getting up and looking out this morning a 5 o'clock I was grieved to find the Wind still continued foul and blowing a very hard gale from the Southward accompanied with very heavy Rain. --- This is very tantalizing -- all my Business at this Settlement being now completed -- and being therefore extremely anxious to return to Head Quarters as soon as possible. --- But it would be useless to embark with such boisterous weather as this is and therefore I must have patience. ---   The New Vessel called the Newcastle Schooner which I had dispatched Express with Letters for Sydney on Thursday morning was forced back the same Evening by the severity of the Southerly Gale she had encountered on that day and lies now at anchor at the mouth of the Harbour not having since been able to resume her Voyage.   It rained very heavy this whole Day -- with a hard southerly gale at Sea. I went to Church in the afternoon to hear the Revd. Mr. Middleton Preach. ---   Monday 19. Novr. 1821.   The Weather has cleared up this morning but the Wind continues still foul and directly against our getting to Sydney. --- Feeling my Bowels rather out of sorts this morning I took some medicine and kept my Room the greater part of the Day. --- Between 1 and 2 o'clock today the Govt. Sloop Sally arrived from Sydney and brought me a very pleasant Letter from my dear Mrs. M. dated the 14th Inst. by which I had the happiness to learn that herself and our darling Boy were well in Health.---   Feeling myself greatly better from the medicine I had taken in the morning I rode out for an airing between 3 and 4 o'clock and accompanied Major Morisset to inspect the two new Wind Mills and New Guard House he had sometime erected. --- The Grand Pier or Mole (named "Macquarie Pier"-- ) I was rejoiced to find on inspection is now about Half completed across the channel which separates Coal Island -- or Nobby -- from the Main Land on which the Town of Newcastle is situated. --- This channel is Half a mile across. --- This Pier is a noble and most important Piece of Work but a most arduous and Herculean undertaking. --- It was commenced by Capt. Wallis three years ago and it will most likely take two years more to complete it. --- When this is done however the Harbour of Newcastle will be both safe and commodious and fit to receive ships of 500 Tons Burthen. Indeed the good effects of this Pier is already felt as it has already rendered the Harbour secure and deepened considerably the Channel by which Vessels must enter. The Wreck of the Nautilus has been removed from where it choaked [sic] up one side of the Channel in consequence of the force of the River Current and Freshes being confined to the principal Channel by the erection of the Pier.   Tuesday 20. Novr. 1821.   The Weather being moderate and there being some little appearance of a Change of Wind the Comr. of the Elizabeth Henrietta (according to my orders given him yesterday) fired a Gun at 5 o'clock this morning as a signal for sailing. --- I got up immediately and sat down to Breakfast at 6 o'clock; the Brig in the meantime weighing anchor made the best of her way out of the Harbour.   At 7 a.m. I left the Govt. Cottage attended by Major Morisset and the Gentlemen of my Suite and set out in the Commandant's Boat to join the Brig which was then laying to for us in the offing the Troops lining the Street leading to the Wharf as I passed to the Boat -- and the Battery saluting me with 19 Guns on my Embarkation. --- My kind and friendly Host Major Morisset Lieut. Close and Ensign McAlister accompanying me on board where we arrived a qr. before 8 o'clock. --- I then took a kind leave of my Friends -- who returned on shore whilst we made sail and stood out to Sea for a good offing; for I am grieved to say the Wind continues still foul -- blowing directly from the very quarter we want to go to. --- The Snapper Cutter sailed in company with us; and the little Dispatch Schooner Newcastle sailed about 3 Hours before us this morning. --- She is however still in sight.---   Major Morisett has most kindly sent his young friend Lachlan the following very handsome Present of Pets; vizt. Four Black Swans Two Emus Two Kangaroos (Foresters) One Wild Goose and One Wanga-Wanga Pigeon; all which were sent on board this morning in high Health. --- Ensign McAlister has also sent Mrs. Macquarie a present of a number of rare Stuffed Birds of Hunter's River.---   By 3. p.m we had got a pretty good offing -- and the wind by that time altered a few Points in our favor [sic] but being very light we made little Progress in our Voyage. --- By 5 p.m. the Wind became still more favorable and we were able to lay our course going at the rate of about 4 Knots an Hour. --- At this time we were little more than abreast of Newcastle. --- At sunset the Breeze Freshened up a little more and we began to make some progress along the Land. --- At 9. p.m. we were abreast of "Bird Island" which is about Halfway between Newcastle and Port Jackson. --- The Wind died away between 11 and 12 o'clock.   Wednesday 21. Novr. 1821.  We had a Calm the greater part of the Night -- and consequently made very little progress in our Voyage.   At 9 a.m. We were only abreast of Broken Bay 20 miles from Port Jackson. --- We have now however a fine Breeze of 4 Knots an Hour but there is a light Current against us -- which considerably retards our Progress. --- The Snapper Cutter is in company with us -- and the Newcastle Schooner is in sight -- but about Ten miles ahead of us. --- At 1/4 before 11 a.m. we saw the Newcastle enter Port Jackson Heads and we expect to do the same in about an Hour and a half.   At 12 at Noon we Entered the Heads of Port Jackson -- and the Wind being directly fair ran up the Harbour in the Brig. --- We anchored at 1 p.m.. and landed immediately at Mrs. M's Private Stairs -- where I had the happiness of meeting my dearest Elizabeth -- our Darling Boy being at Mr. Reddall's.     Saturday 15. Decr. 1821.  I set out from Sydney this afternoon at 3 o'clock in my own Carriage and four accompanied by Sir Thomas Brisbane with whom I had promised to dine and spend the day at Parramatta where we arrived at 1/2 past 4 p.m. --- Mr. Judge advocate Wylde having joined us at dinner. ---   Sunday 16. Decr.  At 6 a.m. I set out from Parramatta in my own Carriage accompanied by Mr. Judge advocate Wylde who makes one of my Party to Bathurst. --- Two of the Horses (the Leaders) proving very restive we were obliged to take them out of Harness and leave them behind; going on with only a Pair.   We reached Sir Jno. Jamison's at Regent Ville on the Right Bank of the River Nepean a quarter before 9 o'clock. --- He received us very Hospitably and gave us an excellent Breakfast. --- Lt. Lawson and Mr. David Johnston joined us at Sir John's at Breakfast; they being two of my Party for Bathurst.   We remained till 12 o'clock at Regent Ville expecting Mr. Meehan the Dy. Surveyor Genl. to join us there; --- but not appearing then we crossed the River to Emu Plains -- where we were received by Mr. Fitzgerald Supdt. of the Govt. Agricultural Establishment.   We remained here for about Half an Hour during which I wrote a Letter to my dear Mrs. M. --- We then mounted our Horses and pursued our Journey to Bathurst across the Blue Mountains.   I left my Carriage at Regent Ville; but took on my Curricle which had been converted into a very handsome Tandam [sic] for the present Journey for me to travel in occasionally. --- We had a very pleasant ride to Spring-Wood the 1st Depot on the mountains 12 miles from Emu Plains where we arrived at 1/2 past 3 o'clock -- having only walked our Horses all the way. --- There is very good grazing all the way from Emu Plains to Spring Wood for both sheep and cattle and a very good supply of fresh water from Springs at this stage -- which is a Military station. --- Here there ought to be a large Tract of Ground of at least 1000 acres reserved for the use of the Crown and the Flocks & Herds of Individuals passing to and from Bathurst on account of the good Forage and Water procurable here.   We sat down to a good Dinner precisely at 5 o'clock; having found our Tents ready Pitched and everything in order for our reception on our arrival at Spring Wood; my Servants and Baggage having come on two days before me to this Stage. ---   We walked out after sitting a little while at Dinner Drank Tea at 1/2 past 7; and intending to set out very early in the morning we all retired to Bed at 9 o'clock.---   Monday 17. Decr.  Set out from Spring Wood at 1/2 past 5 in the morning -- having first sent off all our Baggage. --- Arrived at Jamison's Valley at 9 o'clock disce. 16 miles from Spring Wood.   Found all our Baggage there with the exception of one Cart which did not arrive at the Ground till 11 o'clock -- when we Breakfasted; the Tea Box being in that Cart. --- At 1/2 past 12 sent off our Baggage and pursued our Journey. --- About 5 miles from Jamison's one of our Carts having the Corn in it broke down and we sent back the Axle Tree to be repaired at the Forge of the Road Makers 3 miles in the Rear. --- We arrived ourselves at Black-Heath where we had determined to Halt for the Night disce. 12 miles at 4 p.m.; but the Carts with the Baggage did not arrive on the Ground till 8 o'clock. --- We had then to Pitch Tents &c. with Fire-light and did not sit down to Dinner till 10 o'clock. --- At 9 o'clock it became foggy -- and when at Dinner it came on a Drizzling disagreeable Rain with a very cold Easterly Wind which made us all uncomfortable. We did not go to Bed till 1/2 past 11 o'clock.   Tuesday 18. Decr.  This is a very disagreeable rainy morning and therefore we were not in any hurry of getting up. --- Between 6 & 7 o'clock a.m. Mr. Meehan joined us at Black-Heath and also the Cart which had broken down yesterday -- now repaired.---   At 9 a.m. Set out after sending off the Baggage. At 1/2 past 10. arrived at Mount York and descended the Pass into the Vale of Clwyd; but the Baggage Carts did not join us there till 1 p.m. We then pursued our Journey and arrived at Cox's River at 1/2 2 p.m. -- but the Baggage did not come up till 3 o'clock and here we took up our Ground for the Night disce. from Black Heath being 15 miles.---   Wednesday 19. Decr.  Set out from our last Halting Place at 6 o'clock in the morning crossing Cox's River at a very bad Ford for Wheel Carriages -- and thence pursued our Journey over "Clarence's Hilly-Range" we arrived at the Fish River at 3 p.m. Disce. 17 miles and Encamped on our last beautiful Ground there close to the River. --- It rained a little when we left our last Ground -- but it soon afterwards cleared up and turned out a very fine warm day. --- It proved very rough Travelling across Clarence's Hilly Range and tedious. One of the Baggage Carts upset coming down one of the Steep Hills by which accident my pretty little Table with the Tea and Sugar Cannisters was broken to Pieces.---   We dined early and we all took a very pleasant walk up the Left Bank of the Fish River after Dinner going to Bed at 9 o'clock.---   Thursday 20. Decr. !   A Cart with all our Breakfast things was sent off at 3 o'clock this morning to Sidmouth Valley 7 miles on with orders to Halt there and have Breakfast ready for us there by the time we should arrive. --- We sent on the rest of the Baggage at 6 o'clock and followed it ourselves at the same time. --- We arrived and Halted at Sidmouth Valley at 8 o'clock. --- Breakfast was quite ready which I had the happiness of taking under the shadow of the same Tree that stood immediately in front of our sleeping Tent when my dearest Elizabeth was with me here in May 1815.   Having made a very hearty Breakfast we pursued our Journey at 1/2 past Ten. --- We turned off to the Right from the Road to "Campbell-River" towards "O'Connell-Plains" crossing the Fish-River to Hassell's Establishment and thence through "Macquarie Plains" (-- which at this time looked very beautiful indeed --) and afterwards through Bathurst Plains; visiting the different Farms located thereon including Mr. Cox's Establishment nearly opposite to the Town of Bathurst.   We crossed the Macquarie River by the usual Ford to the Town about 3 o'clock disce. from Fish River 25 miles by the Route we pursued.   We rode directly to the Government House and put up our Horses. --- I then went to see the Troops the Stores Barracks Granary &c. &c.   I found a great number of the Natives waiting here for me for several Days and they immediately came to see me at Government House -- to the amount of 15 Persons. --- We dined at 5 o'clock -- the Baggage having all arrived about 4 o'clock.   In the Evening the little Town of Bathurst was very neatly illuminated in honor of my arrival in it -- and the Natives entertained us with a very good Karauberie at Night which lasted till 11 o'clock; -- at which Hour we retired to Bed.---   Friday 21. Decr. 1821.  We Breakfasted at 8 o'clock this morning -- and went out on Horseback at 1/2 past 9 to take a long ride through the Country in the vicinity of the Town. At Crooked Corner I stopt [sic] for about Half an Hour to inspect the Govt. Herds of Black Cattle and Flocks of Sheep -- all of which I found in excellent condition and grazing in good grounds. --- We then pursued our Ride to Mount Pleasant; thence to Princess Charlotte Valley (--which is at this time looking most beautiful--) crossed the Hills to Queen Charlotte-Vale and thence Homewards calling at the Government Agricultural Establishment where I had the satisfaction of seeing a most luxuriant Crop of Wheat Oats and Flax. --- Arrived at Home at 1/2 past 1 o'clock after a very hot ride of at least 16 miles. ---   At 3 p.m. the Inhabitants and Settlers of the Settlement of Bathurst about 15 in number waited on me with a congratulatory address to which I made a suitable reply in writing. --- In the Evening Bone-Fires and illuminations were made in the Town and at all the Farms in sight of it along the North Bank of the Macquarie River; and in the latter part of the Evening the Native[s] entertained us with another Grand Kauraberie in front of Government House.   Before Dinner I inspected all the accounts and Returns of Lieut. Lawson as Comdt. of Bathurst and found all perfectly correct and received all the necessary Returns from Him and also from the storekeeper. --- Having now completed all my Business at Bathurst I have resolved on setting out early tomorrow morning on my return to Sydney. --- I accordingly gave my Servants the necessary orders about sending off the Baggage at Day-break and I retired to Bed at 10 o'clock ---   Saturday 22 Decr. !  Sent off the Baggage early this morning by the short Route to the Fish-River through Bathurst Macquarie and O'Connell-Plains intending to proceed ourselves by the Campbell River thither.   At 6 a.m. Set out from [the] Town of Bathurst leaving Mr. Meehan to measure Lands there.---   I stopped at the White Rock to inspect the Government stock of Breeding Cows there and was much gratified to find them all in such excellent condition. --- We then pursued our Journey to the Campbell River and to Lieut. Lawson's Establishment close to the Banks of that River on Mitchell's Plains. --- Here we inspected his stock of Horses Horned Cattle & Sheep all which are excellent of their respective kinds. --- Lieut. Lawson accompanied us from his Establishment for a few miles on our way and then returned to his station at Bathurst.---   We stopped to Breakfast at Sidmouth Valley and having rested our men and cattle there for two Hours we continued our Journey to the "Fish River" where we arrived between 4 and 5 o'clock in the afternoon and encamped there for the Night; the distance from Bathurst being 28 miles. --- This day was exceedingly Hot. The Judge advocate drove me in my Tandam [sic] the whole of this day's Journey. --- We had a late Dinner -- but went to Bed at 10 o'clock.---   Sunday 23. Decr.  We broke up our Camp at the Fish River between 5 & 6 o'clock this morning -- and set out on our Journey sending off our Baggage some time before us and intending Breakfasting at Joke's Bridge 9 miles from the Fish River. --- We had a very hot morning's Ride to Joke's Bridge where we arrived at 9 o'clock -- and found Breakfast ready for us. Having rested our Cattle at this Place for an Hour we pursued our Journey to the foot of Mount York in the Vale of Clwyd where we arrived at 3 p.m. ourselves and the whole of the Baggage in about an Hour afterwards; the distance from the last stage being 23 Miles. --- Here we found a large Drove of between 2 and 300 Head of Horned Cattle on their way to Bathurst which on enquiry we found belonged to Mr. Brown of Sydney; his two Nephews Messrs. O'Briens being in charge of them; -- Mr. Wm. Broughton Junr. making one of their Party. --- I was much concerned to find on the arrival of our Baggage at this Ground that one of our best Cart Horses was dangerously ill and that another was lame. --- The former was immediately bled and a Draught of hot Port Wine was poured down his throat at the same time which appeared to relieve him for the time; but the poor animal was already too far gone for he died before we went to Bed in great agony of an Inflamation in his Bowels supposed to be occasioned by his feeding on Wheat only at Bathurst and drinking too much Water on this day's Journey. --- This untoward accident gave me a good deal of concern. --- We did not dine till 7 o'clock but we went early to Bed.   Monday 24 Decr.!  We all got up at 5 this morning to prepare for ascending the Great Pass to the summit of Mount York. --- It was a very fine morning -- but promised to give a very hot Day. --- At 1/2 past 5 the first Cart was sent up the Pass. --- At 1/2 past 6 we Breakfasted -- and had all the other Baggage Carts packed up and sent off in their Turn -- one after the other; the good Horses having to return down the Pass to assist the indifferent ones. --- We set out ourselves at 8 to ascend the Pass. --- I rode up the easy part of it -- and walked the rest of the more steep part of it. --- The whole of the Carts (5 in number) did not arrive on the Top of the mountain till 1/4 before 11 o'clock -- and then moved on for Black-Heath -- the men as well as the Horses being greatly fatigued with the labour of ascending the mountain in consequence of the extreme Heat of the day and the constant hard work they had to undergo. --- Mount York is only 700 feet high from the Vale of Clwyd but the length of the Pass from the Top to the foot of the mountain is three quarters of a mile.   I rode in my Tandam [sic] from the Top of Mt. York to Black-Heath -- where we arrived at 1 p.m. but the Baggage did not come up to the Ground till 4 p.m. --- We then Pitched our Camp for the Night at Black-Heath; distance from the summit of Mount York being 9 miles.---   Dined at 6. -- and went early to Bed.---   Tuesday 25. Decr.!!!  Got up at Sunrise -- and had the Baggage sent off as soon as it could be Packed.   Followed it ourselves at 10 minutes after 6 -- and arrived at "Jamison's Valley" at 9 o'clock; disce. 12 miles. Here we halted to Breakfast and rested our men and Cattle for some Hours. --- At l p.m. we pursued our Journey again. --- I rode the first part of this stage but on the Day getting very hot I got into the Tandam [sic] in which I was driven by Joseph the remaining part of this day's Journey.   We arrived at Spring Wood 20 mins. before 5 p.m. --- The Road the greater part of this stage is execrably bad for a Carriage and I was dreadfully jolted. --- It is 16 miles from Jamison's Valley --; our whole Journey this day being 28 miles. During our last stage we passed "Caley's Repulse" and the "Bluff-Bridge"; the latter as well as several other small parts of this last stage being lately greatly improved by Lieut. Lawson.---   On my arrival at Spring Wood the Corporal of the Guard stationed there informed me that Mr. Fitzgerald had only gone back to Emu Plains about Half an Hour before; having remained here since morning expecting me to arrive every moment. --- The Corporal also informed me that two Convict Ships had arrived at Sydney since our passing here on Sunday-Week. --- Our Provision Cart with the Cook &c. arrived at Spring Wood at 10 mins. past 6 p.m. At 7 p.m. the whole of our Baggage arrived without any accident. --- We dined at o'clock -- and went afterwards soon to Bed.   Wednesday 26 Decr.  We all got up pretty early took a slight Breakfast and ordered the Baggage Carts to be loaded -- and to proceed leisurely to Emu Plains; there to halt a whole Day to refresh and rest both men and Cattle; then to continue their Journey to Sydney halting one day on the Western Road at Rope's Creek to rest themselves again.---   Mr. Fitzgerald arrived from Emu Plains just as we had Breakfasted -- but brought us no particular news. --- As soon as he had got his Breakfast we set out on our Journey leaving the necessary Instructions relative to our Baggage with Corporal Macquarie.   At 10 a.m. we reached Emu Plains the Judge Advocate having driven me in my Tandam [sic].   We crossed the River soon afterwards to Sir Jno. Jamison's at Regent Ville where he had a most comfortable Breakfast prepared for us. --- Our Horses and the Curricle crossing the River lower down at the same time.---   The Day being extremely hot and oppressive we were easily prevailed upon by Sir John to remain within Doors till the Evening and to take an early Dinner with him -- which we accordingly did between 3 and 4 o'clock. --- At 1/4 before 5 we all took our leave of Sir John and pursued our Journey; myself Travelling in my own Chariot with a Pair of Horses only and the Judge advocate driving my Curricle in Tandam [sic] with two Horses.---   I arrived at Parramatta at- 8 p.m.; drank Tea with Sir Thos. & Lady Brisbane remained with them for an Hour & a quarter; and then borrowing a Pair of Leaders of Sir Thomas I set out for Sydney where I arrived at 1/4 before 11 at Night and had the happiness to find my dearest Mrs. M. and our beloved Boy well in Health.---   L.M.   Memorandum !   Lt. Lawson has built a very fine large Barn at Bathurst -- of Brick and shingled. ---   He has 150 acres of as fine Wheat now growing as I ever beheld in any Country; 15 acres of very fine looking Oats and 3 acres of very good Flax now in the ground -- and almost ripe for Cutting belonging to Government.---   The Macquarie wheat thrives well here and upwards of 50 acres of it has been sown this year.   L.M.   Do not make my Letters public which I know is the Custom in Cheshire.  Launceston 9th September 1824. In my last I stated to you that I had drawn for £100 to enable me to purchase Hops. I trust you will honor it. My Brewery far exceeds my most sanguine expectations; in short if I could get a regular supply of Hops a very few years would give me a fortune far superior to what I ever possessed. I am doing so well that I am afraid to tell you for fear you would not believe me. In short with the small means I brought out I am even astonished myself.  The demand for my Ale is already so great that I am obliged to extend my Premises; even at present my sales are equal to 400 Hogsheads of 63 galls each a year. [147] All I fear is being in want of Hops.  I assure you once more that I am in a fair way to make a very rapid fortune and only want a little assistance for the present. After this year I fully expect to able to pay off all I owe as I do not estimate my profits this year at less than £1500 and I consider that the property I possess in the Colony well worth £2000. I have got a most desirable grant of 1000 acres with a reserve of 500; and 2000 acres for you beside me and 700 for Capt. Crear on the other; all on the banks of the South Eek. Besides this I have 400 acres within half a mile of Launceston on the River Tamar opposite where the vessels lay in port. This I purchased for £112 and I could now get for it £350; but in a year or two I have no doubt it will be worth twice that sum.  I have engaged a young man who has had charge of a very large Brewery in Scotland; he perfectly understands his business. In short there is proof of it for we cannot brew it fast enough for the demand. I charge six pounds five shillings or 25 Dollars for 63 galls and for any smaller quantity 2 / 6 p. gallon. I assure you that I frequently feel astonished at my great success so much so that I scarcely fancy it can be real. I have gut my cottage nearly finished and am now building an additional Malt Barn with a Granary over it 60 feet long by 20 wide. All I want are the Boilers and constant sup of Hops and I do not fear selling a thousand Hogs-heads a year. The Ale we brew is so much superior to what the warm climate of Sydney will enable them to brew that independent of the demand here any quantity would sell there. In short I have already refused two orders not being able to do more than supply my customers here. Keep all this to yourself whatever you do; for at present I have no competition and I do all I can to make it appear an unprofitable concern.  If I do not write you so often as you could wish you must excuse it; for I assure you I have not a moment's time. It is said from the Governor to the lowest person in the Island that no person ever did so much in the same time as I have done especially when they acquainted with my slender means. However I now consider myself so firmly established that should you come out (which I more than expect you will). [148] I know you will not be a little gratified by the reception I shall be enabled to give. I am delighted with the Country and the Society at Launceston is very good; there are six or eight families that I could dine with every day if I chose; but I never go out but on Sundays. I visit none but the very first people and dine frequently with the Commandant. At present no person's Credit can stand higher than mine does here and will continue to do so provided the two Bills I have drawn on you are paid. If they are dishonored I shall suffer most dreadfully; but from your kind assurances to me I feel confident you will not allow my Credit to be ruined for so small a sum.  Lieut. Kenworthy and myself continue most intimate friends and he has been a friend indeed to me; in short without his Interest I could have done no good. If you can pay Mrs. K. any attention pray do so on my acct. for her son's intimacy has been worth at least £1000 to me.  Launceston Christmas Day 1824. No man in the Country stands higher than I do. I associate with the Governor and very first people. I dined with His Honor a few days ago and he expressed great satisfaction with the Beer from the Port Dalrymple Brewery. He and Mrs. Arthur and Family are now here at Launceston for six weeks; he has been twice down at my concern and has promised me every support. He is very much pleased with this side of the Island and means to spend five or six months here every year.  Great Improvements are going on; a new Church Court House Mill and several other public Buildings; and the Town encreases so fast that I am sure it is nearly twice as large as when I first saw it and there is nothing but new Houses building wherever you turn your eye. It must in a very few Years become a place of very great importance indeed.  We have had rather an unfavourable season for vegetation in consequence of a long Drought and the corn crops are expected to be short in consequence. There is now a market in the Brazils and the Ile of France for all our surplus produce which has stimulated many of the small as well as principal Farmers to exert themselves. Some of our first rate Settlers live like Nabobs; they have their 5000 6000 or even 8000 acres of Land with a good House & building horned Cattle sheep &c almost innumerable. [149] The Country is fast filling up and unless some new districts are discovered there will be a scarcity of Land. I still retain the 2000 acres for you; but I shall not press you to come out as I mentioned to you that I would not. It certainly is the Land of my adoption; still if things go on well with me for three years as it is now likely I mean to take a trip Home for a short time. But it will certainly be to return here.  Should any of my Friends (particularly my very kind Friend Orford) accuse me of neglecting them assure them to the contrary and I hope to make op for all very soon. My Ideas are so taken up with my business that it is even at present almost painful to sit down to write to you.  You will I dare say like to hear something of our farm which is called Dagworth. It is a very pretty place. Our house stands on a hill from which we have a very extensive view. On one side we see through the trees part of Lake Lachland and on all sides we see the mountains which have a very wild and beautiful appearance. [98] I must now give you a description of the way in which our house is built. The foundations are large trees of a very hard wood called ironbark and the walls are of the same wood. The logs are cut into lengths of ten feet and are then split into slabs which are forged into grooves in the foundation as also into the wall plates at the top. Over this is nailed weatherboards and the roof is shingled which has the appearance of a slated roof. The doors and window frames are made of cedar and to the windows are fastened Venetian blinds painted green as are the doors. The house is painted white. The length of the house is sixty feet with a verandah all round eight feet wide which is a very necessary part of a house in this warm climate. It is also a good walk in rainy weather and a nice place for the children to play in out of the sun. Our rooms are all on the ground floor. We shall have a parlour 14 feet wide and 20 feet long a bedroom the same size another bedroom 12 feet wide and 20 feet long a storeroom for provisions and farming tools etc. the same size a small store room joining our bedroom 10 feet square and a bedroom for Thomas and Richard the same size opening out of our room on the opposite side of the verandah which we shall make a dairy of at present. I do not know if after all my description you will be able to make out what sort of a place it will be and I think I can fancy my little niece exclaim "Well that will be a queer house of Uncle Tom's" but it is the style of most country houses here. "But there is no kitchen!" Louisa will say. The kitchens on account of the heat are generally detached buildings very different to the comfortable ones in England. Indeed all the houses in this country must strike a stranger as being very meanly furnished. The walls are generally painted sometimes only bare whitewashed with very little other furniture than a table and chairs a fireplace with no grate but wood fires burning on the stone hearth or placed on iron dogs [sic]. Window curtains are seldom seen; indeed everything that adds to the heat is taken away in summer time which is eight months of the year. Indian matting is used instead of carpet. It is made of bamboo and is very white and cool looking but I must say I like to see a carpet in the middle of the room in winter time for although not much colder than your summer we feel very chilly and enjoy sitting round a cheerful wood fire of an evening.  Now I've told you what sort of a house we shall have when finished I will tell you how we employ our time. In the summer time we rise early but at this time of the year we get up about 7 o'clock. The children are awake at daylight and are soon dressed and running about. After we are dressed we have family prayers. Thomas reads them to myself the children and one or two female servants and both Thomas and Richard kneel by their father and are quiet all the time. [99] After prayers we get our breakfast. Richard and Thomas sit up with us Richard by me and Thomas by his papa and when they have drank their tea and eaten their bread and butter they are in a hurry to get down so after "Thank God for my good breakfast" away they skip to play with their wheelbarrows which is their chief amusement. After breakfast Thomas's mare is saddled and he goes to the farm where he remains until 4 o'clock. In the meantime I sleep my baby see the house put to rights give out what is wanted for dinner teach little Tom to read and Richard comes to say his lesson which is generally P for papa and M for mama and C for cow or Onginge as he calls orange. Tom is much amused and says "Poor little thing he don't know better; when he is as big as me he will say it right won't he ma?" We do not dine till five as Thomas cannot leave the farm sooner or there would be little work done. After dinner the children are washed have their tea and go to bed after which Thomas and I walk in the verandah until it is dark and he tells me what he has been doing at the farm. We get our tea comfortably together and enjoy an hour or two in quiet. I generally work and he reads to me or we talk of the improvements we intend making when we get to "Dagworth". At nine or ten o'clock we have evening prayers and go to bed and if the children will let us sleep very soundly. As we are 20 miles from any church we read the church service on Sunday to our servants twice a day and Bland's sermons or some other religious book. I dare say it will not be very long before we have a church and clergyman in the neighbourhood as it is becoming a very populous district and as I have always been used to attend public worship regularly I shall be very glad when I can do so again and take my children. Poor little Tom is always asking questions. The other day I had been telling him that if he was good and said his prayers that God would love him and give him everything. He said directly "What lots of pancakes and sugar?" Poor little innocent fellow that is his idea of everything that is good but he will I hope soon know better.  Parramatta  Feby 12th 1824.  Dear Madam  It is now a long time since I wrote to you though I often think of your kindness to me and mine and am grateful for your past attentions. As the bearer of this Mr. Woodhouse who resides in London will have an opportunity to see you after his return I have determined to give you a line by him and shall refer you to Mr. Woodhouse for any information you may wish as he can tell you what we are doing. [77] I have still to contend with unreasonable and wicked men and believe I shall have to the end of life. However much good has been done in the Colony in various ways for the furtherance of Religion. On the 11th Inst I consecrated a very fine Church in Sydney in which I trust the everlasting Gospel will be preached to the end of time. I have now consecrated five Churches in this part of the world and shall soon have the pleasure God willing of setting apart another of his immediate worship. God has overuled the wickedness of man for the advancement of his glory.  I have lately returned from New Zealand and brought with me a few natives. I have no doubt but we shall establish Christianity among that barbarous race of men. They are making advances in Civilization and improving very fast.  I this day marked out a building which I purpose to erect at Parramatta for a Seminary for the natives of New Zealand and have the labourers at work. It is my intention to have the Missionaries children brought over for their education to N.S.Wales and some of the Children of the Chiefs with them which may be of infinite advantage to them both. I am sorry to say some of the Missionaries have not behaved well. This has given me much trouble as I have been obliged to dismiss some from the Mission entirely. These things are very grievous. Moses when he selected 12 princes heads of the tribes of Israel to examine the land of Canaan only two were found faithful and even these all the congregation had stoned them with stones. We must not expect to meet with more success than Moses in our undertakings. The last year was a year of toil & danger and much vexation. I spent near three months in different parts of Van Dieman 's land and travelled from Sea to Sea. On my return I sailed for New Zealand and was there ship wrecked and the ship was lost. We had many dangers as I sailed in four different vessels during the year. I had my troubles on shore as well as on the water and was compelled to appeal unto Caesar for redress. [78] Who can tell what he may meet with in his pilgrimage through life. Infinite wisdom cannot err. All we want is to commit our way to him and he will direct our paths. Should you be in London and see Mr. Justice Field or his lady you may know all our concerns from them. Mr. Justice Field was one of our Judges and sailed for Europe a few days ago. We were very intimate and found him at all times very friendly. I esteemed him and Mrs. Field very much and regret their departure. Mr. and Mrs. Hassall are very well. Mr. Hassall retains his spirituality his pious feelings and promises to be an useful member of the Gospel of Christ. He has got no appointment yet. I believe it is partly owing to the very little esteem some of the ruling powers have for me that he is not provided for. Many settlements are totally without Clergy. At one settlement there are nearly 1500 Convicts and no Minister. I have written to the Bishop of London on thus subject and hope some remedy will be provided. If Government will not employ Mr. Hassall I must do it myself. In short I have ever since he came to the Colony. The Lord will provide. If I could make up my mind to court the friendship of the world all would be well. But this will not do for a Christian who hopes to enter a better world than this in due time. You my dear Madam must now be near your prize. Your race must be nearly run and your reward in full view. You have had a long experience of the goodness of the Lord and must now be ready to say with Jacob I have waited for thy salvation O Lord. I am happy to say Mrs. M. is pretty well and all my family. She often speaks of you with much affection and now begs me to give her kindest love to you Mr. & Mrs. Hughes and all your sons. How must you rejoice to see your Children walking in the fear of God. I have not heard from the Revd. R. Johnson for a long time. He must be near his end now. I purpose to write a line to him this evening which I hope will find him in the land of the living. [79]   Referring you to Mr. Justice Field should you have an opportunity of seeing him and his lady  I remain  with much esteem  Yours affctly  Samuel Marsden  Sydney July 6th 1824   My Dear Cousin  It is so long since I have had the pleasure of receiving letter from you that I do not knew whether to say you have forgotten me or not however I will be like the merciful Judge and not condemn you but attribute it not to want of affection towards me but merely because you do not think it any consequence to write to a "wee bit body" like Cousin Eliza now is not this the case? but now I will so far condesend no to make an apology to you for my long silence and I hope when my dear Cousin understands why it had been so long he will pardon it of course you will have heard all the particulars of our late melancholy and severe loss and I am sure my Cousin will not be surprized at my not writing him when I assure him that ever since that fatal event my heart has been too sad almost to write to any one particularly one I am connected with for I am aware that when writing to a Relation I must nesesarily mention what I would most willingly avoid for whenever it is mentioned it seems as though my wounds bleed afresh not that it is ever out of my thought no night and day and every hour it dwells upon my mind I am sure my Friend will enter into all my feelings on such a Subject it is one that my immagination never led me to suppose would fall to my lot to record oh little did I think when I gave my Sister the last Embrace when I was leaving Sydney that it would be the last time in this world that I should hold so beloved and affectionate a relative to my heart and that her days where numbered to so short a span that that lovely form was so soon to mingle with her kindred dust so soon be numbered with the dead: so soon to lay down her head in the Grave she drooped like a beautious Flower that for a short time spread a fragrance around and before the Evening Sun goes down droops whithers and dies but she died in the Faith of her Redeemer never once did she repine she used to say "do not weep but pray for me the Lords will be done" she might have exclaimed "oh Death where is thy sting" she bore all her sufferings like an Angel for all that was excellent in Woman was comprised in that form My beloved Brother too his youthful head was soon laid where the "Wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest" he was only just entering into the world ignorant of its wickedness unacquainted with vice and so soon to be cut off oh my dear Cousin these where heavy afflictions but shall such frail mortals as we are murmur or repine at the Almightys will it was him that did the deed and shall we dare to ask his reason he has wise reasons for all his actions. - I attended my dear Brothers death bed and never never may I again endure such another trial it was almost too much for my poor heart to see him I loved so tirelesly laying in an agony of pain and not a word of Complaint escape his lips he bore all his sufferings with the greatest patience and appeared to be perfectly resigned but when he resigned his breath he appeared to have fallen into a sweet sleep so gentle and without a groan did he leave this world of woe and then so soon to follow the Death of my departed Sisters Infant it seemed as though it had only been born to be regretted so perfect a little Angel it was but oh was only a blossom. bloomed to fall so soon its innocent spirit fled this earth and joined its Sainted Mother in realms of perfect bliss. I must not dwell on these Melancholy Subjects any longer for my heart is full. - I am now up in Sydney spending two or three months with my Mother who I am happy to say enjoys very Good health I came up for the purpose of seeing her as well as getting an operation performed on Mary Hs Hands for when she was scalded through neglect they became con-pacted [sic] and I have now had them cut and I have no doubt it will be an excellent cure. she is very well in her health indeed we all [?] expected when they where cut she would be [?] and be reduced very much but instead of that she is getting [?] stout I have now got a little Boy just ten months old and a remarkably stout Child and very healthy. I can assure you his Papa is not a little proud of him he does not think there is such another Boy in the World as his When I last heard from my dear Husband he was quite well and very anxious for my return and I can assure you I am not a little anxious to Embrace him that all my happiness [?] with no one can imagine how much I am suffering owing this short absence from my beloved Husband. I feel that this world would be a blank without him he is a kind and affectionate partner nay I do not Envy the greatest and the Richest in the world. with such a being as it has been my happiness to be united to and I hope my dear Cousin when it falls to your lot you will enjoy as much happiness in the Married State as has fallen to my share. Remember me to all Friends that enquire for me the Cochranes Mr Grahame Mr and Mrs Fleming and when you go to Edinburgh remember me to Miss Duncan and the Robertsons and the Reochs. I have written to Margaret Reoch this time when Mr Thomson last heard from Capt Wood he was quite well We hear from him almost every week he has built a very fine House but he still says he wants a Wife give my kind regards to that Family. [92] [93]   do not forget to remember me very kindly to your Mary tell her I have not forgot her and never shall and do not call me selfish when I often say I wish I had so valuable a creature for this is a wretched Country for Servants I often talk about her and wish I had such a one here. tell her I often often think of her kindly. When you write your Brother and Sister give my love to them and tell your Sister I shall write her as soon as I return home but my mind is so unsettled I cannot at present. I am affraid you will think this a sad scrawl but the ship sails very early in the morning and this must go to my [?] and Mother has been calling me to make haste for this last half hour I must therefore conclude and accept of my love and believe me to remain  your affectionate Cousin  Eliza Thomson  Dec. 1825  On the 14 inst. I visited Sydney and did not return till the 21 - as this was in itself a great event so great events might be expected and General Darling's arrival on the 17th may be recorded as an era of some importance to the Colony of N. S. Wales. His Excellency was sworn in on 19 and on the 20th he landed publicly and was attended with all due honours. - We hope great things from the administration of General D who is represented as being firm and impartial just and determined; a character which if he merits is just what we need in a Governor. [82]   There are many changes about to take place in this Colony and in our sister settlement of Van Diemens' Land. This is very encouraging to us as it shews we are increasing in importance as "a promising appendage to the British Territory's in the East".  There is some change in the Members of Council and some additions under the denomination of an Executive Council. This is all we need at present. I would have the Governor Supreme assisted and advised by his Council but having a will of his own I would also have three members. A Council chosen annually by which change every party would be likely to have friends in the administration nothing can be better chosen than the present members - the head of the Law of the Church of the State and of the Mercantile and Landed interests - we ought to be contented and I trust we shall have reason to be so.  Dec. 25  Christmas is always a time much to be dreaded in this country by the sober and well inclined. Drunken husbands distress their peacably disposed wives: and well disposed men have to lament the riotous dispositions of their mates who cannot resist temptation which these holidays hold forth to jollity and intoxication.  Dec. 26  The Lieut. Governor had a short reign he seems inclined to be the Governor and has distinguished his brief administration by the establishment of a Post Office and a regular Post throughout the territory for which a General Order has been issued under his direction and with the advice of senior members of Council.  ><1-267><\g=f><\o=b><\age=40><\status=2><\abode=11><\p=nsw><\r=prw><\tt My Dear Wife I take the favourable Opportunity of writing these few lines to you hoping they will find you and Family in as good health as I am at present. Thanks be to god for it. I would have written to you Before now but I was not in a Settled way of doing so. My Dear Wife we sailed from the Cove of Cork on the 11th of May 1823 and dropped anchor in Sydney Harbour on September 2nd 1825 and we had a very favourable passage thanks be to god. I was never sick on the voyage. My Dear wife I have sent a petition for you home signed by the Governor and the Priest of this colony to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland which I hope you will get yourself in readiness and the said petition is directed to Richard Cox Bowden and Parson McShane and the Parish Priest the Revd. Father Darcy which I hope they will do everything in their power for you to get out to this Colony my dear Wife you will go to Mr. Bowden Esq. and tell my aunt to go along with you and tell him that I expect that his Honour will be so good as to get a mitigation of my sentence as I know that he can do it if he wishes as I have no other gentlemen to depend on but him as it is a poor thing to be a lifer in this colony. He can't have his liberty till he served eight years to Government and a seven years man four years before he can do anything for himself. Therefore I expect his Honour will take it in consideration.   Therefore my dear wife I expect you will be not in any ways daunted in coming to this country for I assure you if you were in this colony we were never happier at home than you would be here as for the passage you need think nothing of it from the first week and I expect as I can't go to you that nothing will keep you from me.   My dear wife you will get your eldest son from the trade as it is a very bad trade in this country and now my dear wife get yourself and your family in readiness and take very good care of them on the voyage and if it be as that your eldest son is not let out along with you leave the second son along with him in the Depot and they will be in Company and together which Mr. Murphy will direct you to do everything that is necessary. Give my best love to my mother and let her know that I am very well and that I hope that I will never die till I see her again. Tell Charles McCarthy that his son has left the place that he was in and removed to Parramata 15 miles from Sydney and is very well in health and I sent him the two letters because that I could not go myself I live a government servant to Messrs. Berry and Wollstonecraft the two best masters in this colony living within thirty yards of the warf where you are to land in. If you have an opportunity of writing to me before you come out write three letters and if you can send them out by hand if not direct your letter to the Reverend Father Terry and another to Mr. Connor Debity Superintendant of Government Barracks and another to Messrs. Berry and Wollstonecraft Esqrs tell my dear mother that I am very well and that I can live as well here as people at home that assumes £100 rent. As for diet I have the best. Remember me to all enquiring friends  PS.... when you come ashore go to the priest and he will direct you where to go if you were here with me I could get £50 per year and £25 for Jonny from any gentleman.  Feby 9th - 1825  My dear Cousin  by the Ship Mangles and by the Son of your Agent Mr Broadfoot of Leith I send you a few lines to say that with myself my family here are all well health and much the same as when I last wrote you. they all desire their love and respects and are anxiously waiting letters from you. it is now sometime Since and I think it long in not receiving one from you. Mr Broadfoot has been living a short time with us and says he will see you therefore he will be able to give you more information than I Can Communicate through Paper. I think him a very amiable young man and very steady I have a very high opinion of him I regret much not having the Money for What goods are Sold handed over to me according to Promise by this Conveyance. I should have Considered it very Safe by Mr Broadfoot but so it is I have been disapointed very much which has grieved me Sorely. I expect by the next vessel Sails from here in about a month I shall be able to send some part or all for what is sold. I should like if Possible you to apoint an Agent to receive the Money here the Agent for the Australian Company Wld. oblige you to remit the Cash with his / I have Sent from the residue of the goods to my House from the Commission Wharehouse and Which I will endevour to sell myself they have offered 2d a lb. for the paint but which I shall not take. I have inclosed for your inspection the Acct Sales if you have not laid the Money out namely the £60 Sterling which I wrote you to do for me in goods you may Keep that with the interest and put to my Credit. having lately made use of some of your goods on my own account Which you shall have a regular Acct of whenever it will be my fortune to receive the Cash for What is actually sold; I shall not lose a moment in remitting it. I have sent by Mr Broadfoot our last years Almanack and last Sydney Gazzette with one No 17 newspaper the Australian and the Pelin [?] for Mary my daughter Elizabeth says she whould wish to Send you a small memorial but will defer it till another opportunity / I must Conclude this before I intended has the person has Called for them and Cannot wait. I now remain your ever affectionate friend and Cousin  M. Reibey  Sydney 9th Feby. 1825 Wednesday  I was much delighted My Dear Cousin at the receipt of your favour by the Portland which came rather unexpectedly as I had begun to fear you had not received my Letter by Minerva which was dated 7th Feby. 1823 and I did not believe your answer to be the middle of Decbr. 1824 but I suppose I must impute to the negligence and retention of Captain Bell.  You say you have often heard of me by the "Hearing of the Ear" but I am afraid my Dr. Cousin it will be a long time ere you see me by the "Seeing of the Eye" unless you take a ship to New Holland as my Husband (Mr Atkinson) has not the slightest wish either to visit England or Scotland for many years he shortly intends leasing off all his [?] and [?] speculations and Commission [?] and returning to a small estate in the country about 34 Miles from the Metropolis which we are now building on and improving therefore I think there is not much hope of our ever visiting Caledonias long Famed Lakes & Valleys nothing I can assure you would give me greater pleasure were we enabled to do it -  You will see by the above that I do not now write under the name of Reibey. The advice contained in your letter was most thankfully perused as it convinced me you took some interest in my happiness but & Alas!!! it came too late indeed you must not be offended when I say that if it came before hand my heart was gone too far to return. it was irrevocably lost but do not think I was too precipitate no it was a matter of longer consideration than you would imagine. you little thought my Hand and Heart were engaged long before you received my last Letter - I own I was married rather younger than the generality of my sex but in this Country they marry so much younger than in yours. my dear Friend it was not the whim of a moment but the result of a long meditated and mature deliberation. I made it the subject of Prayer and Meditation by night as well as by day and my Heart told me that I most sincerely loved and that our love was resciprocal. indeed I think there are not many who considered the marriage state as seriously as I did - I am far from opinion that our Happiest Days are spent in virginity or courtship but on the contrary I think where two Beings are united who have one heart one mind one soul the maried state is much more loveable. 12 o'clock P.M. I find I am getting so sleepy and writing so dreadfully bad that I must bid you good night and resume my Letter tomorrow morning - [87]   Thursday Afternoon 3 o'clock -  You say you tremble for what our letters may [?] but you of course have heard of our most dreadful breavements long ere this. Indeed my Dr. Prince I think trouble never was like ours The loss of two such invaluable and beloved relations was enough to wring our very souls but it was the will of the Lord - yes - "for affliction cometh not of the Dust neither doth trouble spring out of the Ground" "the Lord gave and the Lord taketh away Blessed be the name of the Lord" Therefore we I trust submitted to the divine will with all the fortitude and resignation our frail weak nature would afford but not with the Resignation of Job. I think I may truly say they were the Lords children they were such as would bring full grace to all Eternity - Their Tranquil Souls no longer dwell Within a tent of Clay Their flown to bliss in peaceful realms of everlasting Day!! Forgive this little heartfelt Effusion - but Oh! what is [?] that thou shouldest magnify "him" most Happy should I have been to have stopt here without pouring out to you any further troubles but it pleased the Divine Ruler who seeth not as Man will - to afflict us still further - our poor little Baby the dear little pledge of my Dear departed Celia did not survive her lamented Mother some 7 months - Yes my dear little "Celia Alice" has gone to join her sainted Parent in the regions of bliss where trouble and affliction cannot enter nor can the ungodly approach to disturb her repose - This little verse I would beg add and forgive my humble attempt at Poetry  Dear Celia she has wing'd her flight   to the pure realms of endless light   She sits adorned with every grace  And views her Saviour face to face  You wish to know what Public ammusements we have in Sydney - You will be surprised when I tell you we have not one not even so much as a Public Ball or Assembly - I assure you my Dr. Cousin our ears are not assailed by any of the Wanton or corrupting airs of the opera no nor the majestic and ennobling melody of the Oratorio but they are frequently assailed with the noise of intoxicated People and the disgusting language of the Aborigine - The Winter generally passes away with but one or two Balls and when sweltering [?] summer arrives there are very frequently 4 and 5 in succession sometimes the [?] Sheriff entertains a numerous asssemblage of fashionables when the "Interesting Mrs. Abel" makes her appearance. sometimes our gay Naval Officer entertains his friends / sometimes the "Atorney [?] General" or "the Chief Justice" "the Commissioner of the Court of Requests[?]" or the "Cashier of the Bank" - & & & I really cannot Imagine why they should give the prefrence to the summer unless it is for the sake of the fruits which grow so much more abundantly than in Winter / [88] but as to the Eligibility of it I think I should not presume to offer an opinion as I never enter into Society except a few friends who we sometimes dine with or spend the Evening - Our principal ammusement is that of spending a few hours in the Boat of an afternoon I sometimes take my Book and sit on a Rock by the Water side to read while the others employ themselves with eating Oysters which we gather from the Rocks ourselves my Mother Elizabeth & cousin Eliza very frequently accompany us and Generally one or two of our real friends who might sans ceremonie step in and dine with us / I assure you My Dr. Cousin I feel much more pleasure in these little excursions than I should in any of their [?] assemblies. we generally take a little Bread and Butter in the Boat with us and when we go for all day we provide a cold Dinner / I sometimes collect Insects but I [?] I cannot (as was my intention) complete a Box for you. however should it be in my power I will as I have no doubt you would prize them on account of being collected by the hands of your "unknown friend and Cousin" most happy should I be could you at any time join our happy little group - I think I have been rather tardy in acknowledging the receipt of your pretty little present [?] which I assure you was very much admired and for which I have to. return you my most cordial thanks -  This letter I am ashamed to say is not fit to go out of my hands at any rate such a distance but as I am aware it will meet no other than Mr Hopes I am not so uneasy. it is not bad writing alone that it is famed for but diction and orthography I trust he will excuse it. this day Elizabeth and Eliza came over to see me and they were so full of life and gaiety that I really could not write they pleased me so with their jokes that I scarcely knew what I was about I was therefore obliged at last to leave my pen and have again about Ten Minutes ago resumed it - Tis now exactly 11 o'clock and I have to send this off to night as the Mangles sails early to morrow morning therefore I must bid you Adieu and believe me to be yours with the greatest affection  Jane Atkinson - should your Brothers Sister or any friend enquire after me pray present my kind regards to them Mr A - Miss A - join me in Kind remembrances to you though perfectly unknown. Good night my Dear Cousin May every blessing attend you is the sincere wish of  JPA  Sydney June 19th 1825  My dear Cousin  I merely write you a short Epistle to say we are very well and another separation is going to take place with part of my family. I told you in my last of them all comeing up on a visit to Sydney and Thomas going to sea for the benefit of his Health he is now returned and is greatly recovered from his complaint which was in great measure a lowness of Spirit caused by the loss of his sister J Bn who was his delight those Two above anything on this earth I think his whole soul where Centered in. [90] he is now going down to Port Dalrymple where his Farms and Stock are with his family who as been stoping with me during his absence for six months consisting of wife 3 children and Three servants. they embark the day after tomorrow God send them safe to their desired homes well then after dispatching them off how many do you think I have inmates of my House then. why their is my second son James and his wife their is Mrs Thomson and her Two children and servants. myself and daughter Elizabeth and mostly my sisters daughter Eliza and with my 3 servants we have a pretty good housefull. we also expect Mr & Mrs Atkinson to stop with us a week or two shortly till their House is finished but my House is pretty large. its capable of holding as many more it keeps me pretty busy. I have sent you by Capt McKellan 17 Sydney Gazzette from Nos 1109 to 1125 of our weekly Express from No 1 to 727 of the Australian from No 1 to 36 1 Australian Agricultural Compy for 1824 - the minitures are not done. I am afraid I shall not be able to get them done for some time as we have only man here that is clever and he is almost in a state of enibriety. I have begun a long letter to you which will be forwarded to you by the ship Phenix and which I daresay you will receive before this it will inclose the first of a bill of exchange on the Lords of the Treasury for £100 stg and the 2nd of the one sent by the ship Hope Capt Norris for £100 Stg I hope you are in possesion of before now. I am very anxious for letters from you now it being time we should have receipts for £30-12-4 sent at different times before this. I must now conclude I am afraid I shall be too late to get them on Board from  Your ever affectionate Cousin M. Reibey  They all desire their love and Respects  Sydney August 5 1825  My dear Cousin  through the Ship Phoenix returning to this Port Consequently has brought the letters and small packet of newspapers back I had sent to you by her / and in addition to the papers I have sent 5 Sydney Gazzettes from 1128 to 11335 of Hoares Express from No 9 to 14 5 Australian from no 38 to 43. The Cash is the same namely the first of a bill of exchange on the Lords of the Treasury and 2nd of bill sent by Broadfoot each for £100 Stg / [95] the accounts one not yet brought to a close I mentioned in my letter of date July 5th of the Carpeting being left at the Derwent and stored at Bethmu [?] and Grants I accordingly wrote them to sell for the best prices could be got and inclosed them the Invoice that came in your letter. I think theire must be a letter of advice but that has not come to hand yet but they had reshiped them on board the Brig Nexus bound for Port Dalrymple at £3 per ton and it is expected she will be a month or six weeks / so you see through theire mistake it may make a material difference in the Market and expences. I shall not open those Bales / Mrs Thomson is still with me and very anxious to return. Mr T. has written her he is quite tired of being alone I think he will never let her come again without himself / I got a letter from my son Thomas that they all got down safe and fifteen days passage. their is a young man here by the name of Anderson that Mr Reach [?] gave a letter of introduction Recommending him strongly / I think he said he was a ministers son / I asked him and Mr Wallace to dine with us which they did and I gave them a General invitation but I never saw either of them with the exception of Mr Wallace. Called one day after when I was very ill I believe him to be a decent young man. Mr Anderson got a situation in Mr Wentworths office the Barrister who wrote the History of N.S.W. which place he soon left through his incapacity as Mr W. said to fill the situation. I was very much afraid he will do no good here I reed a note from him the other day praying my assistance he being then confined in Goal for the sum of £5.0.0 at the suit of Cuningham the Ship Builders from Leith / I was going to liberate him immeadiatly but a thought struck me to write to Cuningham Concerning him. he sent back for answer Anderson had letters to him from his friends in Leith and in Consequence paid him all the attention in his power and after that lent him £5.0.0 which he had every reason to suppose was not aplied to the best of purposes / Consequently I declined [?] it. I then recd another note from him saying that Cuningham had agreed to take his note for a month providing he would pay costs which was 40 / - / I immeadiately sent him that sum he promised my servant he whould call on me the next morning after he was out but I understand since it was nothing but a stratagem to get a little money to spend in disapation [sic] / I am told he is a worthless Charracter for which I am very sorry as I know Mr Reach [?] will be vexed he gave him a letter when my servant took the Money to the goal [sic] he was the bearer of another note from that Davis you gave the memo to the Charracter before I did not send him any thing but I sent to his wife relief who I belive is very badly off. a number of these Emigrants come out and spend what little Cash they have before the offer to do anything for their future prospects the generaly turn out very bad their are a great many of them so bad or worse than the most depraved Convicts the go about swindling any one they can lay hold of we have instances of it every day with us / [96]   Mr McArthur is now up on a visit to Sydney I suppose to meet the Arch Deacon to come in for a share of the Church lands theire is great alterations here now with the Clergy since his arrival we have heard him Mr McArthur several times. I think he is atempting to Tread in Dr Chalmers steps / he Certainly is a very Clever man and I think a very good one. he is now liveing at Mr Wemyss the Commissary he called on Eliza Twice / he expects going down to the Derwent at the time Eliza goes. he is rather too voilent [sic] in the pulpit I am afraid it will Ingure his lungs - we are now dayly expecting our new Governor and the Seretary [sic]. I suppose their will be great alterations in our Government but tis all the same to me. I never meddle in polatics. you will see by the papers they are discussing the busness between Dr Douglas and the Revd. I Marsden. tis said that neither perty can make good their aspertions and that Douglas will get his situation as Clerk to the Council with a Salary of 800 per annum / I think I shall be able to let you have the minitures now very shortly. we have got I am told a very Clever man now. Eliza and James is now sitting as they are going down so soon. I shall then be able to judge if he does them well. if so James and Elizabeth will be the next and what whould you say if I where to be the bearer of them myself. if I do come it will be all in a hurry when I have fixed upon it. I do not say I am in earnest but I feel very much inclined. I shall bring Elizabeth with me she is growing the picture of her sister Celia both in figure and every thing I think she is just her height. if we do come we shall stay a few years - poor Mr Wills is just getting into the same way as Celia I think he will soon follow her if he does not very soon take a turn he is a very fine young man he goes up the Country tomorrow morning to Mr Refesnes[?] his Brother-in-law[?] who is a surgeon and I think the change of air may be of service / I have been packing his things up he says he think he never will be able to come down again alive. the Miss Atkinson and sister to Janes Husband was on Teusday last Married to Capt John Grimes a Native of this Colony. I think it is a good match for her when she came out I understood or it was rather given out she had an engagement in England but as it will tis all over now  the sail tomorrow morning for the Ile of France for sugars & - I inquired about that man Murdock and find. by a servant Maid of Mrs Atkinson who lived sometime in the same place. stays[?] at Mr Oxleys as Cook & his wife as Housekeeper / I coud not find out what he left Mr Murdock for I expect long ere this you have been Mr Lang the Minister / [97] he has lost his Brother since his departure a very fine and worthy young man / as for Mr Warren I cannot say anything about as I belive he is now on a Ship to Newcastle & I had liked to have forgot I wrote to Alice by this Conveyance and I desired her to say to you I wished you whould (if they are alive my old Nurse & her Husband) pay over to them £5.0.0 from that Money you have of mine in the Bank and the rest you may send out in a little investment of which I had advised you I see you are about removing to a larger establishment it is a good sign and believe me I am as anxious about your prosperity as you can possible be and may you many years continue to have your health which is more prescious than Rubys to you or any one else I hope you will take care of it / some times Relapses one worse than the first atack. I have had some very bad atacks lately of the Astma or with that exat[?] I think I should enjoy a tolerable[?] state of health but never I am afraid I shall be the woman I was Two years ago - I must now beg of you to present my kind compliments to Mr & Mrs Fleming and all inquiring friends Eliza sends her Dear love to you in which Betsy joins remember us all to Mr Cockran and all the young Ladies  I long to be with you again. Mrs. Atkinson also presents her love to you from your ever affectionate Cousin  M Reibey 