 You ask me how we began Boarding out. It was begun privately by myself as an experiment. By the permission of the Chief Secretary Mr Arthur Blyth I took out two children and found homes for them and then three or four other people did the same the Government allowing each child the cost of its maintenance in the Asylum which was then 9 / - per week. I paid 6 / - per week for board 1 / - for school and the remainder I had for clothing. This was more than was necessary and altho' one of my children was very unhealthy and one of his doctor's bills came to nearly £3-0-0 I saved money upon them so that when the allowance was cut down to 6 / 9 I had a considerable sum in hand. The allowance was afterwards reduced to 5 / - . By that time the poor delicate boy was dead and the woman who had the care of the little girl assisted me by purchasing the child's shoes and stockings and paying for her schooling out of the 6 / - which I continued to allow her and the extra shilling and the other clothing I had to find. It did not cost much. I made the clothes myself and they were taken great care of.  My experiment was a failure unhappily the mother claimed the child as soon as she was old enough to go to service and as she was then married and living respectably she was allowed to have her and carried her off to a bush station.  We began our society by sending a circular to a few suitable people and calling a meeting and then forming ourselves into a committee and applying to the Government for permission to have children when we had found homes for them and an allowance for each. This application was refused and it was not till two years afterwards that our society got to work. Then the Destitute Board began to place out children on their own account. We offered our assistance which was accepted and they keep us informed of all that they do with the children and receive reports from our visitors. We wished to have taken the responsibility but the 'Board' requiring the reports to be sent in within three days of the visits and that they should go direct we were obliged to request our visitors to send them in duplicate one to me and one to the 'Board'. The reports come in at the rate of 40 or 50 a month and the correspondence has become so heavy that although we have two secretaries now my part as chief involves more work than I can easily do. Our colony has just adopted postal cards and I find these save my time very much.  Melbourne Home Little Lonsdale Street  4th August 1876 -  Dear Mrs Sunter I am sure you must think me very ungrateful for not having written to you   before after all the trouble you took on my behalf but to speak truly I have been ashamed to write as I have been so very unfortunate since I've been in the Colony; and I have been hoping against hope that I should be more successful by and by and be able to give a pretty good account of myself. I will commence at my arrival here and tell you what I have been doing as far as I can remember.  The voyage was a very pleasant one and I need hardly tell you that I was very sorry when it came to an end and I found myself for the first time in my life at the mercy of strangers. [201] We anchored in the Bay on Saturday the first of November at about half past one in the afternoon and never while I live shall I forget the feeling of despair that took possession of me when I saw everyone on board talking to their friends who had come out in the Tug Steamer to meet them. Miss Davis (my cabin companion) came out to be married and her intended husband took her away in a little yacht and Mrs Thomas the only remaining lady went away in the Steamer with her husband and of course all the gentlemen got away as soon as they could and I was left to indulge in my grief and to wonder what would become of me in this strange land.  On Monday morning one of the passengers who had been very kind to me during the voyage offered to go to the 'Home' with me and when I got there I found that my Father had not kept his promise of writing to me; and I had only a few shillings in my pocket not sufficient to pay a week's board and lodging in advance (17 / -) which Mrs Roe told me was necessary. I had only one sovereign in my purse when I left England as my Father said he had not got it to give me having had so many little things to pay for but he promised to write to me and send me at least £20 so that I should have it on my arrival in Melbourne and from the day I last saw him till the present time which will be two years tomorrow he has never taken the slightest notice of me. Now I consider this most cruel of him as he wished me to come thinking that I should be sure to be successful although if you remember when I came to make enquiries of you some twelve months before he would not sanction it.  When I had been here but a short time I obtained a situation at a place called Boggy Creek near Kyneton and there I took the measles from the children and the unfeeling woman sent me home when I had only been there five days and I had them very severely. My Cousin kindly had me at her house and nursed me herself. The doctor said that I might have lost my life. I had to have my hair cut short like a boy and it has not grown yet.  After I had got quite well I got another situation through an advertisement which was supposed to be as a companion to a young lady but when I arrived there I found that there was no servant kept and the man was a travelling hawker and I was required to help his daughter make fancy articles for sale and do all the housework besides so I did not stay there very long. [202]  After that I went to Wangaratta and when I had been there a little over two months they gave me notice to leave and I think they were in difficulties. After I left there I did not get employment for a very long time and what I should have done without my Cousin I really do not know for I should have wanted for food and clothes too but for her.  Mrs Roe at the Melbourne Home is one of the most kind and motherly persons I have met but she is quite powerless to assist anyone who cannot pay their way and the ladies of the Committee have passed a law that nobody shall stay there who cannot pay 17 / - weekly in advance so that really I do not see what benefit is to be derived from being there excepting of course that if one stays there 'tis a guarantee (to the employers) as to their respectability.  From what you told me and judging from the report (the little book I mean) I quite thought there would be someone to meet me at the vessel and also that some little interest would be taken in you by some of the members of the Committee but I soon found that I was mistaken. Of course if any one comes to the Home requiring a Governess or Nursery Governess as the case may be if you are suitable you have a chance of getting the situation; but if you are staying elsewhere and you see the Advertisement you stand just as good a chance of getting it if you answer it in time.  Now I should very much like to know if you have received the £15. I think that was the sum borrowed. When I left England my Father told me not to trouble myself at all about it as he intended paying it within a month or two but as he has not sent me any money or even written to me I much fear that he must have been in difficulties and I do not think my Uncle or Mr Dalton would be very pleased at having to pay it. I should indeed be very thankful if I had the means of sending it to you but when I tell you that since I have been in the Colony I have only earned about thirteen pounds you will know that I have not got it to send especially when I had nothing to start with.  I never thought that I should live to be in the unhappy position that I am in now. The very first day that I went to the 'Home' I was told that I should never get on here without music for the very commonest people have a piano and have their children taught to play it. There are very few respectable situations to be got where music is not required. I was in a nice family in St. Kilda for a time where I used to do all the needlework and attend to the younger children but I was not very well while there and the lady told me she was sorry to part with me but she required some one who was very strong. [203] She had only been married a month when I went there to a widower with a family of five and as she was very delicate I had to leave so it seems as if misfortune attends me wherever I go.  My Cousin (whom I had never seen till I arrived here) is very good indeed to me and never allows me to want for anything & always gives me a home when I'm out of a situation. Still I cannot help feeling that I've no right to be living upon her & her husband although they are both kind enough to tell me not to worry about it. I had no idea that Melbourne was such a large place as it is or I should never have come to it. The people here are very different to what they are in England. Gold is their God and it does not matter to them how ignorant a person is if they have money but if they have not they are not considered worthy of notice. My Cousin lives a very quiet life and does not visit any one or receive any visitors so I do not see any chance of getting into society where I might be likely to meet with any nice situation where I should be kindly treated.  Several people in England promised to give me letters of introduction to friends or acquaintances of theirs out here; but I had no time to go for them & my Father promised to send them & so I have not had them. I wish my Father had sent me to learn a business - millinery or something of the kind. He always used to tell me never to marry for a home & that at his death I was provided for but now I find that I am entirely at the mercy of the world. Sometimes I think of working my way back to England I mean with a family but perhaps I should not find it any easier to get employment there. I know a lady much older than I am who is far worse off for she has no relatives here and she is now giving her services for board & residence & she has not a penny in the world. 'Tis all very well for people to say 'Take a situation as a housemaid or nursemaid.' Employers require thorough hard working servants who fully understand their duties & I am sure that I could not do the work they require.  I fear you will consider this a very miserable letter & I am almost ashamed to send one so badly written for I have left it so many times but I have not time to write it again as the 'Mail' goes tomorrow. If it is not asking too much of you I should be very glad if you would kindly write and let me know about the loan.  With kind regards trusting that you are well  Believe me Dear Mrs Sunter  Yours very truly -  Ellen H. Ollard  Victoria Grey Street St Kilda October 2st 1877  My very very dear Sister  I cannot tell you how delighted I was to get your very welcome letter. [136]  I must say I had long thought I was forgotton by all whom I loved in the dear old country that is as far as letter writing. But dear old Uncle John Gratten sends me a Dublin Paper every month for which I am so thankful for Fanny used to write to me but I have not had a line now for 9 years. Just fancy that. I often wondered the cause of such silence between us and as for your dear self and Edward & Susan I could not think what had become of you all. I often and often thought of you and longed to hear of you all. Had I known where to write I would not have kept silence so long.   And now dear Matilda as the ice is broken I hope and trust we shall corspound [correspond] regularlly. I promise you I will and if any thing should prevent you doing so Susan or Edward could write. I did so feast of dear Edwards letters the were such a treat. I do hope I shall have them to feast on once more. Poor fellow what changes he has passed through since then and me not to hear one word of it. I was so delighted to hear he was again a happy man and had got such a good wife and one of your choise so thoughtful for you.   What a woman of buisness you are. You would not be happy out of it and I must say I am thankfull you have your health and strength to work to be independent if it is ever so little. Time will pass much more plesently to have your time occupied if not too laborious. It would not do to be that in your time of life. It should be all pleasure for you. I beleave I should be like you myself. I am so fond of buisness that is drapery.   I was deeply greeved to hear dear Susan was not strong. I thought she would have had a large family by this time but poor Girl as she is not strong she has as many as she aught to have for it requires strength of body as well as mind to bring up a large family. The Great Being knows all things and will not put any thing more upon his Creatures than the can bear[?]. I trust she may be spared a long life to those little ones that are Given her. I sometimes look at their little faces and think how changed the are by this time.   Now I must tell you a little of ourselvs which I know you are anxious to hear. I wrote and told you all of our change to Melbourne. 6 year next Aprill William left the drapery buisness and went into the Grocery. He spent nineteen year[s] in the drapery in South Australia the place I still call home. I shall always love it having spent 24 years in it and left so many dear dear friends behind. I have been over and spent eight happy weeks among my dear old friends. I think if I spent twelve month I would not want for a home. The time was only to[o] short that I had to stay but my little family call me home.   I took my Baby that was then seven month old with me and my eldest Girl that is now sixteen years old. She is quite companionable now. She is taller than her Mother. She has been to School untill the last half year. We have her now finishing with a Good[?] Master. She is very studus [studious] and fond of teaching so we wish to finish her well and if she should ever have to get her living teaching will be her wish. [137] She is very clever[?] so I have very little help from her untill her Studies are ended.   Now that is saying a little of my eldeldest [eldest] of nine six Girls and 3 Boys. What do you say to that. Our second is only 14 months yo[u]nger as tall as her sister but not studus. She is clever[?] at Music but one of my best helps. She can work and help if she was home from school. I do not like to take her from school just yet. Her name is Fanny Elizabeth and the eldest is Alice Jane. Now the third is as big in her way as the two older Girls. She is fond of school and thinks she would like buisness. However time will tell what the will all be fit for. Nex[t] is a Boy William John 11 years. I did not tell you the third Girls name is Emma Maby. Did I send their likeness to you. I did I am sure but had no reply. The nex Girl is Edith Steel a bright Girl of nine years. Then come[?] two fine bright Boys Robert George and Arthur McKirdy Scott. Now that is the number going School. And the next two[?] are little Girls one Adelaide Maud three & a half[?] and Florence Isabel the flower of the flock. Now Alice will teach them when she is finished. The yongist is just two years.   Now I am sure you will say with all your heart A charge to keep I have. I am very thankfull for the number that providence has given me. I trust we may be spared to bring them up in the good way to be a blessing to world and to ourselfs. We ar endeavouring to do so with the help of Him who never yet refused those who sought his help. You know we need all the strength of mind and Grace daily to do our duty in a large little family like ours. We have much to be thankfull for such a family you would [?not] see any[?] where.   And now a little about buisness. I do not like the Grocery as well as the drapery alth[ough] I nevr go into the shop. We live on the buisness premises. I would like that part very well but we now find our house is to[o] small so our staying here is unsertain. However you direct your letter just the same untill you hear of a change. I like the buisness for Willi[a]m. He has got his health better since we came here. It is not such a close buisness. I would like the drapery for the sake of our Girls but that is a second[ary] consideration. We have no cause to regret our leaving Adelaide for we got a Good buisness and it was a change for Willi[a]m which did him Good in every way.   Our expenesses are very heavy which you know must be to bring up such a family and keep the position we should like for the sake of the family. I will Give you an idea. We have four men to trade[?] pay them good wages one £3 per week the next £2 then 25 / - then 10 / -. Servant Girl £36 p. year nurse Girl 5 / -. I have paid 9 / - per week to a nurse Girl but I have no Baby to nurse now so I can be a little independant what I never could before. I hire to wash pay a woman 4 / - p. day and you will fancy what our house keeping would be with such a family. [138] We keep three horses one cow but[?] gives enough Milk for our use. You will say it would require a good buisness to keep up such an establishment and buisness is not so good as it was. Melbourne is over done. We all have to work. I have my share what with sewing for my six Girls and all the rest my hands is quite full.   Now I think I must say no more about ourselv[e]s untill next time and tell you a little of our Adelaider friends or reletives rather. Deer old Uncle Alaxander is still liveing but feeble. He holds his situation in the Govermt yet. I think he will till the end. His eldest daughter Fanny he heard[?] of been married to a lyer [lawyer]. She lost her husband about two yeers ago. He was drowned on his way from the Northern territory. He went on some law case and on his return was rect [wrecked] with all the Crew Judge also. He left her with five little ones. The Goverment gave her £1500 but what was that [?against] his loss. She keeps a School and doin it very well. Her Sister is teaching Music and drawing[?] not married yet. Her Brother William is married and has two Boys. He lost his last. Alexan is also married and has as nice a little wife as you would wish to see and two dear little Girls. She writes me such affectionate letters. John the other Brother is up the country I do not know what doing. Ruth Shadgett is still in the same place five Girls and two Boys. I seldom hear from her. Now I think I have told you all.   Have you heard if Aunt Lucy is still alive. Do please Give my dear love to Fanny & Tom Grath also dear old Uncle & Aunt. Tell them to write if only a few living occasionally to let me know and thank Uncle for the Paper William reading them.   I wish I could see you all. There be a great number of newery [Newry] people over here. There are more Irish in Melbourn than Adelaide. Now dear I must close this and will give you another as long by return of your next. I promise you fathefully yours will always be answered by return of mail. If you only new how I long to hear from you all if alive or ded you would not forget poor me. I sometimes wish you were all out here. You perhaps would do better but that is to be proud. I must now say good by and untill I know if you have recvd this I will be anxious. William unites with me in fond love to Edward & Susan[?] Uncle when you see him and a very large part for your dear self from your loveing Sister   Bella  Toowoomba May 19th. 1877   My dear Michael   I received your letter in November last and would have answered it before this only that I have been greatly put about threw Sickness both myself and family. I dare Say you will be Surprised to think I am Still living when I tell you my Complaint was Cholera and in a Short time after they Children had Scarlet feavor. [333] I am happy to Say that we are all quite recovered and gives thanks to God for his Kind mercy to us.   I am glad to find My Mother enjoyed good health and Still hope that She Continues to enjoy that blessing. I was verry Sorry to hear of Sisters Julia's death May the Lord have mercy on her Soul. I onley hope we may be as happy as She is.   I have written to you Some time past but I Can See by your letter that you did not get it. I have to tell you now that we have an increace in the family and has Called him after my Brother John and must tell you that you are his Godfather. He is now two years. I am Send one of his portraits which was taken when he was five months old.   Now I must enquire how my Brothers and Sisters are and all frends and wishes to be Kindly remembered to them. I hope Bridget Mc.Donnell is proffessed before this time. May the Great God Strenthen her in the duties toards him. I wish to be Kindly remembered to her and hopes that She will think of me in her prayers. I am Still in the Same possition. I have nothing to mention that would be in anyway interesting to[?] you. Be Sure and write Soon and let me Know how are all frends. Mrs. Dunne and Children joins me in Kind love to Mother Brothers and Sisters and not forgetting yourself.   I remain Your Affectionate Brother   Christopher Dunne   Dear Michael you would do me a great favor if you would let me Know my age next time you write.   I remain yours & Christopher Dunne I wish I Could get Some Home frise [frieze]. It is very much thought of here and very hard to be got.   CD Mr. Michael Dunne   Norbinstown Kells Co. Meath Ireland Via Brindisi  For 2 weeks I have been cutting firewood in order to have a good supply for winter as I can't afford to pay for a load which the wood cutters charges from 7s. to 8s. each. I am sorry to say that there is no chance of gold now about where I lives yet I hope I will come on a patch some day unexpectedly. I am almost the only alluvial miner seen at work with a deal of patience. It is not known as soon as all the gold is swallowed of these diggings what the people will do. We must have to work for a living whilst life lasts.   I do not know how to begin to write after such a long silence and the longer one is without writing the more difficult it is to begin but though so long silent there was none of you ever forgotten for a single day. The reason I did not write from the first was I had bad luck from the very first and as I was always in the hope of something turning up and then I would have written with some heart. But the news I have heard these last few weeks has stupified me. Mother I could hardly expect to be alive but as for you James and poor dear Charles I thought you were all as I left you. Well if you will answer me now and let me know what happened poor Charles and when mother and him died I would take it as a great treat for with what news I have heard lately I feel downhearted as I have come to the sad conclusion that I am on this side of the water alone. [50] When we first landed Noble and me went to the digging done no good: I got fever from which I would have never recovered had it not been for Mr. Orr wife and family: they are the only friends I have got here and they are friends indeed. Noble and me managed to keep together pretty well for a couple of years or so until I got my back crushed from which I never properly recovered. I was laid up for 12 months: during this time Noble went to the diggings again promising to write to me as soon as he was settled but I never got a letter from him nor heard of him but once and then I could not trace him out. But Mr. Orr seen him some years afterwards and told Noble to beware of I almost said men but I had better say savages or wild beasts: I mean the men Noble was working with. With what Mr. Orr has told me and Noble disappearing all at once we can only come to one opinion as to what happened to him and that is too horrible to even think of.   When I was last parted with poor Ezekiel he was going to Bendigo district; I wanted him to stop about the Melbourne district where I was then but he fancied he could do better about Bendigo. We parted with the understanding that when we were both settled we would try and find each other and write but shortly afterwards I went to New Zealand and I never seen my kind hearted brother afterwards nor never will in this world. Eating unwholesome food in New Zealand brought on liver complaint which I never could get rid of but enough of this.   After I came from New Zealand I had always the hope of bettering my position before looking for Ezekiel or Noble so time slipped away until I was told of the advertisement in the paper. Then I set to look for them in good earnest; I advertised for Ezekiel in the up-country papers and stoped in town trying all schemes to find either or both. I firmly believed Ezekiel was alive until yesterday when I found he had died at the Melbourne hospital of fever on 16th May 1863. Dying in the hospital here is no disgrace as it is the only place a single man can go and a man with no money as Ezekiel had must pay 2 guineas a week and if he dies he is buried in a respectable manner out of his own money and if there is any left it is handed to the curator of the estates deceased persons.   I am glad to tell you that the unpleasant drought is now at an end. For some months the hot weather was so oppressive that I had to sleep outside my hut sometimes at night but I did not feel inclined for a bit of sleep for fear of a snake visiting me. The people made such complaints about the bugs mosquitoes fleas in such numbers whilst in bed at night we had to use the Carbonic acid for their destruction. We have got plenty of bread at last. Before it came the good drinking water was very scarce. Since I last wrote telling you how I got on at digging I am still getting but a good deal less gold; much more poorer than at the beginning. Before I came in sight of a speck I had to draw a few pounds out of the bank as to keep me agoing.   [19 March 1878] I do all the house works myself except fine shirts which my nearest neighbour a wife of an old Dublin seaman washes for me at a charge of 4d. a piece; a native of near London she is the one that makes clothes for me and other people; a very good dressmaker and tailoress. I have a nice cat for company for me. She follows me like a dog to where I works. The moment she sees anyone or dog she runs into holes till she is sure of them being gone out of sight. [48] She sometimes stands a chance of catching rabbits; the hares are becoming plenty. Unfortunately I have no gun to shoot them.   I am not doing much good at digging just now. There was a heavy fall of rain last Friday all day and night which caused a deal of earth to fall in a new hole I am sinking [...]   Most of my neighbours who cant get gold on these diggings on which I live looks for work as labourers. I fear I shall take their example when all the gold is swalled out of it. hard to tell what the people will do after. I live by myself in a very good view of Castlemaine half an hour's walk so that I don't mind being lonely. Last week I got a present of a good lot of grapes and apples and pears from a wealthy gardener. He has a fine large orchard about half hour's walk from my hut. He like a good many miners made lots of money shortly after the gold was first discovered which enabled them to build fine houses on their own land. Castlemaine is beginning to be a fine town with some fine public buildings (the Post Office particularly) [...] [5 August 1878] My dear Maria many thanks for your kind letter of 18th March which was sent to me by my store-keeper whilst lying bad with dysentery with piles at the hospital so I know that you would not accuse me of my negligence in replying to it sooner. I got sick for a time before he recommended me as a member of the committee to go at once to become an in-patient which I found more comfortable with plenty of attendants and attention than my hut. He took me there in his own tax cart. I lost a deal of blood passing till it disappeared on my leaving it but I am not quite well yet. Going up high hills causes me to breathe hard unlike before. I don't remember having ever been sick of any dangerous disease after or before I left Ireland so I am thankful to God for his kindness in taking the complaint from me. The hospital is a splendid building with a fine view of Castlemaine from the top of a hill about one and a half miles from my hut. Some of the patients were of respectable families at home; amongst was a cousin of the celebrated explorer Bourke of whom you would certainly read in the papers. I had plenty of visitors particularly miners. Some brought me sorts of cakes and jams etc. whilst at the hospital. The surgeon Dr. McGrath is a North of Ireland man said to be the cleverest doctor in all Castlemaine. From 6 to 8 deaths took place. My diet was such a weak one which consisted of sago burgoo porridge boiled milk boiled bread pudding rice tea fresh butter bread with a good supply of milk and medicines along with a little brandy every day and night till I found myself getting better when the doctor ordered me to live on soup with meat potatoes eggs bread tea milk; just before I was fit to come home he put me to the expense of drinking port wine for a month which was pretty hard on me [...]   The weather here has been a bitterly cold one for sometime past with some rains so that I have to make good fires to keep myself warm. I am happy to say that I am now enabled to cut firewood as to save the expense of hiring any more load. Shortly after I came home I had to order 2 loads till I was well enough to start to dig for gold about 4 weeks ago after getting none since I left the hospital.    [24 January 1879] You would read the papers I sends you giving accounts of the bushrangers Kellys who I am sorry to say are sons of Irish parents [...] I am sorry to say that my nearest neighbour of whom I spoke in my letters to you is dead - the same woman that made clothes for me and diggers. Since her death her husband has been unlucky enough like me at digging; hard times just now with the miners and trade dull. [49] He talks of leaving here and go to near Melbourne to try and get work on the roads for the government. Lots of men can't get any about Castlemaine now. They complain so much of the Chinese men keeping them poor and of the government allowing the emigration of more to there colonies. If my neighbour go away I am advised to shift to some place as it would not do for me to be alone. [15 April 1879] As to digging for gold I have not done much good like other miners since I came home from the hospital. It is a very difficult task to find gold now about where I lives [...]   We have just got through the shearing and have now on Dunlop about 150000 sheep. The station will carry more when it is improved. The great drawback in this country is the want of water. We have one well down 414 feet and not a supply of water and still sinking. It is the intention of the present company to improve the stations and then sell.   Zoocall has about 185000 sheep on it. These stations will carry over half a million of sheep. we have a good season there will be that number on the stations.   It is not likely that I will be home for some time as I have entered into partnership for 5 years to see this speculation carried through. We do not know how we shall come out of it. It is a large undertaking and requires a good deal of capital.   O how I did enjoy those happy happy hours and how I keep counting and thinking that in two clear days more I shall clasp my own darling once more to my heart and have her chat to me smooth my hair and now and again muster up enough courage to give me a loving kiss. O how those kisses do thrill me the recollection of them is sweet for weeks after. Sometimes I almost feel as though you were present with me. O my own darling how I do long for the time when you shall be my own in very deed and these bitter partins and separations over and all uncertainty shall have ceased.  I do so miss your dear kind loving arm so round my neck so much and I miss your soft warm cheek on mine. But we were too happy for it to last long I suppose but I shall comfort myself with the thoughts of the past knowing that there are brighter and greater joys to come when we shall be united not part as we have had to.   1st Day Started on Friday 6th Oct 1882 beautifull day Dick Shumock came by going fishing and of course wanted to know if we was off came on to Booths when Sam went in and got me a nice bleu Necktie and Baby some lollies came by a lot of men working on the hill when we got to the top we had to load some wood for night got to the camp had tea fixed our tent Sam and Tom took the Bullocks away to the river I made the bed and put Albert to bed he went to bed early it is a miserable camp to night so windy and no grass much we let the cat out of her box when we stopped and I have not seen her since so I suppose she has cleared out.  2nd Day Saturday Morning Saw the commet this Morning and it is beautifull I never saw anything like it it rises about 4 oclock in the Morning we had a very good bed in [the] cart last night but it is hardley big enough for three but it will do Albert slept well all night got to Queanbeyan went to town got Baby a Horse with a long mane for Sids present had dinner made a start heard very bad accounts of the grass along the road got up the big Hill met a Carrier asked about the grass he said that there was good grass at Bungendore I hope so for we are very nearly disheartened got to the Molonglo River Camped.   found not a bit of grass all a sheep run I expect that the Bullocks wont stop my face is very bad and has been ever since I started I am writing by lamplight on the grubbox little Albert is asleep he sleeps nearly all day.  3rd Day Sunday Morning Oct 8th Tom and Sam has been after the Horses Since Sunrise and has not come back yet so I have gave Albert his breakfast and done all that I can my face is a good deal better today I do hope that we will soon get some rain the cat is quiet at Home we let her go as soon as we stop of a night and she stays by the fire all night 4th Day came through Bungendore to day and camped at the Back of the Church of England Parsonage going to try to get the Bullocks in a paddock for a day or two to give them a spell for I dont think that there is any feed this side of Braidwood it is like rain to day and the wind is blowing the leaves of my Book over so that it is a job to write we had some very nice rain it came up a pretty sharp Thunder storm with plenty of Wind Thunder and lightning but we had some very nice rain throught the night and morning our tent is not proof against a strong beating rain for it beat in at the side that was next the storm but I hung a blanket up and that stopped it. [216]  5th Day Yoked up about 11 Oclock saw Ted Rolf and Johny Ryan. They sent their cattle away to the Coast nearly all the people about Bungendore sent their Cattle away and I think that they would have done better to have kept them at home for out of what they sent away they are only getting about half of them back we are camped to night just over the deep Creek past Charley Moss's and can see the Lake like a mist on a plain the Bullocks are awful! discontented they will not stop unless in a paddock we had a good place for them last night but we have not got much grass to night the Travelling Cattle camped there last night I think that we will be tired before we reach our journeys end unless the grass gets better after we leave Braidwood Albert is such a good little fellow he sleeps nearly all day in the cart and as soon as we stop at night after he has a run about he gets his supper and off to bed again and sleeps all night The Bullocks are going to be a bother to stop to night and as Tom has been up nearly every night since we left home I told him that I would stop up till twelve to night and stop them going down the lane so you see that I am not very frightened in a strange place.  6th Day started this Morning beautiful! day came to Long Swamp Creek for dinner after dinner came on to the Doughboy Creek worst camp we have had since we left it is getting worse instead of better if it was not for Cabbageing a bit of grass the bullocks would all soon be dead.  7th Day dreadful! hot day to day looked like rain last night but has all gone off with the Sea Breeze clouds we have not yoked up yet for we are only going to go a short distance to day and in to Braidwood tomorrow this would be a pretty place to camp if there was grass but it is overstocked with sheep so there is not much We was down at the Creek just now it is so nice and cool and shady with green Wattle trees Albert has got his old complaint again and is very cross.  8th Day started early this Morning just as we was yoking up by came the Gold escort with 2 policemen with it and 2 on Horseback had dinner at the six mile flat came on again met a Man that Tom knew came by a Public House he gave me a drink of lemonade it was a Man by the Name of Harris but after to night we will be in a strange land to me and I hope a better one than this for you think that it is bad over your way but I can [not] compare Braidwood to anything but the very heat of Summer time when everything is burnt up so that you can judge what state the country is in over this side we had to buy Hay for the Bullocks to night it has been dreadful! hot to day and looked like Thunder. [217]  9th Day This morning when we woke it was a thick fog we got the Bullocks for we had them in a yard all night but Tom was walking all morning after the Horses and them not far away but they had no bell on and he could not see them while I was waiting for him to come with them there was a woman sent me a cup of new milk for Baby and an egg so that was not so bad.  we got yoked up and started and came through Braidwood and I think that it is a very nice town I was in one shop and it is so nice a great big shop such a lot of shop men we came on then till dinner time I dont know the name of the place that we stopped for dinner but it was not very far out of Braidwood.  started came to Jembaicumbere it is a nice place a nice level country but it has been all dug up and it looks so funny now that the grass has grown all over the hols and what was dug up out of them there is Streams of water running in all directions what was there races for gold washing there is much good grass now for we have got out of the sheep country you see nothing now but cattle and Horses after we pass what they call Jembaicumbere we begin to see tall Trees what they [call] the Ribbon gum and deep gullies and we will soon be in the wild country a little further on is the Araluen Mountain I thought that we was at it last Night for I thought that we was in a pretty wild country but it is 4 miles further on.  I must tell you that I got a great fright to night I asked Tom where I would light the fire and he told me against a log close to the road and against where I lit it was a big gum Tree and it had such a lot of Bark hanging from it that when I lit the fire it caught the Bark and up the tree it went right up nearly to the Top and run on about the ground and I had such a job to keep it out of Hassels paddock Tom was away watering the Bullocks at what is called Bells Creek and I was very glad when he came back for if the wind had been coming towards the waggon it must have got alight so that I will be more careful in future when I light the fire in the Mountains where there is so much Bark and leaves to burn. [218]  10th Day Sunday the further we go it seems to get Hotter for to day is just like what it is at Christmas The Locusts are singing and the Lizzards are running in all directions and when Tom was after the Horses this Morning he saw a snake I went to a creek down in a deep gully for some water I expected to see some but I didnt see any it is such a long miserable Sunday we went for a walk after dinner and I saw a big snake Tom tried to kill it but it got under a log came back and I never saw such strange weather as it is with us I doubt if it is the same up your way but it all got foggie and dark and just like rain but it all goes off in the morning and is as hot as ever They say that it is a sure sign of a draught but I suppose they must have something to say.  11th Day we lost our poor cat this Morning just after we started we was going over some rough mettle and she jumped down off of the waggon and away in the scrub and we could not see her again I was so sorry for she was such a nice old thing and would jump up in the waggon or the cart when she saw us preparing for a start in the Morning.  we came on a good long way along a cutting running alongside of a creek and I thought that it was the bad piece of road that I had heard them talk about but you can judge of my surprise when Tom stopped and told me that we was at the Top of the Mountain and that we had it to go down yet so he took all the Bullocks off but four and put the rest behind and tied the two Horses up behind the cart and then we began the decent it is good road cut in the Mountain but it is so very narrow that if anything was to happen [to] the Harness you would be sure to meet with an accident for as high as you can see on one side is the Mountain above and as far below you can see the top of trees and such beautiful! creepers climbing up the stems of the Trees.  there is one creeper in particular that I saw if we only had it up our way we would be glad to have it growing in our gardens it has a nice green leaf and is smothered in big branches of flowers I hardly know what flower to compare them to they are not very unlike Orange blossoms but not quiet so white as they are.  I have not seen any Maruya side of Araluen you keep winding down the Mountain and after you come a bit down you see Araluen like a little dot amongst green trees the houses dont look to be any size when you first see it I was coming down a good bit behind Tom when the Mail passed us and the Mailman told me that the grey filly had her leg over the Halter so that if he had not have told me I would have been in a bit of a mess most likely broke the cart where she was tied you can judge the steepness of the Hill when Tom used to have to stop and put water on the Brake and it used to fiz and smoke with haveing to have it on so much but it is a good road with anything els but a Team and the Corners are so sharp that you can hardly turn with a waggon but we got down all right and had our dinner at the bottom then we started and went up the town and camped in an open piece of ground. [219]  it is a funny old town for it is enclosed all around with big high Mountains you cannot see where there is any get out to it at all but they are very kind people in Araluen for there was a man came down and asked us to come up and spend the evening and so we did they were such nice jolly people just about the time we was going to camp the school children was coming out of school and Albert was playing on the road so I watched what he would do when they came up to him and so what should he do but lay flat down in the dirt that shy that he would not look at them.  it must have been nearly 12 oclock when we went to bed last night.  there was not a bit of grass so that we had to get the Bullocks some chaff as we could not get them any hay it was so strange last night for whenever you woke you could hear engine whistles blowing and the Machinery at work for they work the claims night and day and the Cocks was crowing all night it looked very much like rain to night I dont know whither it it going to rain but I hope so for things look very bad over this way.  12th Day started this Morning all sign of the rain gone came through the whole length of Araluen which is about 3 mile long and has only the one street running through it and most of the Houses look as if they have - seen better days which I suppose that they have for we was told last night that it had at one time thirty-six Public houses where it has only 4 now.  came along till we came to the cutting which is all the [way] from Araluen to Maruya and if I thought that the Mountain was bad yesterday this was.  ever so much worse for in every two or three hundred yards there would be [a] turn as sharp as your elbo and as it was nearly all up hill pulling we had to have all the Bullocks on and it was such a job to get them round turns it will let you know how close we was over to day when the two off Wheels run off and was nearly down the cutting you are all the time working round a Mountain between the Top of it and the River and in most places you cannot see the Top of the Mountain and looking down you see the Bottom of the River such a long way down as we was going along we saw a lot of men diggin they had six or seven Horses and carts and they would load the carts and start the Horses off and they would go to where they had to be unloaded where they was washing the dirt [then they would] start them back again and they would come and go without the driver it looked so curious to see them marching up and down by themselves we came about nine miles to day and we are camped to night close beside the River that we have been following all day. [220]  I do wish that we was at our journys end for I am getting tired especially of this nasty cutting but it is all the way to Moruya like what we passed to day there are such a lot of houses all along the Bank of the River we see them as we pass along and all of them with fruit gardens most of the Trees are peach and they look to have a lot of fruit on them and so green and healthy the trees there are some such nice trees all out in flower.  there is a scrubby kind of tree all out in White Blossom you would think from the distance that it was Elderberry and then there is another tree it is something like our hickory trees it is all in beautifull bloom and then the sides of the Mountain are all covered with ferns I would like going along if we had not got the Waggon to take for I am so frightened that we will meet with an accident before we get there as they are such contrary bullocks to drive.  13th Day Started from Camp this Morning just as we was starting by came a Man driving pigs we had no grass for the Bullocks but they done very well on cakes and such a road for it is all a cutting and such sharp turns you never seen I was frightened to drive the cart in some places we got on very well though had dinner started came through some nice grass land saw a lot of young calves and cows started on the cutting again came to a very sharp turn in - the road when over she went right over.  and over and if it had not been for a tree it would have went down to the river and took the Bullocks with it but it went right over pulled the off side polar right down on his knees we had a job to take him out but we got them out and none of them was hurt in the least which was a good job for there was enough damage done but it could have been a great deal worse. [221]  the things that are hurt the most are the chairs they are destroyed altogether and the poor old Preambulater I am more sorry for it than all the rest the table got all the legs broke off but one but I think that we can get it mended they are broke off right up at the Top the Washstand it got the sidepieces broke off and the Toilet table 2 of the legs off but it only wants a bit of glue The Cheffinere was right on top and it escaped with very little dammage The Tubs Buckets Pot-oven Saucepans all escaped all but Babys and it got broke my Saddle never got a Scratch The big case was broke to pieces and my old Blue box the grubbox Babys chair is the only one that is any way whole at all the cradle was broke too The Waggon has only the front crosspeice broke so that on the whole we escaped pretty lucky but it would have been better if it had not have happened at all I dont know how the crockery case got on for I did not inspect it to see but I think that it is pretty right.  it was a great job to get the waggon up again but they got another Team of Bullocks and Pulled it up with the two Teams but we did not get any loaded that night for it took us all our time to get the things up on the road and in the Morning we had four men come to help us to load so that we was not long before we had it loaded again - and ready for a start.  I was so frightened for I thought that Tom was under the Waggon we was just coming along a very steep cutting where this sharp turn was I was a little bit behind waiting for him to get round this turn I heard him shouting to the Bullocks to stop but they would not he then run round on the off side but it was no use for the leader run right to the edge of the presipeice and they pulled the two Pole Bullocks and the waggon over it would have been a dreadful smash if the Tree had not been there we was busy till dark and just about dark the Mail coach came along and a gentleman got out and came and spoke to me so nice and kind and after he was gone I was told that it was Judge Mcfarland on his road to Moruya we went to bed but not to sleep much I never undressed myself or Albert.  14th Day got up and it was a disheartening sight for all along the side of the road all the things was strewed about and we was to the Tops of our boots in dust only just the road and so much traffic on it but we set to work and soon packed it up again one of the Men that was helping us was the Maintainance man so he asked me to come down to his place so that when we was packed up we started and came on to his place had dinner camped there all the rest of the day I done some washing the People was real nice people they were young married people with one child poor little Albert when he saw his carriage broke he did cry bitter poor little fellow I did hate to see him for he thought so much of it - we are in the tick country now but I have not seen any as yet. [222]  15th Day came 9 Mile 1/2 to day through some very ugly places quiet as bad as where we met with the Accident but we got on nicely to day though the Bullocks was very contrary sometimes saw trees to day such a height that you would not think trees could grow as high Saw the first iron Bark that I ever saw to day and such beautifull Ferns and what they call the Burranang it is so pretty and I saw Orange trees growing where we are camped to night is a Chinamans place there are dreadfull Bush fires in the Mountains about us and has been this last week we have been following a River since last Tuesday they call it the Dooey River I never heard the name before.  it has eels in it we was going to try and catch some to night but it is raining the Way they catch them about here is to take a light and paddle up the river with your Boots off and have a pitchfork and spear them with it they say that they will come round the light this is a great place for Bears you can hear them shouting in all directions of a night and there are lots of snakes for you can see their tracks across the roads making for the River they say that there are deaf Adders too I dont want to see any of them gentlemen you can think that the trees are a good size when -it takes 3 Men to fall one Tree down.  16th Day started looked very much like rain came about a mile and a -half when we came to the foot of the Moruya Mountain got up all right It was a long pull up to the Top there was one very bad turn I had to go and be off side driver round it but we got round it right when we came to the top we took all the Bullocks off but four to come down if it had have been a nice clear day we would have seen the sea and the town of Moruya but it was raining and foggie so that we could not see any distance. - you never seen anything so beautifull as the sides of the Mountain is as you are coming nothing but one Thick Mass of Green Trees and Vines there was a dead sapling and all up that the vines was just like ivy so pretty you cannot see the bottom for green shrubs all out in flower some with flowers and some- with fruit I got some wild rasberries yesterday. [223] [224]   such big ones but I dont like the taste of them a bit They just grow like the Rasberries in the Gardens only they are ever so much bigger you never seen such long trees in all your life as there is in that Mountain we had our dinner at the bottom and I saw a Tree Fern it had leaves about foot long and about 2 foot wide it was so pretty.  we came about 2 mile and then camped for the night it has been raining off and on all day after we camped we went a walk up in the bush and Tom shot such a pretty parrot it had a purple head green and yellow back purple and yellow breast and nice long tail when we got back it was raining a little we could hear the sea like anything it was roaring so loud although we was 7 or 8 miles from it.  17th Day Sunday got up was raining Tom put up the Tarpauline like a verandah and we had a very good place but Albert would keep running out in the wet had our dinner it deared up a bit we went for a walk but it started to rain and we had to come home again and my word it did rain all night as hard as it could come down it came through our tent and we had to get up and put a blanket up that stopped it from coming through it want greasing.  18th Day Beautifull Morning it looks to fine to last Tom went to some of the Sawmills to see if he could get a job without going all the way down to Wagonya as some of the Bullocks feet were very tender I went to the Top of a hill with him I could see Moruya but not very plain so that I cant tell you yet what I think of it we went a Mile and Albert walked all the way back his father carried him up on the Mare.  got back put out the Bed Clothes to dry put Albert to sleep when up comes a Thunderstorm so I had to bustle about and cover things and I did not know what to do for I thought that it might be a very heavy Storm.  there was people living quiet close to where we was camped so I plucked up courage and went to their place and they made me very welcome so I had some dinner there and stayed awhile and came to the waggon again when another storm came on but I stopped this time I did not like to go again to be so silly and before it was all over Tom came back and he has got a place at Lynchs at Mago so that we will soon be there now and if we had to go to Wagonya it would take us all the Week it is not very far from Moruya so that it is not such an out of the way place it is a Weatherboard house that I have to live in some one is living in it now but they are leaving in a day or two. [225]  we have lost the Bullocks to night so that while I am writing this Tom is after them Albert is in bed I have put 3 pairs of dry socks on him today so at last I took his boots and socks off and then after running about playing a while where should I find him but laying down in a stream of Water with all his cloths on the young Scamp so that I had to put all dry clothes on him there will soon be good grass here now after all this nice rain.  Butter is a shilling a pound here Oranges are 6 pence dozen this is a great place for peaches every house you see here has a lot of peach Trees and loaded with fruit and all looking so green and healthy you will see them growing along side of the road where someone has dropped a stone I suppose.  19th Day Got up looked like rain but we thought that it was going to be fine so we packed up and yoked up and just as we had everything ready for starting down came the rain again so we waited a bit to see if it cleared up but it did not look like clearing up a bit so we let the Bullocks and Horses go and as we was out of Provisions we put the Mare in the cart and went to Moruya.  I thought that Moruya was a nice big town but it isnt it is not as nice as Queanbeyan to my thinking but it was raining dreadfull hard perhaps it will look better on a nice fine day.  it is nice Country about the town for grass you will see little paddocks there white with clover blossoms and such nice orange trees I am tired of eating them and so is Albert after we got our things we came back it was raining all the time and rained all night the flats are running with Water and we cant get out of the cart for getting our feet wet I hope that it will soon be fine now for I am tired of so much wet  20th Day came about 6 miles camped in a wild scrubby place turned the Bullocks down in a swamp good feed a young chap come along and was yarning for about 1 hour or more  21st Day beautifull fine Morning I forgot to mention in my yesterdays travels that I saw the big sea but I would not have noticed it if Tom had not have told me that it was it it looked to me like a flat plain with distant mountains in the back and as I thought white houses but upon viewing it more closely I see that it was white foam on the rocks but I must go on with my to days travels for it is our last days for a while I suppose.  we had our breakfast and was takeing our time for Tom had seen the Bullocks and Horses quiet close and I was just saying that I could laugh at you fellows for I had had no Ticks on me I had not the words scarcely out of my mouth when I feels something on my leg gives it a scratch and my word it soon let me know what it was a tick so I took the scissors and cut him in to I never had anything to pain me so for a while I have taken a great lot out of old Spot I expect that he will soon be dead. [226]  now packed up went for the Bullocks could only find 6 where the others was we could not make out Tom looked everywhere I believe he was 2 hours or more looking for them when he went up to the others out of the scrub they came with their tails straight up in the air galloping like mad we had a job to get them yoked up and while he was looking for the Bullocks I fetched the Horses up Harnessed the Bay Mare the little filly always follows the others while they were waiting for the Bullocks to come away marches the filly up the road I thought that she would soon come back I did [not] bother for a while but after a while [when] she did not make her appearance I put Albert to bed I went up the road a piece but I could not go far and leave Babe so I put old Blossom in the cart and trots along to see if I could see her After I had gone a good way back I sees her walking along the road so I thought that she would stand when she seen the mare coming but the faster I went the faster went she I tied the Mare up and tried to get round her but she would best me so you may depend that I was pretty wild with her then and mad enough to do anything so I takes the mare out of the cart I had brought a bridle to lead her back so I jumps on the Bay Mare and gave her a chase for it and I soon got a head of her and caught her and fetched her back.  Baby had never stirred and was fast asleep so I harnessed up and went back to the camp again and just as I got there Tom got the Bullocks and if I had not have done that he would have had to go to Moruya for her so we got started at last and came on when we stopped for dinner and we had just got out to have it when we saw a man coming to us and it proved to be Willie Lynch he was out with his team for a log so he would not hear of us stopping for dinner there we must come on to the house to get it so we came on till we got there and went and had our dinner they seemed like very nice homly people there is the old laidy and Willies Wife and a young girl and I think that there is another girl but she is not at home just now so we began unpacking our things and putting them straight but they are very much knocked about so that we did not get much done to night. [227]  22nd Day Got up nice fine morning Tom started on the chimney I wish it had a fireplace for it is so miserable cooking outside Mrs Lynch fetched me down a basin of milk for Baby he is so fond of a drop of milk in his food poor old Spot is bad now with the ticks I expect that he will soon die they are dreadfull things they have been known to kill Horses My travels are done now I dont think that I have anything els to tell.  you must excuse this writing for sometime I had not much light and no table and after the Accident I had not even the grubbox to write on for it got all smashed up I dont expect that you will be able to make it all out but I will send it for I promised to.  I intended to have sent this last time we went to the Post but it was not quiet ready but I will send it to night for I am going to the Post this Evening I was there last Wednesday they call it a town but it is not much of a town there are two Sawmills and some stores but I dont know how many there are three churches but I have not found out yet how often there are preaching I expect that there will be some Post for me for it is five Weeks since I left and I have never heard a Word We had one paper sent here so I expect that they will all come now I am going to try tonight to get some fowels it is a job to get any.  here I could get some from Mrs Lynch but they would not stop if I did we are nearly eat alive with Misquietoes and fleas and there are Native dogs Mrs Lynch had a hen sitting at the back of our place and they took her last Saturday night we heard him howling but I did not think that it was a native it is a terrible scrubby place not a bit like what I thought the Coast was like.  Albert is getting so fat and big you wont know him when you see him again Tom is starting to draw this Morning with his team the Bullocks has picked up very well.  we was at the Ball the other night in Town and it was a grand affair I left Albert at home with Mrs W. Lynch we did not want to go but the two girls was going to drive and they wanted our mare so we thought that we would go I went with them in a Buggie and Tom came with the men.  I enjoyed myself very well considering [I] know no one but I am used to that now that I make myself at home with strangers there was a great lot of people there it seemed so strange to look round and see no face that you know amongst such a croud.  Mountview House February the 2 / 1882   My Dear father & mother   After a lonly christmas I received your letter yesterday the 1st of Feb which give me a start to heare that my father is not well. I hope that God will reward you John for your kindnes to him. Dear father it is a hart broken case that we cannot go & see you but I hope in God that you will live to see the day that we will all meet together in the old home again for I can see nothing that takes the memory of it out of my Head. The more please [places] I see the more I think of Home. So Now father Chear up & take Courage the is good Hopes across the see. Dear father & mother I feel so glad to hear that Mary A. & Delia is improving well thank god.   Dear parents I got 5 week Holly days at christmas from my mistres & I went Home & spent them with uncle. Myself & Patt realy we had a grand Christmas of it but I woul enjoy it better If I Could have you letter. It takes such a long time gone & coming. I got a few letters from Patt Collins. The landed Heare of late. He is in townsevilla [Townsville] & is all right & likes the Colliney fine.   You will remember me to my Sister Mary & her Children & also to my uncle Laurence & Children & uncle William Wife & Children or is Bridg. getting much Bigger. Also to my Aunt Biddy & Husband & family Aunt Peg & Husband & family uncl Mick wife & family uncl Jim Wife & famly & tell that Uncle Martin is sending His best respects to them all. [152]  Remember me to all Clude people & parkmore also to all my neighbors & well wishers especle [especially] Jack Burke & Mis & Patt Cannavan & Misis & family and I am so sorrow for Thomas Killela & Patt Callop[?l Death. May the Lord Have Merrcy on them. There is a lot of sudden Deathe heare now for the sun is verry Hot.   Dear father & Mother I am sending you a bit of my Hair in remembrenc of me. It got So dark I think to long to delay the letter to get my likness but I will send it in the next letter. The Country is agrean [agreeing] fine with me & I like itt will [it well]. I go to Mass every Sunday a nine clock and to vespers at night & so does Patt so ye neadend [needn't] be uneasy atall about us. This is the finest Country in the wourld for young people that takes care of themselves. I would like that some of the youngerst of that Country would Come out hear. I cannot ask anny body when I have no sister but I wish I had & I would not leave her 24 hours there but anny boddy that likes to come out let them wright to me at once.   Dear John & Winny  I drop you a few lines hoping that year [ye are] fine & in good health as this leave me in att preasant thank God. Winny I am sure that you ar getting plenty to do now for its often I think how do you mannage it atall. I have far bitter [better] times of it now at servis than I had there but I feel verry lonely on Sunday. When I see all the Girls gone to see ther Mother I must go to my bed room & Cry my fill.   Dear Winney let me know how all my Cousins doing & also Mrs Burke & Thos & the Children & also Mr & Mis Goley of Balrobuc & not forgeting Richard & Mistrs & Mike Bawn & Patt Burke & Missy & Son & of coors [course] Miko Hession Wife & family & now all the fathers & Mothers or did Mary McHugh die yet. Wright Me a letter all about them or does Sibby Dively wright home & if she does send me her adress. I hope to see & mes [?miss] the lot of thim yet.   John I asked for my father & mother likness. I hope you will help me to get it from them & do not forget to send me Martin Fitzpatrics adress. I will surely wright to you once a Month & let you do the same. I have no more to say but do not neglect my father for god sake.   I Must Conclude with fond Love remaining yous truely & Loveing Daughter & Sister for ever   B Burke I Be[?l  P.S. + + + + + + God buy [good bye]   The Mountview House June the 19 / 1882   My Dear father & mother brother & sisters   I am just taking the Oppertunity of wrighting you a few lines for I know you Oe [?owe] me one & one time borrowed a nother & so on but now I must do it hoping to fiend ye all in good health as the departure of this leaves me & my brother in good Health thank God for his Kind merrcy to us all. [153]  Dear father & mother I Hope you got the order that Patt send you. It was 5 pounds from me & the remnd [remainder] from himself when - send it I said I would - the next mail. Yea must Excuse me father this is not like Home. One day delayes a Mounth & I couldent Help it but never mind I Hope it all right. I send you a pound John for yourselve for I know & I must say that your the onely friend I have in that part of the wourld. The all have given me for a bit of paper but you. Never mind John God is good. I constantle watch the postman zwice a day for my father and Mary Letters but its all in vain.   My Dear John I must ask you not to forget my Mother or father for wourld [world]. Take good car of them while you Have them for the ar the are the nearest friends John. But God Help the Lost Lambs that is far away from them but not forgetting them night or morning nor never will. But I Hope my father is all over illness now & not forgetting My Mother Head. Be careful & get her to keep Herself well raped [wrapped] up in boots. Not forgetting my sister Winnifred & my One Dear Mary An & Delia which I am Longing for the day that I will be gone down the Bay to meet them with the Help of God.   Dear parents I am nearly too [two] years Landed in this Country & I never yet meet with anny body that I new at Home but Brine Conner from Oram [?Oranmore]. He is living within 5 munits [minutes] walk of where I am in the town & is Married to a girle from his one [own] place att home & has got one baby boy named William. He is sending His best wishes & respects to his Aunt & all his cousins & if the send anny messag in the return of this note I will kindle [kindly] give it to him. He hasent heard from His cousin Margret Stanton this Long time. He wants to know does she Wrighte home to her mother.   Now I got a few Letters from Patt. Collins from townsivillia [Townsville]. He is getting on all right he will be Coming to Brisbane shortly. & I got a few Letters from Bridget Burke & Maggie Conner from Bunderberg [Bundaberg]. The are all right. Bridget Burke is married with 6 mounth to a police & the tell me that Maggie Conner is gone to be married next mounth to a Carpender by traid. I wrote a Letter to Malicki [Malachy] Lenighen but I got no answer yet. I am expecting a Letter from Patt & John Burke this Long time & I cannot get it so do not forget to send us their adress for P Patt is Crankey [cranky] untill gets their Letter.   & Lett me know How is Libby Dively doing in America. I Hope You will send me Her adress in the next Letter John & if Mary Lenighan does wright Home will you remember me to her & also if Martin Fitzpatrick Was Here His wages would be 15 shillings a day. [154] When I Landed I could not tell him How the Country was untill I see some of it & uncle been away in the bush He could not exatle [exactly] tell How the town was but I am verry sorrow that He went to America so Suddon. There is a bad account of it. This is a good Country. Patt is Earning over a shilling A hour & is a verry good & kind brother & is doing Well. I am sure His father would be Delighted to see Him Now. He grew taller & stouter. I got thin [omitted: and] bolder. So yea have to Look out when we goe Home.   He Has Got His phostgraf taken to send Home & he Dosent Like to send it without mine & I Cannot delay the Letter Now but yea will Have them the next Mail. But my Mother musent cry or but [?put] Herself about when she sees them. I would Have send them a long time ago but I dont want Her to cry anny. She will be surprised wh[en] she see them.   John will you take [erased: Pa pen] to my Onely sister for me & tell that I Have a few Word to say to Her if I new [knew] that she would axcept kindlie [accept kindly] to do it. But I am sure that My Letter would be bourned now but always after a storm their Come a Came [calm]. I have something to say If onely get a few Lines from Her. Realy I did not think tat she would give[?] to say to all the people that she woundend escorth [wouldn't escort] me to the station the morning I Left. It built a rock in my Harth [heart] that shall never be seperated. My tears often blinds me to think of it. Patt is verry Angery to [very angry too] for it for He Knowes How it Hurts Me. Dear John it is Hard Lines to Have serve & wait on anny body & to think of a Comfortable Home & of a father & mother.   Dear John  I am 40 Miles from My uncle. I feal Quare without a Home to goe to when on My sunday out. I often wish to Have you out Heare. I ame verry strange out Here. I cannot make free with any body. I often Have a Walk with Patt & Has a long yarn of Home. He is verry Kind became a steady fellow since He Left Home & also I could not expect My father to be a bit better than My Uncle. His wife & children is all right it is a nice place to go but it is to [too] far away but My brother is near me & comes to see me 2 or 3 times a week. We often Have some fun talking of the Old times at Home.   Dear John you wanted to know How do I Like the Country or what sort of people are heare. John that Queston I cannot answer. There is all sortes black & white misted & married together & Living in pretty Cotages Just the same as the white people. Thire is English Irish French German Italian black Chineease and not forgetin the Juse [Jews]. There are verry rich fancy John white girls marrid to a black man & Irish girls to [too] & to Yellow Chinaman with their Hair platted down there[?] black back. Sow [so] you see that girls dont care what the do in this Country. [155] The would do anny think [anything] before the worke & a great Lot of them does worse[?] than that same. & this is a fine Country for a Young person that can take care of himselfe.   Now John I must ask you for all my Aunts & Uncles Cousins friends & Neighbours sweet Harts & all also did Cannopy die yet. Now John I must Conclude Hoping that You will send me as Long a Letter as I have send you & Lett me know all about Home. Dirrect Your Letter as[?] Patt told you for me I Have more[?] to say but remaning yours fond sister for ever   BDB good buy with + + + + + + + + to all the children.   Per Berer [?] Queensland for Ever & Augus un ballybug go braugh [agus an baile beag go brath: 'and the small town for ever']   Footscray 18 / 9 / 82   My Dear Friend   You will excuse us for not writing to you before now. We would have done so only awaiting to See your uncle John who came down to See us both Himself and aunt Mary. Uncle Mike was out to see us also. They are all well so are all your Cousins in Heathcote.   You my Friend seem to have a desire to Come out to this land of Health as you Consider it. I am giving you my oppinion of you you leaving Home. It may not be agreeable to your taste but I cannot help that. My advice to you would be and this is supported by all of your Friends to remain Contented at home & put the thoughts of a foreign land out of your head. You or nobody else ever experienced the dearly earned Crust got here. You I hope will remember its not all gold that glitters no not out here or no where else.   You unfortunatly have a Stepmother who may not be the Kindest to you but you have a good Father who has well provided for you and who would not see you wronged. [262] You have also approached the age when you Can defy her to interfere much with you. Taking these things into account we could not upon any Consideration advise you to Come out. We are surprised at your G Mother & uncle Lar & aunt Bridget for not throwing a little oil on the troubled waters and to endevour to check that wandering nature So Characteristic to our race. Uncle Lar appears to be youth all over when He thinks of leaving his home. Well when I do read His letter I cannot help laughing at manner in which He worked his landlord.   But I must not wander from the main point. There is nobody that I Know of more Suitable for this Country than Servants at home. There are of Course many Farmers Sons & Daughters to out here but how are they situated. They are working hard from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the Same for a living in a burning hot Climate far different to Home & after all we find we are the poorest of the different nationalities in Australia. You may think I am oversteping the Mark but I am not. If I said otherwise I would tell an untruth & I do not mean to do that & as for Store[ke]eping all that buisness is done by men in this Country. I firmily believe there are not one hundred young women in the whole of Melbourne Storekeeping. We would all be very anxious to see you but to advise you to leave [y]our Home its a thing we cannot do. Be advised by your Father & your fond friends in Lurrig & Some day we hope to hear from over the water that Kate Shanahan is now living happy & Contented in the old sod free from the dictates of a Step-mother & perfectly satisfied with the advise given Her by Philip Mahony.   Dear Kate its the first time we heard that poor Norry Quirk was dead. We were very sorry to hear it & your uncle Lar never mentioned how her Father & Mother was in Cloyne. Tell your uncle Lar we were all glad of his letter. Ask him for me to request of my friends to write to me. I will soon write him a long letter hoping he is getting on well at farming also your Father.   Tell G Mother Aunt Mary Came down to see us and remained for a week and John Came down after her unexpected with a little boy that went away from the Goverment Schools. Uncle Mike & Mrs was to see us also so we had one good meeting[?] & the only time I felt myself at Home while in the Country. Uncle Pat is thinking of going Home soon. He says He will Take Johney with.   I must also return our Sincere thanks for your Kindness in Sending the newspapers so regular to us. I have no more to Say only that you will remember us all fondly to G Mother uncle Lar Father & aunt Bridget & believe us to be all interested in your welfare your glory here & hope here after. These are the wishes of your fond Friends whose advice I hope you will accept. From Yours ever truly & affectionatly   Phil. Mahony.  I do hope I will be successful in this station. The last manager lost nearly £500 a year on it but everyone says it was through bad management. When I come to think of it it seems a risky undertaking for one with so little experience as myself to undertake to manage and bring a station in a state of utter disorder into good order. I have scarcely had one year's experience but if close attention to it and hard work will do anything towards making it pay it shall not be lacking on my part. And I am the more encouraged when I think it is not myself alone I am working for but for the dearest girl living. Oh Lillie my own true love I would undergo anything for your sweet sake and count it but pleasure if it but brought you the nearer to me. I often think what would life be to me now without the love of my Lillie. I managed to get along in a kind of a way before but now it would be misery indeed. Tis the sweetest thought I have that before long I hope to take you to myself for better there will be no worse in it. [66] Sure there won't. Do tell me more about yourself in your letters. Fill them up about Lillie commence with Lillie end with Lillie and fill the space between with the same subject and you may add a postscript about her too it will not be too much. It is a subject I never weary reading about writing about or speaking about so satisfy me in this respect my little girl. I am looking as if I had just escaped from prison my hair cut close and my beard also. I do wish I could make my mustache grow a bit longer. It sticks at the one length much to my disgust. Is not this vanity worse than a girl I fancy I can hear you say. Perhaps by the time you see me next it may have stretched a little and you may not be able to get at my lips. How will that do?    [...] it was all I could do to drag myself along. I was stiff and sore in every joint. At last I reached the hut and found the hutkeeper and he immediately set about getting something to eat. I was now 72 hours without having anything at all to eat. I thought a good wash all over would revive me so I went down to the river and it looked so tempting I undressed and jumped into a deep hole. I was scarcely in until I was paralysed all over and could not move my legs or hands at all. I came to the top then went down again then up and I saw a branch of a tree hanging over my head and with a great effort I managed to move my hand up and catch it and I slowly drew myself to shore. After some difficulty I got out and then I began to come to and was soon alright and went up to have a good tuck in but at the first mouthful I was sick and could scarcely eat anything. A few hours after I managed to eat a good substantial meal.   The natives up here are very troublesome one of the men has just come and told me one shepherd had three killed last night and for the past week scarcely a day has passed without some being killed in one or other of the flocks. We never go a couple of hundred yards from the hut without our revolvers or a gun. I am the farthest back most remote from civilisation in Western Australia. It is about 80 miles to my nearest neighbour in one direction that is north west. South west it is 68 miles east a couple of thousand and south about 800 so I am pretty well isolated. I have nine white men on the station and about 20 niggers some I only keep and feed to keep them from killing the sheep. [67] They are the most primitive lot I have seen. They wear no dress nor covering of any kind. Some of the men have a string tied round their waist to stick their boomerang or Corvak in and some a string round their foreheads through which they stick kangaroo bones as ornaments. They are good natured among themselves and share all their food in common. They will never eat anything if there are others about without sharing it sometimes giving it all away and going without himself. They have no religion nor idea of God they are afraid of an evil spirit they called Gingie and they have long flat pieces of wood with a hole at one end for a string this they whirl round their head and it makes a curious moaning sound and they think it keeps off the Gingie.  The women are not allowed to see them; if they do and a man gets to know about it he will kill her. Some odd times they indulge in cannibalism but not often and they only eat black fellows that's one consolation.  The natives are killing the sheep here wholesale. On Friday I had four killed and a black fellow came in and told me about it and where he thought they were camped so I got a couple of horses up and put him on one and although it was almost dark still the moon was up and it would not be very dark and I went off to try and catch the thieves. Would you like to know how your Big Boy looked well I will try and describe him. Medium height and fair with some beard and whiskers of a duckety mud colour a soft hat with a veil hanging on it a flannel shirt open in front no buttons or studs and sleeves rolled up to elbows a pair of mole skin trousers kept up by a leather belt with a leather watch pouch on the left - hand side and a silver chain running from it to one of the studholes in the shirt on the right - hand side a leather pouch with some string matches and a knife (I hardly ever smoke now) in front a Colt 6 chambered revolver just where you can put your hand on it at a moment's notice. A pair of top boots and spurs and a double-barrelled gun in a leather gun bucket suspended from the saddle the whole mounted on a fine coal black mare [...] I rode on until about half-past eight p.m. when we came to a waterhole about where the native with me thought they were camped. [68] We found the camp but they had gone somewhere else that morning. I rode up towards the range for about three hours and then as we came to a waterhole I thought we had better camp so I hobbled the two horses with my stirrup leathers and lit a fire and lay down beside it and slept until morning. I had expected to be home by 10 or 11 the same night and had brought nothing to eat so I told the black who goes by the name of Monkey to look for some colias a kind of root not unlike the potato in appearance and sweet and some Bardies a kind of grub that is about 2 inches long. He soon found some and we cooked both in the ashes and made our breakfasts of them and then we went on looking for blacks. About 11 o'clock we came on some tracks which we followed up and soon Monkey pointed out something but I could see nothing. He said gallop which I did in the direction he pointed and I saw a black fellow run and try to hide under a bush. I made straight for him and all at once my mare jumped over a bush and as she did so I saw two black fellows under it so I pulled her up as quickly as possible and wheeled round just in time to see one of them fitting a spear in his Womera to throw at me I had not a moment to lose so I pulled out my revolver and shot him in the leg. This frightened the others and I managed to take three and broke all the weapons I found about. One of them on the way back picked up a stick and tried to hit me with it but I had my eyes too sharp on them to give him a chance so all he got was a crack with the butt end of my revolver on the head for his trouble. The one I shot was not much the worse only a flesh wound through the fleshy part of his leg; it will be alright in a day or two. I did not like firing at his body for fear of seriously injuring him. With a good deal of difficulty I chained them up by the neck and made them fast to a tree. I told one of the other black fellows to make a fire beside them and gave them some supper and left to this morning. I made enquiries as to whose they were and found two were strangers and the other had killed a sheep some months before. The first two I let go and the other I gave half a dozen cracks with a whip and told them if I ever knew them to kill a sheep again I would beat them well and send them to jail.   I found that there was no difference made here between Sunday and any other but I have stopped all kinds of work except what is absolutely necessary so that at least we have the quiet of that day.   You ought to see me morning and evening feeding the blacks. There are about a dozen round the station who do anything that is wanted - I give them damper and meat and boil our tealeaves over again for them and put some sugar in it for them. They are very generous divide all they get with all present no matter how many. One who gets it given to him will go without himself rather than let another who got none go without. They get it made up to them by the others who bring in bush food and divide just the same. I gave a couple of the best of them a shirt and trousers to keep them warm these cold nights but to my surprise when they were going to sleep they took all off them and lay down in the cold absolutely naked.   I have told some of the natives to get me a young parrot and I will teach it to say Lillie pretty Lillie etc. so that I will hear your name constantly and be ever thinking about you. What is come over you for the past two or three weeks you have not come to see me just before I go to sleep as you generally do is it because I go to bed so early about 7 or 8 sometimes or what is the reason? Be what it may I miss you very much and wish you would maintain your loving visits the only drawback to them is just as I fancy it is really yourself and can almost feel you and clasp you in my arms either you fade away or I sink into the arms of death's twin sister. Oh my little girl how I long to have you with me never to leave me again. How I long to have you stroke my hair once more to smooth the furrows in my brow and as you turn your face up toward mine and display that tempting little rosebuds to press it again and again [...]   I think she is the most loving tender hearted purest girl I have ever seen or known that she has a winning loving face that makes you want to love her as soon as seen and once knowing her are content to be her slave forever. I think I know no-one can know her and not love her and that she is sure to be a favourite wherever she goes. I think she is a darling and the dearest girl on earth I think she has two lovely eyes that look more lovingly at me than at anyone else that her mouth is so sweet and delicious that when I am near it I want a continual feast ever enjoying yet never satieted or satisfied. I think it is one of the most delightful sensations that I can have to have her arms round my neck and her head on my shoulder and wish I could keep them there forever. I think she is like an angel of mercy who takes pity on poor mortals and turns their earth to a paradise I think the kiss she gave me in the kitchen sitting on the table nearly 3 years ago fixed my destiny. I never got over that. It thrilled through me and when I left Linton and did leave her behind and went to New South Wales that kiss seemed to grow more and more in significance and it assumed immense proportions until the image of Lillie used to be constantly before me [...] to me it seems as if our souls met and refused to be separated again [...]   I think this will turn out better than I thought. It would be a pity to throw away a good chance. This may be the tide which if taken on the flow will lead to fortune but if missed I may be borne back on the ebb to struggle in vain forever to regain lost ground - hope and be undismayed - I would be quite content if I had you with me my whole soul longs for your society to have you with me to be near me - when you are near I have a feeling that I cannot go wrong - goodnight my loved one [...]   I will tell you the principal reason for being called a tyrant because I will not allow any of the men to keep black women which on nearly all the other stations both masters and men do. I may be guilty of what you say being too fond of bossing but I do not think so but I dare say I am but a partial judge and I should think you were even more so. I know at least in most things you are. I never did profess to be a gentleman. I have got rid of all the bad men I had and the ones I have now are all rather decent.   [...] I do not want you to treat me with reverence only with love and that you always do: it is not in your nature to do otherwise. I quite agree with you that happiness is not at all dependent upon wealth. In fact I have rarely known very wealthy people what I would call happy. On the other hand I do not consider poverty conducive to happiness either. It may have the effect of drawing a family closer together but there are many things connected with it not calculated to give happiness. Should it ever become my lot to be possessed of wealth I do not think I should live in a grand style. I prefer quietness I hope you do too but I do not think I am likely ever to be troubled with that I have no ambition to be a so-called wealthy man. So long as I have you to love and cherish I shall consider myself rich in the true sense of the word. Yet for your sake I would like to have a fair competence. Did I not hope to have a house of my own sometime and you with me I should be content if I got enough each day to pull me through. That saving young man I wrote about and whose photo you wear in your locket never saved a penny scarcely in his life until within the last year and now he saves all he possibly can and then thinks he does not save near enough and all that is through you so you see what an influence even a little woman can have on a person whom she loves and who loves her although separated by thousands of miles.   I hate to receive anything and not to be able to return the compliment. I do not mind how much people are indebted to me but I cannot bear to be indebted to anyone if I can at all avoid it. It worries and annoys me. sometimes I even feel so about you and wish I could do something that would in some measure make up for all I owe you but I can only wait and hope to be able to do so by and by. Then my darling I shall do all I can to prove how much I value you.   So that is the extent of your confidence in me that you think I would bring up 300 miles in the bush and when I got there go away for several days at a time and leave you alone. That is the first thing you have ever written that has really hurt me. I don't feel it from Stewart so much [...] But that Lillie my loved Lillie should thus think of me I did not think possible. With reference to what aunt may have said and what you say about one or two inevitable obstacles that cannot be got over you do not say what they are. If you had I might have been able to answer or remove them. So you had better let me know what insurmountable difficulties are and if they are really such I must take other measures to make you a home. You see it just comes to this. I am in this for seven years I may make a good thing out of it by that time. If I leave sooner I have no money to start myself as you know well. If things go on as they are I would feel free to marry soon. If you cannot live up here why I will not stay up here seven years to live a lonely hermit's life and perhaps at the end of that time be delayed again through my not getting something else to do at once. It just comes to this: if the difficulty is considered insurmountable by aunt I will give up this place at once and go and try my hand at something else and either come back and claim for you for my bride in 3 or 4 years time with enough to settle down in comfort or if I find that I am one of fortune's fools I will not ask you to bind yourself to one who may selfishly keep you bound to him and after having thus held out hope to you year after year perhaps never be in a position to marry you and the best portion of your life gone. I shall think no more on this subject until I get your letter in reply then I shall take steps accordingly.   Ah! Lil my darling little wiffie I wish I could hear these magical words my Alick my own from your own dear lips that would be happiness indeed. I am afraid my wiffie has been a little downhearted when writing to me or you would not think of melancholy things as the future without me. Why my darling I dare not think of the future without you in it. It would give the blues for a month. Oh Lil the very thought of such a thing being possible makes me shudder. As for you bearing it if I were single I think if you did not marry me and married anyone else I think if ever I met him I would kill him. I would go mad the idea of another man clasping you my darling loved one in his arms would drive me really mad the thought of it now makes the blood rush to my face. Lillie I could not bear it. If I could not get you myself I could not let anyone else. It is selfish but I could not help it. I do not feel wounded but I think you must have been in a despondent state and I would not like my little girl to be downhearted it does not make much matter about me as I am alone but my Lillie must keep a brave heart for she knows her Alick loves her and her alone and those about would feel to see my little one sad. Yes I do love you far better than anyone else in the world and with you alone is bound up my life's happiness.   Booroopki  West Wimmera Victoria  18th May 1883  My dear Aunts Uncles Grandma Cousins Nellie Tucker and Birdie Price This must be passed round to you all.  My Diary  1st Day Started from near Goolwa on a Monday going up a hill dray pin slipped out dray tipped up with furniture fowls &c. Took Pa and boys over an hour to prop it up fasten pin and secure with chains I drove spring cart two horses. Scenery trees and sand.  Camped in an old deserted house. Pa and Will got in broken window. Unscrewed door lock. Fine paddock good well water. Ma and I slept in cart boys and pa under dray. Too many fleas in old house. Slept in clothes and boots.  2nd Day Rose at moonlight started sunrise. Cat got out box rode rest of way on bedding in cart sometimes on cart seat Very rough road horses took bad drinking muddy water one fell down in dray shafts. Pa took him out physiced him and whipped him along to keep him warm. Another horse fell down. Camped near fence physiced all horses. Scenery gum trees. Bad road. Camped at Mulgundawa opposite hotel. Passed lots of wild turkeys and native companions. Slept as before.  3rd Day Started 6 o'clock a.m. Very cold ice on water. Coorong on one side. Good road till reached Wellington then hill of sand above axles horses on noses pulling. Unloaded dray at Jetty crossed in punt to pretty landing place willows and tall grass on either side. A long drive. Wellington properly styled 'The Sand Hole' is a small place houses half buried in sand. Stores some yards from road. My gloves fell off worn out with driving. Hot day faces and lips nearly blistered. Wrote the above on stockyard rail Wellington while men reloaded dray. Picked up a tramp gave him 4 miles ride. Camped at fenced paddock good feed for horses boys had to take them. 3 miles to water. Slept as before.  4th Day No water to wash faces enough for tea. Road puzzling perfect circle round dry salt lake could pick up handsfull of salt. Missed top of lantern Will rode back three miles Chinaman coming same way picked it up gave it to Will. Pa went up a steep sandy hill sand up to axles to a cottage. Asked an Irish woman if we were on right road she replied 'You great big silly why didn't yer go to yer left insted of comin' up this 'ere 'ill.' [231] Good road for some time then a steep sandy hill with stones half a yard above ground. Again good road along Coorong. Fine scenery green grass birds of all species swarming on water. Passed flocks of dead and living cattle and sheep. Reached Meningie at sunset mail steamer arrives at night there. Camped in hotel yard. Ma and I slept in hotel men in cart. Landlady asked me to play her husband with the station master and two other young gentlemen spent the evening with us singing and playing the lady was very fond of my waltz asked me to play it three times over did so. I played all accompaniments.  5th Day Started at sunrise made another circle round dry salt lake came to banks of Coorong midday. Turkeys pelicans swan fine great geese and other birds on water. Sheoaks Gums and pretty trees on side of road. Kangaroo dog chased a sheep down tied him behind cart. Camped under Sheoak tree poured with rain. Will cooked chops. Slept as usual but pa watching horses all night. Ma fretted could not find kerosine or matches for some time.  6th Day Caught enough water on top of canvas over cart to wash faces in. Started at sunrise. Jack's birthday. Continued by Coorong scenery the same as before. Dogs chased kangaroo 'no catch him'. Several hares sprang over road. Stopped at Wood's Wells bought milk. White girl buried there who was murdered by Mileky Martin 20 years ago. Bad road lots of Teatrees. Passed several dead and living cattle pigs and sheep. Camped at Salt Creek where Mileky Martin murderer of the white girl lived. Water salt in Creek. Slept as before.  7th Day Sunday Woke at 3 o'clock a.m. Poured with rain all bedding &c. soaking through flood all round cart horses strayed away. Took me till 10 o'clock a.m. to bail water out of cart found horses 3 / 4 mile away. Stopped all day in cart. Will cooked chops pa waited on us in cart. Rained all day wind blowing rocking cart like a cradle. Blacks camped near us their dog ran away with our boiled beef out of boiler on fire. Jack's straw hat smashed table broken with wind. Kept awake all night by wind and rain. 'Cart too muchy rocky'.  8th Day Started 8 o'clock a.m. Poured with rain miles of deep sand miles of road covered with 4 feet of water. Plenty Kangaroos on side of road. Pa told me to drive on to Kingston 32 miles ahead for food he took one of my horses to ride back and help the boys through the sand. Ma and I in a fever sand up to axles - my horse done up went some miles - came to Coolatoo hotel. Camped horse's back all raw Pa came galloping after us for fear we could not get on glad to see us camping galloped back for boys who had camped Tackled up again came 8 miles through heavy sand and water pitch dark raining. Ma and I waiting with clenched hands reached hotel had tea slept there bedding in cart too wet dried some blankets in hotel. Will's accordeon box smashed tied it up in one of my dresses. [232]  9th Day Started at sunrise rained all day. High wind blowing. Road fearful 9 and 10 miles through deep sand and water in one place above the axles of the dray in sea sand and stones to avoid newly metalled road. Dray horses done up left them in paddock dray on side of road with all in it 8 miles from Kingston. All went on in spring cart through a river of rain on road could not find road but for water shining pitch dark. Reached Kingston 8 p.m. had tea at Mrs Tuff's hotel wife of Mr Tuff's brother of Currency Creek. I was playing at Mrs Tuff's request my pieces when three gentlemen musical gentlemen asked her to allow them to come and hear me. She introduced them one a doctor a very musical widower he had one of his thumbs shot off some time ago he was delighted with my pieces said 'My dear keep up your music the Almighty has endowed you with a wonderful gift if you only keep it up your fortune is made I only wish I were younger &c &c &c.' Flattery flattery Oh the gentlemen! One of the young gentlemen played some quadrilles the other sang a nice song. Slept in hotel men in cart.  10th Day Pa went back for dray. When starting from hotel the Dr gave me a book. Started midday boggy stony rough road Sheoaks on either side camped under tree.  11th Day Started at sunrise road boggy sand hills and rough stones beautiful trees on one side Lost one of pa's hats. Camped on roadside splendid feed for horses had to go over a wide deep ditch for wood. Passed several flocks of living and dead animals during day went through river up to axles. Slept as before.  12th Day Started after sunrise lovely day. Road stony and stumps half a yard above the ground. Reached Lucindale 12 o'clock a.m. Pretty little place nice stone buildings. Road continued boggy sandy and stony. Kangaroos in great numbers too fleet for dogs to catch. Beautiful trees. Malee Tasmanian Blue Gum Red Gum. Honey Suckle Teatree Sheoak Stringy Bark and others Rosellas and other birds. [233] Lost stirrup off saddle coming through thick scrub. Some of the limbs had to be chopped down to allow us to pass. Camped under tree. One horse bad physiced her.  13th Day Started after sunrise. Bad stony road through thick scrub then good road. Lake on either side good grass native companions feasting in grassy paddocks. Reached Naracoorte about 4 o'clock p.m. Pretty place fine buildings good gardens fine government buildings with livery stables. Found a horse's bit in thick scrub. Camped at a native well. Little cat rode on my horse's back for a little distance. Poor fowls bumped about glad to have some fresh grass put in cage.  14th Day Sunday Started early went 10 miles on metal road. Met some young gentlemen out shooting. They told Pa we were 8 miles on wrong road turned back to proper crossing and bad road one of my horses lame. Pretty trees several fine stations with fine fruit gardens. Camped under gum tree.  15th Day Started about 10 o'clock a.m. Horses gave us a hunt of five miles for them first. Fearfully rough road rest of way. Reached Binnum a wretched place with 3 hovels and a station in it about midday. Found our things which had gone by sea all exposed to all weathers the piano case bottom upwards and partly prized open and ma's large sea chest ditto. Clara's and my drawings exposed on top in a box to wet and heat. Camped in paddock pa went 17 miles for Mr Beard and his bullock waggon to cart our house could only carry half. Then had to go several miles in dark for chaff for horses. Slept as before.  16th Day Old dumb tramp came along gave pa a paper begging. Pa gave him a shilling he picked up his swag with the arm the paper said was useless and trudged on. Took Pa and boys till 2 o'clock p.m. to turn piano case right way up and unload trucks which had our belongings on. Bad road heavy sand stones &c. Reached Mr Beard's at dusk. Mrs Beard kindly sold us bread and pork.  17th Day Started with Mr Beard's two sons for guides with bullock waggon about 8 o'clock a.m. Heavy sandy road thick timber had to cut some down. Camped near 'Bring Albert' station a fine place situated on the bank of a fine lake beautiful fruit garden. Pa rode on to find road. Slept as usual.  18th Day Started sunrise bad road pretty trees lots of birds. Pa went before with axe to cut a road through thick Stringy Bark scrub. [234] Reached our land about noon. Scenery like Currency Creek. Fine dam on Clara's block. Plenty tadpoley water for use. Plenty wood. Spent rest of day rigging up galvanized roofing for hut to put luggage under. Lots of wild birds.  19th Day Will shot wild duck and rosella. Cooked bread outside. I made a mud fireplace and washed socks in Tadpoley water. Several parties of surveyors and station hands passed here boiled their tea on the land.  Ma and I still sleep in cart men under iron huts. Pa went 7 miles to post yesterday received letters from Uncle Will and Ethel Uncle's advice came too late but his letter was welcome. It was the anniversary of Pa and ma's wedding day yesterday. I am kneeling on the men's bedding by a box writing this ma is cooking outside. The boys gone chopping trees & pa gone for a sheep for 'muttony'.  We are like a lot of bears let loose in a desert and will have to go 30 and more miles over fearful roads for provisions. We have kept pretty well excepting colds which Jack and I have. Please tell Burnet the Australian stamps are no use to Victorians so I have returned them excepting two which pa wanted. Now with much love to all I must say farewell.  It is cold and I must go to sewing fancy we have had to go for days without washing our faces or hands. Plenty water now. Hoping you are all well now and happy as we are not yet and with love from all to all  I remain  Your loving relative and friend  Lucy Jones  27th May 1883  My dear relatives and friends You will see this epistle was written on the 18th Pa took it to Booroopki Post Office then to post it. When turning out his coat pocket yesterday 'Lo and behold!' There was this letter so I opened it to add this.  Will went out shooting a day or two ago shot at an old man kangaroo wounded him he turned to scoff Will but he hit at him with the butt of his gun splintering it in the act but killing Mr Kangaroo with such vigor that a piece of that brave creature's head bone entered the woodwork of Will's gun and remains there. [235] [236] Will mended his gun though it was badly splintered.  Ma manages to cook a damper pancakes and meat outside. The piano which pa and Jack brought the other week from Binnum is out in hail rain &c only a tarpaulin over it. No room under iron for it. Pa and boys commenced building chimney today. No stone here. The chimney is to be made with Bulloaks and filled with pugg (mud). The Squatter's sons came here yesterday they seem very nice. We see station folks pass every day nearly all come up to have a chat.  I have been washing today. The clothes are completely spoilt [with] iron-mould and mildew and some rubbed in holes.  I helped dig a small waterhole yesterday chopped down several trees and wood so you can imagine what nice hands I shall have for piano (If it be any good after the exposure!) We had a letter from Walt on Thursday he was well and busy. It seems so unpleasant here we are with our things all tossed together sleeping in [the] cart with rain sometimes soaking our pillows or ice on water and piano &c exposed to rain our clothes all mouldy. We cannot change those we have on either for the water is full of toads and our clean clothes are mouldy in boxes.  I believe the journey through rain has ruined £20 worth of bedding and clothes. When uncle Will comes over he will come by mail and not see the horrid roads. A good thing too! He would be too disgusted to get here. Of course we came a different way.  Please Nellie tell Fred the boys will write when their busy time is over they are always saying 'My word wont we have fun when Fred comes over to stay with us by and bye.' Nellie you should see the poor puny looking folks here. Of course I have not seen many. There are two Squatters living not far from here. Mr Hamilton and Mr Broughton. The former has a daughter who plays the piano so we heard. Her two brothers called here yesterday one is 22. There were 7 young gentlemen here one day.  Must close this with love to all relatives I remain  A conglomeration of wonder and hope!  Also your wellwisher  'Luce'  Having no overseer now I have a great deal of extra work and in fact I am going to try and do without one and save the expense as I have had some heavy losses nearly seven hundred sheep killed by the natives most of them ewes heavy in lamb besides several other severe losses of horses and about £350 expense my late overseer put the station to during my absence so that altogether things are not looking very promising just now. It is not all prosperity a squatter's life in Australia any more than in any business elsewhere and there is far more trouble and anxiety than in almost any other business I know but such as it is we must bear it. I am labouring under a considerable difficulty in writing having sore eyes. They have been very bad for over a week so bad that I cannot bear a candle in the hut after sundown and can do nothing but lie on my rug and think or practise on my flute and make all kinds of hideous noises but that does not matter much as there is no one to hear and be annoyed at them.   I had rather a serious encounter with 13 natives the other night I had my left arm rendered useless for days and my left knee badly hurt. It has swollen up considerably and gives me a good deal of pain besides sundry odd knocks on the back and head. I had to fire 6 shots at them wounding some severely and then I had to fight them with my revolver which I had by the barrel and knocked two down with it when it broke although a strong Colt. I would have been finished I think outright had not my native boy hearing the firing come galloping up shouting as he came and the others I suppose thought help was coming and cleared off. It was all I could do to keep in the saddle riding home but I am getting all right again. I have sent a report of it to the Colonial Secretary and the Governor demanding police protection [...] The natives sent in word with one of my shepherds first spearing him to say that they would come down altogether and kill all the white men on the place. It may be only an idle threat but I have given out all the revolvers and guns I have to the men and told them in case of an attack if possible to come into the station and tell me and I will go and meet them. I have two or three rifles that none of the men can use and with them in daylight I consider myself a match for thirty or more niggers. If they do attack us I'll teach them a lesson once for all that they will remember to the end of their days.   What a dreadful set the Gascoyne River lot are. Its dreadful to know in this the time of so much gospel knowledge that they have no regard for the Sabbath. Surely they need missionaries and ministers there as much as in the heathen lands [...] Now darling I want you to give me a good scolding for something I wrote to you in my last letter about total abstinence. On reading over your diary I can see my darling is as strict as ever and I am very sorry I ever wrote about it to you for I am afraid you will think I have not sufficient trust in you. I am very sorry if I have pained you and I am afraid I have. Tell me I am a very naughty girl for writing such a thing and try and forgive your penitent little girl.   I wonder what my Alick is doing now. This is Thursday afternoon. I have got 1st June but it is 31st May. They always tell me here if I do anything wrong or stupid that I am in love. So there's an excuse. So you must take it that I am in love if I write down anything wrong or stupid. I expect if you were here you would tell me that you hoped I was in love. Well I scarcely need to tell you I am in love or the person I am in love with need I? My Alick knows that don't you?... The best part is yet to come the purest happiest joy is yet in store for us darling. The time we are both looking forward to so eagerly when we shall be to each other what we have yet never been the sharing together of mutual joys sorrows and the different experiences that come to all homes. Oh darling with what joy we look forward to the fulfilment of our hopes don't we? [75] [...]  Oh dear me love is a queer thing. What made you do such a thing you a young man who tried to convince us you would never do such a stupid thing as fall in love or get married why you hooted the very idea of such a thing. Surely there must be some magic at work or has Australia the effect on cold Northerners of making them hot and rash so that they fall in love get such fervour unstilled in them that they get quite hot. What is it? Australia must be a funny place especially Victoria. At any rate you have changed and shall I give the credit to Victoria. Now don't you think you are going to have a very respectful little girl for a wife? If she makes such fun of you now what will she do by and by? Do as you tell me! Eh!!! Now don't you be thinking you're going to tame me up in the wilds of W.A. Why I'll be as wild as a March hare. Don't you feel afraid of this little monkey's naughtiness? I am in a wicked mood I think this afternoon I would just like a good piece of fun. I feel I would like to tease you if I were near you. Do you remember I used to tease you when you wanted a kiss and I would just touch your lips with the very point of mine and you would look as though you would shake me especially if I repeated it several times. You must teach me good manners when you are the veritable lord and master. Oh don't I quake at the thought of the treatment you'll subject me to!!!   I am so glad darling you like the station life and can be happy in it. I am sure that I will like it and be very happy there too with my Alick. Of course it will seem strange to me at first to have no shops etc. but I will soon be used to that. It is a good thing I have not been brought up with dainty ways for it would be a very strange change to one who has been used to life with only its easy and delicate side. You see if we do not make a very nice and pleasant home there don't you think we will as time goes on? It will be very awkward to bring furniture so far it would need to be very carefully packed. You make your mind quite easy about the furnishing of our home it will please me just the very way my Alick has it and I do not expect to see in it what you would have if you lived near a town so don't please trouble yourself that you do not think Lillie will like this or be satisfied with that just because it is bush fashion.   I feel though as if I could never love you enough. You are very dear to me my darling and you know your little girl does love you so much and longs so much to be with you darling I do get so tired of the waiting especially when no letter comes and it seems as though the time would never pass. But I suppose it will come some day and then we will be so happy I shall have my own Alick and won't your little girl be proud of her big handsome husband so proud and happy that I will not know what to do to express my joy.   Oh my darling what a cheerless world it would seem to me without your precious love and the hope in prospect of being your little wife. And I although I love you so dearly I don't idolise you darling. I don't love you or think more highly of you than I know you deserve and I have no fear of ever being disappointed in you Alick dear. I know what a dear good man I am going to love for a husband but I know you are not perfect I know you have feelings but they do not hinder you being a dear good noble man my darling and I don't praise you my Alick unless I think you deserve it. I let you know sometimes what I don't like now don't I? It does seem very tantilising not to be able to get men to work at the house but my darling things seem scarcely fit yet to bring a young wife to the station. In a year's time the blacks may be quieter and more settled and if you sell a station it will take you less from home. I would be willing to go tomorrow but darling we must do what is best and nothing rashly. At present a young wife there would be a great anxiety. You must be a good deal away and you would not like to leave me and yet the station cannot be neglected so darling putting to one side the house not being ready perhaps it is best you are not tempted to come this year. I know it is hard and gladly would I be with you if it were possible my darling and I know another year of waiting will be hard to bear but my darling knows a higher hand overrules it all and if He knows that it is not to be this year it will not be. Oh Alick you know it does not cost me no effort to write this. It is a long time to wait and I know we will often feel very lonely without each other. I would it could have been this year my darling. It would have been joy indeed and happiness to have had you sooner and I will try to wait patiently my own. Your little wiffie does love her own Alick so much and does long for the time when I shall be yours indeed. [...]  I do wish you had not so much to do with the blacks. It is a dreadful thing to be continually hunting down ones fellow creatures for they are our fellow creatures and have precious and immortal souls. Oh my darling keep your hands free from your fellow creature's blood. For you to need to fire on them makes me feel miserable. It seems dreadful when really in your heart you cannot blame them for taking the sheep. They don't know right from wrong. They only fear the punishment that may be inflicted if the white men catch them. Be very careful in your use of firearms my darling poor degraded wretches though they are yet in God's sight they are precious Christ died for them as well as us and for this reason we should protect them as far as lies in our power.   We are I know apt to look down on them as something little better than beasts but remember darling they have souls as well as we and don't let them rise up in judgement against us in the last great day. Keep your hands free from human creatures blood or how can we expect God's blessing to rest on us my Alick? We will not prosper if we disregard his commandments. [77] I know my boy tries to follow his divine master but we need grace every day darling and we need to fight against our own inclinations else we will sadly go astray.   You ask me if I forget the loves we used to have. I'll forget I am in existence as soon as forget that darling. How I dwell on the happy times we passed together and look forward to brighter and happier days. Nor do I forget the one on the kitchen table. You remember it so vividly can you remember the first you gave me. I think it's time you blushed please don't give the excuse that there is something red in the room. Dear me what an impudent cousin we had those days. To think of the liberties he took shocking!!! But I suppose you will be telling me we were just as naughty to permit such things. Ah well perhaps we were. I remember the last kiss you gave me the last real one in Aunt Mattie's parlour you said we'll say goodbye now before any other others come in and we gave each other such a real love that it's fresh yet darling. I got another kiss after but that was when we were all standing in the hall. Oh darling how vividly that day rises before me how mechanically I went through every thing and tried to talk and laugh as usual but Oh that I could have been alone how I missed the one dear face so tenderly loved and the voice that thrilled through me. Your letters are all I could wish letters to be but I miss the reality the writer a blank is here which only you darling can fill. I want the loving substance my heart craves for something that will not be satisfied without you. There's a continual unrest an eager expectation a looking forward to hopes fulfilled which will not be at rest till I feel I have you by me not to be separated. It's a very queer feeling intense love for someone. It may be wrong but I cannot help it that home does not satisfy me as it did a few years ago. I keep longing for something not in the home a continual yearning to know how you are whether you are well or not. But I do not wish you to think I am fretting darling for I am not. I know how that would grieve you and do no good but perhaps harm. But you alone know the feelings I have and understand what the heart longs for and to you only would I thus write [...]   I have been going over your letter and now come to something I would like to speak to you about but first try and think your little wife is on your knee with her arms round your neck and my head on your shoulder and you with your arm round my waist holding me to yourself and I tell you I want to say something and please give me your serious attention for a few minutes. It's this darling in some places in your journal it grieved me to read that several times on Sunday you were out laying poisoned baits and riding some distance after sheep and one place firing at some birds in the garden. Now darling you may think I am making a fuss over very small things but darling may they not lead to larger things. I don't want to vex you but I do want my Alick to keep the Sabbath a holy day. These may be small things now but unless you watch over yourself and pray they may lead to larger inroads on the Sabbath. O my precious one my own dear husband guard against the very appearance of evil. [78] Your little girl prays for you darling and don't forget to pray for yourself my Alick. Don't neglect your study of God's word my own do not neglect your precious soul's welfare it needs daily nourishing and watering or it will go back and not forward. It is easy for me to write and advise easier far than to act I know but darling it is for your good I write but I love you very tenderly you know this don't you that I do not mean to be fault finding but I write in love to you Alick my own.   I know my love is doing his very best. To do the best is all you can do and I am sure you'll make a good thing out of it. It must take time. You are a very short time there and must expect it to be uphill work for some time but I feel assured you will make it profitable in time if it is possible to do so my Alick. I was indeed pleased to read your mother's letter my darling. We'll hope in time your father will write as cheerfully too. Maybe my darling your father unknowingly has done what is the kindest thing to both you and me. He has prevented us living in Ireland and it may be that Ireland was not the place for either of us; it did not suit your health that had been proved. I was untried and very young as well. I have been brought up in a warm climate and though not delicate yet not strong and it might have brought back the tendency to a weak chest which I am outgrown quite. And Australia agrees with you my husband dear you know it does and once the pecuniary trouble is removed from the station a comfortable happy home can be made and a happy life enjoyed and time will bring more population. The land must in time become private property and it will be impossible for people to have such enormous runs. So looking at it in this light only yours and my health we see one good coming from your father's opposition. There are other blessings too but I have spoken of them before to you. The waiting is hard the trial of separation severe we both know but all trial all troubles are for wise purpose and I think we should look at it as such.   How strange it seems that two people should be so dependent on one another for happiness. I so often wonder at it all other people seem so little to us. Its you and I all over the world. Such is love strange mystic passion! We do not feel that we are satisfied until the solemn vows are spoken and we are one. There is a deep craving while we are separate that feels it's not satisfied until our lives are joined in one. Life now with its various duties cares and joys to be equally shared together. It's a very responsible position one takes when married life is begun. Each should help the other onward upward ever growing more united more as one and if our lives are sanctified ones this will be the issue. [79] We each hold a sacred trust and happy indeed will be life together spent if Christ is the Head of our home. Sorrows and trial may come but they cannot take away the peace He gives if we are His alone. How we are both looking forward with joy to the end of the waiting time.   Why you are a cool young gentleman to ask me how it was I allowed you to be so familiar with me as to allow you to take me on your knee and into the kitchen and pantry? Why for the simple reason I could not stop you. Do you forget how I used to struggle to get free? But I was held as in a vice so finding struggles useless I submitted but I suppose I might as well be honest and confess that it was not always disagreeable to be fondled but I did not always deem it prudent you naughty boy. Ah well that's all gone and past it's your love I have now and I have given you mine without reserve Alick is mine and I am his I love you fully and freely and I am so happy in the possession of your love darling I can afford now to laugh at the past when we were cousins together and to me at least nothing more than cousins.   Nor can I understand how anyone can go on being in love one week with one girl and next week with another. It's not love it can't be maybe they fancy it is but its mere fascination and the spell is soon broken it's not in human nature to be always changing one's affections. The person who does so has never been really in love for if love for a girl or reverse the case if a girl loves any young man all her feelings raise against making believe she is in love week after with someone else and just the same with a man don't you think so? I think you know enough about the marriage ceremony without my teaching you of course you don't know that I have to promise to obey you? And I won't satisfy you by having a string of pretty bridesmaids either.   Do you know we laugh at your ideas of the native language there being no words tenses etc. Why Alick how do you know they haven't? You know very little of their language they have one of their own is certain for see how they will talk to one another quite volubly. It's because you know so little of their language you cannot make them understand you now isn't it? I hope you have not had much trouble with the natives lately. I do hate to hear of any hostility between them and you to me it seems dreadful to fire at them and the poor prisoners that are sent to Bathurst they have a fearful time of it from what has been coming to light lately poor miserable degraded wretches. The whites will have a deal to be answerable for someday I fear so called Christians. Oh my darling keep yourself free from any stain of these poor creatures I know how very annoying the attacks on the sheep must be but we should strive to do unto others as we would have them do to us'.   Mr Agnew invited John and I down the first Sunday to his place where we met Mr Crickard who of course we saw the day we arrived. Mr Agnew was very kind. Mrs Agnew showed us much friendship. We saw Miss Aicken. She looks in very good health. We have a good feed of strawberries and other fruit. I commenced on Friday last 7th December and when I was leaving Mr Agnew in the street he again invited us to go out a second Sunday also a Mr Brown from Co. Down who he was also trying to get into a situation but Brown went to a situation in a country town about 200 miles from here so John and I went ourselves and enjoyed a pleasant evening. We also went to his pew in the church he goes to in Melbourne. His residence minds me of some of the house you would see up in the Malone Road (Belfast) with their lawn before the door and nicely laid out ground but in the Australian fashion with veranda etc. He has four nice little cobs or rather ponies. He drives one of them in town when going about business to the bank etc. His business is a Coach builders Ironmonger not coach builder and ironmonger. He proposed to give John a letter of introduction to a farmer he knows if John does not like to stay where he is gone.   I doubt whether in my preceding letters I have made the distinction between Melbourne and its sister capitals sufficiently plain. I shall perhaps best convey it by saying that Melbourne is quasi-metropolitan while both Sydney and Adelaide are alike provincial in their mode of life. In the matters of which I have been writing the difference has hardly been sufficient to warrant a separate treatment; but with regard to dress it becomes so noticeable that not to treat of Melbourne separately would convey a false idea. For in dress it is not too much to say that the ladies of Melbourne are luxurious - a charge which could scarcely be brought against Australians in any other particular that I can think of. And take them all-in-all they do not dress badly; indeed if one considers the distance from Paris and the total want of a competent leader of fashion they may be said to dress well especially of late years. The highly fantastic and gorgeous costumes for which Melbourne used to be notorious are fast disappearing. Successful diggers no longer take their wives into a shop and ask how much colour and stuff can be put into a dress for fifty pounds. Already outrageousness is confined to a few and when I say that it is generally agreed to be "bad form" you will understand that its death-blow has been struck and the hearse ordered. Bright colours are still in vogue but they are not necessarily loud or unpleasant beneath the austral sun and the art of combining them is beginning to be understood. When one remembers how their houses are furnished and what their general style of living is it is astonishing to find Melbourne ladies dressing so brilliantly and yet with so little vulgarity. [272]  But it is not among the grand monde - if the term be not ridiculous as applied to Victoria - that you must go to discover taste. I am not sure that class for class the rich do not show the least taste in their apparel. Many of them send to Paris for their dresses and pay sums which make one's mouth water to be dressed in the latest fashion; but I fancy that the French modistes manufacture a certain style of attire for the Australian taste just as the French merchants manufacture clarets for the Australian market. It is a compound of the cocotte and the American. Nor when she has got a handsome dress does the Melbourne grande dame know how to wear it; she merely succeeds in looking what a Brighton lodging-house keeper once defined to me as a "carriage-lady". A lady of the English upper middle-class dressed by a London milliner looks infinitely better.  There are some costumes worn by Victorian ladies which you will never see worn by any other ladies; but for all that the middle and even the lower class are by no means destitute of ideas about dress. Compare the Melbourne with the Birmingham or Manchester factory girl or the young lady in a Collins Street retail establishment with the shop-girl in any but the most aristocratic part of London; the old country will come out second-best. And why is it? It is no easy question to answer; at the bottom is undoubtedly that general love of display which is almost as characteristic of Melbourne as it is of Paris. But then what is the cause of that? And a love of display though it may be and is amongst the wealthy productive of grand dresses as it is of grand dinners and grand furniture does not make taste - e.g. the Second Empire; and though it would be going too far to say that the ladies of Melbourne dress tastefully it is within the truth to give them credit for a tendency towards taste. Throughout England the middle and lower classes dress hideously. Why should the first generation of Victorians show a disposition to abandon the ugly? I leave it to some aesthetic philosopher to find out the reason and content myself with noting the fact. If I wanted to moralise I have little doubt that the drapers' and milliners' accounts of these "young ladies" would furnish a redundant text and that although a large number of them make up their dresses themselves from paper patterns or illustrations in Myra's Journal. How they can afford to dress as well as they do they and their mothers best know; but the bow here and the flower there are not costly things and the mere fact of being able to cut out a dress so as not to look dowdy shows natural taste. It is the rarest of sights to see a real Melbourne girl look dowdy. Her taste sometimes runs riot: it is exuberant and becomes vulgar and flash; but even then the vulgarity and flashness are of a superior type to those of her equals across the ocean. [273]  Sydney and Adelaide are distinctly superior to English towns of the same size in the matter of apparel; but they will not bear comparison with Melbourne. On the other hand gorgeous and flash dresses are very rare in the smaller cities. If they have not the talent of Melbourne neither do they share its blots. They go along at a steady jog-trots and are content to take their fashions second-hand from Melbourne but with modifications. Their more correct and sober taste will not tolerate even many of the extravagances of which London is guilty - such extravagances for instance as the Tam O'Shanter cap which was warmly taken up in Melbourne. But with all this good sense they remain dowdy.  I have said nothing hitherto of married ladies' dress. When a colonial girl marries she considers herself except in rare instances on the shelf and troubles herself very little about what she wears. As a rule she has probably too many other things to take up her time. She has got a husband and what more can she want? He rarely cares what she has on as soon as the honeymoon is over. There is no one else to please and I fear that colonial girls are not of those who dress merely for themselves; they like to be admired and they appreciate the value of dress from a flirtation point of view. Their taste is rather the outcome of a desire to please others than of a sense of aesthetics. It is relative and not absolute. When once the finery has served its purpose they are ready to renounce all the pomps and vanities of this wicked world. And if the moralist says that this argues some laxness of ideas before marriage let him remember that it is equally indicative of connubial bliss. Once married her flirtations are at an end - "played out" if I may use the term.  In another respect the Victorian is the direct opposite of the Parisienne. If you leave general effects and come to pull her dress to pieces you find that the metal is only electro to whatever rank of life she may belong. The general appearance may be pleasing but in detail she is execrable. Not but that the materials of her dress are rich enough so that my electro simile will hardly hold water; but money does not make the artist. Let us being with the bonnet. Walk down Collins Street at the time of the block on Saturday and I doubt whether you can count half a dozen bonnets which are both pretty and suitable to the face and head of the wearer. Bien chaussée et bien gantée might be Greek as far as Australia is concerned and if by chance you see a stocking or any portion of the under-clothing you will have your eyes opened. Whatever does not meet the eye is generally of the commonest. It would be thought a sinful waste of money to have anything particularly good or expensive which other people could not see. The light of Melbourne is never likely to hide itself under a bushel; external adornment is the mot d'ordre. Ribbons and laces or anything that helps to improve the look of a dress the colonial lady will indulge in freely and even extravagantly; but you must not penetrate her tinsel armour. [274]  Owing to the climate hats are much more frequently in use than bonnets and if the merit of subdued tints is unappreciated it is not often that the eye is shocked by the glaring discords to which Englishwomen are so prone. Fringes are much worn and the hair is often parted on the side. In spite of the heat gants de suede find very little favour; they look dirty and with a 25 per cent duty cannot be renewed every day. The usual English fashions find their way to Melbourne in about eight months and this is the more convenient because your summer is our winter and vice versa. Spring and autumn we agree to forget; this is rather a pity because practically nine-twelfths of our year are spring and autumn and on a bright July or August day the dress which is appropriate to a London fog in December looks singularly out of place. Sealskins and furs are worn till you almost imagine it must be cold which during daylight it hardly ever is in this country. In summer suitable concessions become obligatory and dresses are made of the thinnest and lightest materials. Pompadour prints and white calicoes reign supreme and look better than anything else. It is then that the poorer classes are able to dress best the material being cheap. Winter stuffs are expensive and to a great degree their effectiveness is in direct ratio to their cost; but during quite half of the Australian year the poor meet the rich if not on an equality at any rate on much fairer terms than at home with regard to dress.  Servants of course ape their mistresses' dresses as in England and generally manage to produce a delightful sense of incongruity in their attire; but for all that they are much less dowdy than English servants.  So much for ladies' dress. Change the sexes and the picture is by no means so pleasing; for thorough untidiness of person there can surely be no one to beat the Australian. Above all must one beware of judging a man's position by his coat. It is impossible to tell whether the dirty old man who slouches along the street is a millionaire or a beggar. The older his coat and the dirtier his shirt the more the probabilities are in favour of the millionaire. Perhaps he thinks he can afford to dress as he pleases. The city men are more careful of their personal appearance and have kept up the shadow and image of London. They wear shiny frock-coats and the worst-brushed and most odd-shaped of top-hats and imagine they are well-dressed; at least I suppose they do for they seem to have a sort of contempt for the spruce tweed suits and round hats of "new chums" and such of the rising generation as have followed their example and adopted that fashion. Can you imagine yourself wearing a black coat and high hat with the thermometer jogging about from 70° to 110° in the shade? If the coat were decently cut and of good cloth and well-brushed and the silk hat well-shapen and neat I might put you down a fool but would admit your claims to be a dandy. [275] But as it is most of our city men are both uncomfortable and untidy. Their clothes look as if they had been bought ready-made at a slop-shop. The tie they prefer is a black bootlace if not it is bound to be of the most tasteless colour and pattern you can think of. A heavy gold watch-chain and diamond ring is de rigueur but otherwise they do not wear much jewellery. Their hair like their clothes generally wants brushing and hands and nails are not always so clean as they might be; but one knows that for the most part they tub every morning: this is a consolation.  The bushman at least dresses sensibly. When he comes into town he puts on a slop-coat but retains if not a cabbage-tree at any rate a wide-brimmed soft felt hat. Sacrificing comfort to ceremony he generally puts on a collar but he often kicks at a tie: he finds he must draw a line somewhere. But there is something so redolent of the bush about him that one would not have him otherwise; the slop clothes even become picturesque from the cavalier fashion in which he wears them. Note that his pipe never leaves his mouth while the city man does not venture to smoke in any of the main streets. He is a regular Jack ashore this bushman. A bull would not be more out of place in a china-shop though probably less amusing and more destructive. The poor fellow meets so many friends in town that by the end of the day he has probably had more nobblers than are altogether good for him. It is a very hard life that he leads and he takes his pleasure like his work hardly.  If the Adelaidians are perhaps the least got-up they are certainly the most suitably dressed of the inhabitants of Australian towns. With them the top hat is comparatively of recent introduction. Silk coats and helmets are numerous still though becoming more rare every day. Melbourne and Sydney think it infra dig. to allow themselves these little comforts and Adelaide is gradually becoming corrupted. It must however be added that the Adelaide folk are the most untidy as the Melbourne are the least untidy of Australians. Comfort and elegance do not always go hand in hand. Tweeds are beginning to come into use amongst the upper middle as they long have in the lower middle and lower classes. Capital stuffs are made at Sydney Melbourne Ballarat and Geelong; but the patterns are very common. In a dusty place like this it is impossible to keep black clothes clean and tweeds give far the best wear and appearance of any stuff. For my own part I wear them winter and summer.  The working-classes can of course afford to be and are better dressed than at home; for though clothes are in reality much dearer they are much cheaper in proportion to wages. They do not often Wear black coats in the week but keep them for Sundays and grand Occasions. Directly an immigrant has landed he feels that his first earnings must be devoted to a Sunday go-to-meeting suit. [276] His fellowmen all have one and he does not like to feel himself their inferior even with regard to a coat.  [...] as regards the farming I had a notion of going back to New England about February or March but there has been a land bill past that is a great barrier to the setteler [sic]; it is in favour of the squatter; their is a great many of them in power so the make the laws to suit themselves like the landlords of Ireland but if I went back to New England there is a mate of mine their we would have leaced a run and put cattle on it but it is very chancey for your cattle dying in a dry season.   Mr George Reid is going to try and get me on as a coach driver between Beechworth and Yackandandah. [...][129] The situation will be worth a pound or 25s. per week. Each driver has only to drive a few hours every day and wash his coach twice a week (I will have my board too). If I do not get this crib I will likely get on a sheep station after a little.  There is a Mr Finlay who I got an introduction to by the Rev. Robinson who said he would try and get me a crib on a station but he advised me to take a month or six weeks before commencing work. I went to Dr. Bird of Melbourne before coming up here and he examined my chest and give me a recipe. He also weighed me I was only 1st 3lbs without coat and vest. My light weight was owing to my having diarrhoea for a week which greatly weakened me. However I have not it since.   He is getting along nicely but is always talking about how much can be made at home and how a man who has a farm could make money. My advice to such people would be to stay at home and content themselves and not be running of to Australia away from their relations and society. Yet he says he is content. If money is to be made at home how many men can get 7s. a day for harvesting and £1 a week and board as a ploughman. I know a young fellow named Brown who has £1 and board for attending to horses and doing a little farm work and another named McBride who is employed with a Mr Henry over beside James Reid's here who has 15s. per week and board. His work is not hard and he eat at the table with his master and mistress of everything of the best. I know for I have been often over there and has stopped nearly two days with them. [130]  Hugh Sheils is working to Alexander Perry at ringing trees. I suppose you would not know what ringing trees is if I did not tell you. It is to take about 6 broad of bark and the last spring's growth off right round its circumference. Young Jelly is going to Albury about a situation next week.   H. Reid has a letter by last mail from his brother giving all particulars and among the rest that the Maxwells had not written from Plymouth (that was a mistake). You know it looks careless not to write from these places where the ship calls at. And I felt it greatly when it was read out in my hearing that we did not write. There were none of whole party who wrote more than us. You must not be saying anything I said to any of the neighbours. You know it might go to Watson's or Sheil's and then come back here and if it does I will promise you that all the news you get will be little from me. Remember that.   John was only one day there when he wrote but he was likely to like his billet pretty well. He has a little bedroom to himself and eats with the overseer of the station and his wife. He was helping to put up some fences as he must know how to tighten the wire before he can be a boundary-rider. He says that Queensland is much ruffer country than Victoria as much as Victoria is ruffer than home some of the roads in the bush being very bad and no stones on them. He describes them as like the moss roads.   I saw S. Jelley on Sunday. He is down in St. Kilda with a cousin of his there (a butcher) where he is going to stop until he gets a crib. His cousin says there is a good chance of him getting one soon. Jelley seems to think that H. Sheils is not too well made up with the country; perhaps his expectations were too great or he may have jumped at the thing without thinking seriously. However he has had his £1 a week and found up to the present. He was not working to Perry lately but was helping a young farmer to split timber at £1. I think there is not enough of sport for him and he may be troubled a little with homesickness. If he had the first 6 months over he might come round. However do not say anything about this to anyone for you know how soon it would spread. Be especially careful about this and let it be his own pen that shall make known the fact. Indeed it is a very common thing to find people grumbling when they are well enough. A young man from near Lisburn the name of McBride is a little tarred with the same stick. He was up in the Yacklandandah district also but has left it and gone to a place south of Melbourne and is going to try his hand as a missionary. He had never been from home until he came out here so I suppose that is how he takes it so hard.   There is another Co. Antrim young man that was up in the district about Ballarat about 50 miles from here. He liked the country very well and had constant harvest work and 5s. a day found. He could have got £1 a week the year round on a farm there but he thought he would see what he could get about Melbourne first. He has got a job at pick and shovel work at 7s. a day and is stopping with a neighbour of his who came out in the Liguria also. This said neighbour has bought a horse and dray and can earn nearly £4 a week at drawing rubbish or stuff somewhere about Melbourne. Mr McNight was thinking of starting something of the same but I do not know whether he has or not. [132] Of course people cannot expect fortune to shine on them all at once and it requires a little patience.   John was making me laugh when he was in Mel that H. was saying that there was no markets or fairs and seems to look on this as hard indeed. His time for that sort of thing has not come yet and it would be a very poor way of making money or saving any if there was many markets and fairs.   I consider that I can keep myself on 17s. or 18s. a week including washing never speaking about the beer or tobacco cigars etc which does not happen to form an important item. I do buy a few apples occasionally to help digestion but the habit of eating apples can be left off at any time.   [...] if Harry has any notion of coming to any of the colonies of Australia I would recommend him not to have a burthen where with to regale his shoulders in the shape of a wife with him as he will be far lighter without one [...]   [...] she need not mourn for as soon as my chest gets better I will surely give Old Ireland a visit again. Although the climate of Queensland is well suited for a weak chest yet it is not well suited for the liver. I am greatly troubled with my liver now and then. I think so much mutton and beef and the warm climate is the cause of it. If I had plenty of buttermilk I would not be troubled with it. I never have seen buttermilk since I came to Queensland but Mrs Smith the manager's wife is going to get three or four cows and make butter so I will get buttermilk then but Australian milk is not so well tasted as the home milk because it only the cream that is churned [...]   You will be surprised when you hear of my being in Queensland. I got a letter of introduction from Mr Agnew to Dr Rowan whose brother and himself owns a good part of this station Smith the manager having also an interest in it. The Doctor's brother gave me a letter of introduction to Mr Smith and sent me up to Queensland. The letter said that I was a new arrival who had chosen the squatting as my profession and that I was to receive exactly what pay I was worth. Mr Rowan said he would write a private letter to Mr Smith telling him I was to have a little room or cabin separate from the other men. I have my meals with Mr and Mrs Smith and I have a nice little bedroom where I am now writing but as regards pay I don't know what I will have. I would be content with 15s. per week. If I don't get that I will try something else. I intend putting over winter here if I can and next spring to get a job at sheep or cattle driving down to Victoria and there begin harvesting and afterwards either to return with a drove of sheep or employ with a farmer. There is always sheep going south and others going north which you will think strange. Sheep can be reared cheaper in Queensland and are driven south to a better market and good breeds of sheep are driven north.   [...] I suppose Mr. McVicker will be in Melbourne in little over a week. I will do any little thing I can for him but it is indeed very little that I can do. Of course I can introduce him to Mr. Agnew and I suppose that is the best I can. I hope he may be fortunate in getting a situation but as far as I can understand things are a little dull just now. [133]  There is a young man from Belfast a grocer who came out in the Liguria with us and went to a situation up country shortly after we came but about three weeks ago he left his situation to try and get one in Melbourne. He has been looking about a good deal and has not been successful yet. I see him very often; indeed he often calls on me to have a walk and a talk; of course he is likely to fall in before long but not so quickly as he would like. John says that times are bad in Queensland owing to the drought. I believe Mr. Gowan would be better to come to Victoria. Queensland is very warm and rough. Victoria is quite hot enough for anyone to work in. There is not much land to be taken up now but he has plenty of money and could buy a farm. Up the Goulburn improved farms sell from £6 to £10 pounds an acre freehold. There are other districts where farms can be rented but I can pretend to say very little about it as I know very little. The climate of Victoria is well suited for any person with chest complaint [...]  There is some talk about unemployed labourers and scarcity of work yet I see by the papers that farmers in some districts cannot get a sufficient number of hands to get their crop in. These said unemployed turn up their noses if they do not get a high rate of wages and will not work for low wages so they are not so much to be pitied.    [...] you will wonder when you get this why I left the station so soon. I would not have left so soon had the food been good enough to afford healthful nourishment. The first seven or eight weeks the food was pretty good as I got plenty of milk for my tea and sometimes a bit of rice pudding for dinner but the two cows which we had on the out station went dry consequently there was no milk to be had and all my meals consisted of bread and salt meat and tea without milk. I would have put up with it for a bit had I not got a cold which started my cough so Hugh wrote for me to come down to Melbourne and I did so and got here yesterday morning and was quite long enough on the station. Hugh was greatly uplifted when he saw that I looked so well for he was very uneasy when he knew of me getting cold. Hugh Sheils was telling me yesterday that there was never a bit of life in him when I was away and whenever he heard of my coming back his spirits rose and he got quite cheery. I was quite long enough on the station [...] all I got for 15 weeks work was £8 so my trip to Queensland was pretty dear. It cost more than twice as much to take me there and bring me back again so you see I have not made a pile yet but I hope my fortune will change by and by.   I was not in such great need as you expected but at the same time the order was acceptable as I am now out of work and do not intend doing anything till I am quite rid of my cough. Had I remained another three weeks among Mr. Reid's people I would have been earning something instead of being idle I could provided my chest was strong be earning 6s. 6d. a day for very little work on the police. They have only eight hours duty. However I have to content myself with the thought that the summer will make me all right. At present I can eat and sleep well and scarce ever feels ache or pain except on a very wet day or a cloudy day before rain. (I always mention myself first because I know you will want to know how I am first and then you will read or listen to what I have to say afterwards better.) I believe that Hugh has had his health as well if not better than when at business at home. Of course he is sometimes troubled with his stomach but you could hardly expect any person who is confined in a draper's shop all day to be as strong as any one who gets the fresh air and plenty of outdoor exercise.    [...] we are now lodging with Mrs. McDonnell. We can manage to live cheaper at least my bill is more reasonable than when I was stopping in the other place. John and I have taken to porridge in the evening and find a great benefit from it. Mr. McVicker had a walk out with us on Sunday indeed the last two Sundays. He has been here several times in the evening. Of course he is a little lonely and we are great company to him. He is getting along nicely in his situation. He got the same salary as myself to start with but he thinks he will never have such fine times again as when in J. R's [...] Mr George Reid called with me a fortnight ago. His father and Hugh were pegging out some land for selection but do not know if they will get it as some others were pegging out too [...]   John has improved a good deal since he came to Melbourne. He is much heavier. I don't think Queensland is much of a place to go to as there are a great lot of immigrants continually arriving there and can't all get work; besides black labour cheapens white. You see the farmers and squatters return the members of Parliament and they only return those who will vote for free immigration so that they can get their work done cheaper. There is a good deal in the papers about the unemployed in Brisbane as well as the capitals of the other colonies.   The land about Yack more of a red colour and better adapted for vine growing. I think Mr. Reid's people should go into vine growing as they have some land admirably suited for it. Wine being a smaller commodity in proportion to the bulk of land planted could be raised at a greater distance from a market or railway which would convey it to the market than grain or any other root crop whose cost of carriage would be great. Indeed it seems to me that vine culture will be the prevailing industry in the drier parts of Victoria as the dryness of the climate is greatly against all other agricultural industries.   Meat has risen to a very high price this winter mutton being as high as 5 l / 2d. and beef as high as 7 1/2d. for steak.   I observed in the paper a few days ago where some bullocks were sold at £21 each. [135] I believe the rise in meat is owing to the very dry season which has been in a great portion of New South Wales. Sheep and cattle have died in thousands from want of feed and water. I knew of a man who started from New South Wales with 22000 (thousands not hundreds - he was a drover and of course had a lot of men) to travel through Queensland for grass. He passed Talavera when I was there with about 400 the rest having died from hunger. When a squatter chances to have no feed for his sheep he often employs a drover to drive his sheep to another part of the country still keeping driving on from place to place till he hears from home the station to which they belong that feed is beginning to rise and that by the time the sheep gets back the grass will be good enough to sustain them. Thus they keep travelling at the rate of 5 miles a day which is the rate that law will compel sheep to travel but it often happens that sheep like these I have been speaking about do not travel so fast and only do so when urged by the squatters and selecters whose runs they pass through (a day) during the time they are absent from their own station. Sheep when travelling are allowed half a mile on each side of the road.   Hugh Sheils's opinion about farming in this country is not very great. Of course he has only been in one district and cannot form a very correct opinion. [136] He still seems to be in the notion of going home in about April next although he is now getting very good wages £2 a week. I think now that he is here he should try it out for a while longer. You will please to remember that the above is not to be spoken of to anyone not even his own people. Let himself be the first to give such information as I do not want my name mixed up with it in any way [...]   [...] as he cannot see a good prospect in farming he thinks it not worthwhile to stay. If he does go home in April he will be able to give you a description of the bush and bush life.   There is only one district where there is any good land for selection that is called Gippsland but I believe it is very heavily timbered although the land is said to be good when it is cleared. A selector of Government land has not to pay all the money at first but pays in instalments - the paying it is not so heavy as the getting the right kind of land and in the right place not too far from railway or good market I mean. On the whole I cannot advise you to come this year and you must not hold too high an opinion of a place until you have seen it.   When John grows a little stronger and the weather gets warmer he will be giving it a trial up country and in the course of another twelve months we will be better able to give you an idea of the state of things as we find them ourselves and not by the report of others. It is a very fine climate; the winter is very mild only a little cold in the mornings when there is a white frost. This winter for so far has not been wet. The worst in my opinion is the heat in the middle of summer.   As far as I am concerned I have rather better prospect than in Belfast and by no means regret the change although in some ways it is very different you know. John is certainly better in this climate than home [...]    [...] I saw M. Hawthorn today. He was telling me he had got a situation. (I think he said in Launceston. If so it is in Tasmania. It is an out of the world place to my mind. Tasmania is very slow going place and not at all energetic like the rest of the colonies) in a hardware house. As I am not quite sure don't say much about it lest I made a blunder. He (Mr. Hawthorn) is very sociable here and stops and shakes hands with either Hugh or I when he meets us but Australia and the crossing of the line makes a great change on people's sociability.   You ask in the letter to John what kind of men my employers are. Well one is an Irish man from Newry and the other an English man. Craig the Irishman mostly attends to office affairs. It was he engaged me and indeed engages all the hands of course with the other's opinion on the matter. He is liked better by most of the hands that I have heard expressing an opinion. The other is a whimsical old fellow and as some of the hands say you don't know when you have or when you haven't him; is rather hard to please at times and sometimes get through a good many strange hands. There has been many come and left since I went there. I often think of turning to the farming when bothered or annoyed about something or other but dearie knows I might turn farmer along with John some time; hard to say what's before us.   I put off writing this day week as I was very tired. Although we have not a long day we have to work pretty hard and constant while we are there. This is now the busy season coming on to the summer so we have not many idle minutes from we go in until we come out. Add to that the bustle fuss and confusion and it makes a heavy enough day's work but it is ever so much better to be busy than have too little to do.   One has to be pretty particular about one thing and another as there are often mistakes occur. It is a very complicated kind of town to send parcels in as there are so many names of suburbs and so many ugly long-spelled native names one has always to be on their guard; at least that is my experience.   The wheat crop will be very poor this year hereabouts owing to the dryness of the season in this district. I am greatly surprised to see the crop looking so well when I consider the dryness of the past few months. There is one thing if they have a bad crop they have no rent to pay and no landlord to fear and they can live for one season without any return from their own land as they could go and work in other districts where crops are good that is supposing they never had saved anything from former years [...] the land up here is very good being very well adapted for growing wheat and it's grazing capabilities are very good.   [...] It will be much better for James's health to be going up and down to Bangor and Mr. Peters will be good company for him. He will be able to go home every Sunday and to see his girl as often as he had a fancy. You know it is a grand privilege to have such a luxury which either you nor I have had the pleasure indulging in since we came to the colony. Perhaps you have for all that I know.   I wonder if William is still in the notion of buying a farm. I think the money would be better laid out here on a bit of good land than to buy a farm at home and still have to pay a rent for it. A man to select in this country would have more he could call his own in 10 years than he would have in 20 at home. I am quite sure. I see evidence everywhere I go. There is still land to select and under not more difficulties than in earlier times. Mr Barron used to have to cart wheat from here to Melbourne before the railway was made up this far.    [...] there is one part of John's letter with which I cannot agree in which he says that there is still land to select under not more difficulties than in earlier times. Well the first difference is the best of the land is selected. What is left is covered with wood and under-growth. There is less of the public domain to select from and more difficult to get a selection or farm. Then if the farmer had to draw his wheat a long way to market he had surely a better price than 3s. 9d. per bushel. If I was farming here I would not go heavily into crop growing as I believe stock would pay better at present with less labour.   I have been feeling my liver a little out of order lately. I got a bottle of medicine from the chemist last night which I think will be of some good. This is said to be a very bad country for liver complaint indeed the worst in the world not excepting India. I suppose it is partly the heat but it is hard to say what are all the causes. I hope father and mother are keeping free from it. I would suggest to you as a possible preventative of headache to pour some cold water on the back of the neck first thing every morning; it won't do any harm at any rate [...]   I don't think he [...] has made much of it in Australia although he has £2 a week and every opportunity of getting an advance but he seems not satisfied and the country is I believe behind his estimate of it at home. People come here and think they will get money almost for the lifting and are disappointed when they arrive.   I am now working as assistant gardener at a gentleman's place out at Kew (about 4 1/2 miles from Melbourne) I am getting a pound a week and found. Hugh has left Craig's and is going up country to a place called Heathcote. He will have £2 2s. a week. I see by yours that you have taken a situation as landsteward at a pound a week. If you are found it is very good wages but if not it is not worth having. If my health keeps good I expect to have a bit more wages before one twelve month comes round; that is as a coachman. [140] The sound of coachman will jar in your ears I suppose but servants in this country are never so much looked down on about gentlemen's places as they are at home and you are not obliged to do flunkey so much or touch your hat or say yes mam or yes sir simply yes or no I will or I haven't time. If you are civil and obedient is all that is required but they will not have anyone who drinks. I find although my hand was so long out of practice that I can do work as well and as much of it as any other man that I ever wrought beside here. I find that although I have not perhaps quite so much physical strength as some I can handicap most of them in quickness.   [...] Susanna: you must be very careful and not catch cold again. You must not get overheated. You must not put your hands in cold water. You must not be out in the night air and yous must take outdoor exercise say weed potatoes when the ground is quite dry but perhaps there would be too much bending over your chest. Drink plenty of warm milk from the cow. Drink nothing else neither water nor tea and it will make you like it better. Be sure and take my advice for I have had experience.    [...] I am over a fortnight in my new crib. It is a very quiet little town. I am getting along pretty well for so far. The hours are from 8.30 to 6 and 10 pm. Saturday. We have not too hard to work there not being a great rush of customers. They seem to get a good profit so that makes up.   There is a young man came up a week after me for the clothing department. He is a new chum from Magherafelt Co. Derry. His name is Vance. He is fine company for me. We are the only two assistants and we stop in the same lodgings. Our lodgings cost 20s. a week; we are very comfortable. Of course there is no other lodgers here.   The governor of our drapery side is a Presbyterian so is Vance (there is also groceries kept but next door). Vance and I had a long walk up the mountain about three miles from here. Away on the other side of the mountain we could see the valley of the Goulburn River. This place is a little south of the Goulburn. From Melbourne we came about 40 miles by train and 30 by coach. It is a wonderful journey through the bush. The road is not the best; some parts of it is only a bush track. It is something strange to hear the morepork (the Australian cuckoo) calling at night. It is quite a different bird. The call is something like mo-pork and is not so sweet as the cuckoo and much slower [...]   I am getting along pretty well in my new quarters [...] We have got a new hand in the grocery store Mr. Calthcart. He has been in New Zealand for a few years. He served his time in Beatie's in Ballymena where James Maxwell served his. The other drapery assistant Mr. Vance is from Magherafelt Co. Derry. Our bookkeeper Mr. Brown is a Belfast man; he has been 18 or 20 years here. The miller Mr. Grant is from Co. Armagh and the engine man his nephew Mr. Walsh is from Tyrone. [141] The senior governor Mr. Moore is from Co. Down; he is always in Melbourne. Mr. Christie is a Scotchman; he looks after the grocery and grain store. Mr. Spinks is from Dublin; he is a Presbyterian also Mr. Moore. Mr. Christie goes to Church (English) rather odd for a Scotchman. Mr. Spinks is in the drapery store so he is the man we have to look after. He is very agreeable and not too hard to put up with.   The lady we stop with is a widow with two daughters an Irish woman from Co. Clare and an Roman Catholic. One of the daughters teaches music and she often gives us a tune in the evening which helps to pass the time. Mr. Cathcart does not board here but sometimes comes down a little while in the evening and we have a bit chat and chaff.   Mr. Vance and I have joined the Mechanic's Institute (where we can see the newspapers every evening). There is a debating club in connection with it which holds a meeting every fortnight. All the members of the Institute who like can debate. It is always worth hearing and one always learns something    [...] For my own experience I like the country full as well as I expected to - indeed quite a different thing to the time I was in England. Although the Irish are always hard spoken of everywhere I find that an Irishman takes as well with the people generally as any other countryman. One great thing is never try to hide it; I never do. Everybody is friendly with the new chums as we are called when we come out first. It is a bit different to England where everybody is English. Here you meet people from every part of course more English than anything else [...]   I also got a dictionary at 4s. and an alarm clock at 12s. My expenses since I came here have been pretty high. I bought a pair of trousers at 20s. a pair of fine boots at 22s. a pair of every day boots at 14s. a good hat at 10s. 6d. and I have joined the Good Templars which cost me half a crown and a devil of a lot of medicine for let what come or go I have always to have a good supply of it. You must not think because I am using a good deal of medicine that I am worse. If I can pass the winter as well as I have done for so far I will be satisfied.   The people need not be dreaming such nonsense about me being married for I can tell you the colonial heifers are a kind of cattle. I like to keep at a respectful distance. You know we new chums have a very bad opinion of the colonials.   James is now sitting on a box about a yard from me sewing on a button on his breeches. It's a terrible want the want of a wife. He wants to know if Mary has mind of the time when she used to learn him to knit in the gallery in Ballymaconnell. He says if she had learned him to sew it would have been of more use to him now.    [...] I see by the paper that there has been a great fuss made about the Prince and Princess. I would like to know what the Prince ever done for Ireland that merits such an enthusiastic welcome. Undoubtedly the Princess has done what she could to forward Irish manufactory by patronizing the Irish lace and poplin. The Belfast people are always making fools of themselves. What is royalty? What good do they do for the middle and lower classes of Great Britain? They are the people who live by the sweat of their subject's brow. They are the people who think themselves made of better clay than their subjects. They are the people who mean people bend their heads and knee - for what? For thinking themselves better than they. The aristocracy do well to look down on laity or democracy.   Surely people will see through such nonsense by and by. They have not learned the lesson which the United States have been teaching them these many years past; but I believe the aristocracy has nearly seen its day in England. They have had to cave in a good deal the last few centuries. I believe the franchise has been a blow which will be felt by them at the next general election. It is hoped that the people of the Co. Down will have learned some sense and will look better after their own interests. In fact they like most of their North of Ireland neighbours do not quite understand politics and always keep mixing it and religion up together. They seem not to know that politics and religion are two things as widely different as the can be. Politics belong to this world and religion to that which is to come. The one our temporal benefit and the other our spiritual welfare.   The Orangemen have been a great hindrance to the advancement of civil liberties of the people at home. But poor men the know not what the do and are simply guided by the aristocracy who use them with great dexterity to suit their own ends. There is no shout about loyalty no waving of their filthy flag over people's heads here.   he cannot be considered by any means a criterion. You know Hugh simply made a mouth of himself. He therefore will have to blame his return home so soon on the country instead of homesickness but I expect he back in about a year or perhaps sooner.   A man cannot well complain of a country where he can earn 25s. a week and found but I suppose Hugh will attribute his high wages to his superior or I presume his father will as he is a bit of a blow.    [...] the gardener here is a new chum who has been out in the colony about the same time as myself. He understands the management of bees and he a I have determined to start a small bee farm in spring. It will be carried on a more scientific principle than I used to see you do it at home. There will be no destroying of bees for their honey. We will take the honey when they are at work extract the honey from the combs and then place them back in the hive to be refilled. The hive consists of a square box which can be opened at the top. There are a number of square frames which are hung a little apart parallel to each other. In these the bees builds their comb and they can removed when filled or at will without very much disturbing the bees.    [...] I left my situation in Heathcote rather more than a week ago. There was no chance of a rise screw there. I got another crib yesterday wages £2 15s. The name of the place is Corowa. It is on the Murray River New South Wales side 184 miles from Melbourne railway all the way. I should think it is not more than 40 or 50 miles from Yackandandah across the country but much more by rail. I don't know that the crib will be very permanent as it is a new firm and the cannot tell what trade will be done. However the screw is pretty good and when that crib gives up something else may turn up.   John looks very much stronger then he did six months ago. I believe he could do as much work as any other man. The cough is not quite gone but is very severe now. I do not know that he mentioned in any of his letters that he was going into bee-keeping along with another young man (who understands the scientific principle of working bees). He was the gardener where John is working. They each put an equal sum of money down and get equal shares of the profit. They make Quinby hives in the evenings (moveable frame hives). I think John will give up his crib in a week or so so that they can push forward hive making before the summer sets in thereby securing the advantages of the best honey season. Mr. Amey the partner works 3 days in the week the other 3 he devotes to collecting swarms and hive making etc. etc.   I am going to put £10 worth of bees which will be about 16 or 18 swarms into the business. John and Amey will supply the hives and other appliances look after the bees and sell the honey for half the amount realised and the young swarms the other half of the amount will be my share. I expect it to realise 100%. [145]  You understand the bees have not to be destroyed under this principle which is a great savings. If the undertaking proves a success I will go into the business next year. By that time John will know something about the workings of the bees etc. John will be able to give you fuller particulars by Christmas. It will save John from having to work so hard in the warm summer weather. Mr. Amey and John have taken a little house near Kew. They have got a tenant for half the house keeping two rooms and a workshop for themselves. They have ample sitting room for their bees in the little garden in front of the house; they will cook for themselves etc.   If I am not mistaken bee farming could be made one of the best paying occupations in Victoria for a man with small capital.   It will be two years tomorrow since John and I left home. It does not look like it looking back. We have not made much money but if we get along as fairly considering circumstances the next two years we cannot complain. I enjoy very good health myself [...]   When I wrote to William four weeks ago I was engaged to go to a situation at Corowa New South Wales. Well I went and when I went into the shop Mr. McLean the governor said he was sorry I had come up so soon as he thought he would sell the business over again if he could make a profit off it. I asked him to let me know as soon as he found out what he was about to do as I did not want to be wasting time there so next morning he said he would either sell to a draper on the other side of the street or by auction but would pay all my expenses and give me a week's salary which he did. I returned to Melbourne and found after paying expenses that I was £3 in pocket.   I got this situation a week ago arriving here on Thursday evening 5th November. I am getting 50s. a week and premiums which will make it about 55s. or 60s. I can count on the former at any rate. I am in the dress department.   Echuca which is a native name means the meeting of the waters. It is built on the Victorian side of the Murray the longest river in Australia (3000 miles) at the junction of the river Compaspie which is a Victorian river. There is a half holiday on Wednesday afternoon. Prince of Wales birthday was on Monday last which is always a holiday. Well arrangements were made to take the whole day on Wednesday and work on Monday and have an excursion in a steamer 20 miles down the Murray. We started about 9am this morning and had a very pleasant run down the river stopped on the New South Wales side and had a picnic that is some of our own shop hands and my landlord and lady; he is our book-keeper. There were all the other shopkeeper's assistants on the steamer also and everybody else that was willing to pay their half crown in all about 250 or 300 people. We started on our return trip about 4.30pm and after a pleasant run arrived here shortly after 6 o'clock.   The river is very crooked but deep and a good width say 130 yards wide. I believe it is much wider further down where some other large rivers join it. There is a large shipping trade done in wool and grain from both New South Wales and Victoria sides and Echuca is the chief port as the wool and grain can be transferred from the barges to the train for Melbourne. The barges are towed by steamers which are also loaded the load of both if in wool 2100 bails if in wheat 4500 bags - some money's worth I wish I had it. [146]  Echuca is lit with gas and supplied with water from the Murray which is pumped by steam into two large tanks about 100 ft. high which gives it pressure in the pipes. The water is good and wholesome much better than in Melbourne and the supply never runs done. I like the place so far as I have seen of it. I believe it is hot at times sometimes as high as 120 in the shade. We had it 102 in the shade in Melbourne ten days ago.   John is very busy about the bee keeping and making hives so he will have not time to write this mail. They had got 20 swarms when I left town. They were likely to get orders for some hives (boxes) which would pay them well for their work. John is in high hopes about the undertaking and thinks it will pay. He was very well and improving when I saw him [...]    [...] in reference to the Hanna brothers; James wages are 10s. a day or £3 a week (the same as Mr. McDonald's etc.). There is no doubt that Samuel has £2 15s. My own wages at present is rather better than that being £2 10s. and spiff (which is worth from 5s. to 10s. a week); of course I want little said about what wages John and I have as people form their own ideas about those things.   In the matter of wages all classes are better off than at home. Of course there are difficulties to be put up with in most departments of labour. I do not regret coming to Victoria in the least (although home is always where the heart lies) the heart has many a dwelling place but only once a home. I feel that I can make a dwelling place anywhere now and be contented with it. At the same time I would not use any influence on any individual to come to the land of the golden fleece'. I am inclined to let folks please themselves as I did and then if things turn out different to what they expected (as it sometimes does) they will not turn round and say to me you misrepresented the state of affairs to me and I blame you that ever I came here. We all have to run our chance of being out of a billet another name for crib and may go without one for a considerable time. It is at such a time we are apt to think that the new country is no better than the old. However when the tide turns and one gets in again his wages are such as will allow of saving something. I must agree with you that there is very little to be saved at home and most departments of industry are tarred with the same stick.   You mention the price of wheat 5s. 9d. That is indeed exceedingly low. I think I mentioned about last harvest that there would be very little hope of wheat ever rising to the old prices. It is the foreign competition not the home produce that brings down the markets. The Australian colonies produce a great deal more wheat than is required for consumption here; the surplus is sent to London. India can now produce as much wheat as the United States. The United States cannot use anything like her own produce. England or rather the United Kingdom is up to the present the best market in the world and of course the great surplus is shipped thither. Things must find a level and the result is low prices rule in the United Kingdom as well as other places. If I were farming at home I would give up wheat growing as a bad game go into live stock more and feed more on the farm. So much for my ideas of agriculture [...]   I am liking my crib for so far. Echuca is a much more important place than Heathcote and farther north therefore warmer. [147] Some of the people here where I lodge bathe in the River Murray but for my part I prefer a shower bath. There is one here and I have a shower nearly every morning.   Yesterday was half holiday so some of the hands 3 besides myself went to the junction of the Goulburn with the Murray about 5 miles from here and had an afternoon's fishing. We drove there in the governor's parcel van. I enjoyed it very much but you know I am not much of a fisherman.   The Australian bush impresses new comers very much on their first run up country. It is so different from the scenery at home. The evergreen forests of Australia are so very different to the home woods (when one does at home come to a wood which is so very seldom) then the dead trees which have been run to let the grass grow have such a weird desolate appearance. The scenery here does not come up to the home scenery generally as far as I have seen at any rate. Of course art has done more for that of the home countries than it has yet accomplished for Australia [...]    [...] I have observed by several of your last letters that there is very little coin to be made at home. Indeed I am surprised that people in health and strength should stick so closely to the old country. Had I the health and strength of some people I believe I could make a very good living but unhappily I am never sure of having permanent good health. At present I had to give up my situation owing to not being strong enough to hold out but indeed I had two good reasons that is very hard work and bad tack (food). I have determined on taking a couple or three weeks spell I intend employing my leisure at painting the roofs of our hives and making a few section trays. I have to make a hive for a man for which I will get 32s. 6d.   My partner Amey has absconded nobody knows where. He left me to pay both my own and his share of some accounts which was against us and also took with him over £10 in cash. I am very glad to be rid of him and although he has taken a slant at me yet he left me the art of beekeeping which I will be able to use to advantage.   We purpose holding on the very few stocks of bees which we possess and increasing their number next spring and going into a heavily timbered district which is the best for bee culture. The is nothing which yields so much honey in this country as the gum trees (eucalyptus). The bees in this country depend more on the blossom of the trees than on the field flowers as clover and other good honey plants do not thrive in every district yet they thrive very well and even better than at home in some portions of Gippsland. Gippsland is a great agricultural district. There is always a good and bad honey year alternatively; this is the bad year. [148] Some of our stocks have over 70£bs. Of honey stored notwithstanding so that gives encouragement. There is one stock in particular which has 16 two pound sections but all filled. I believe if we had 200 hives we could make £600 a year [...]   Susie speaks of bad times and difficulty of making anything at home. Indeed I am surprised at people grumbling about hard times. What would the times be if like Hugh or I with no home and without capital? But the answer is people at home cannot make the money at home they can in Australia. Why then complain? There is many lines of splendid steamers plying between Australia and home? Whose blame is it if home people with means to alter it cannot live as well as people on this side of the globe? The want of courage to face 13000 miles of sea. The want of courage to depend upon the sweat of their own brow. These are part of the reason of people enduring and putting up with difficulties. They starve lest they should starve. They think it is better to starve in Ireland than to run the risk of starving in Australia. They prefer half loaf and idleness to work and plenty of bread.   Everybody who comes here without a capital has to work or the will starve or run the risk for Australians will not keep idlers. The only way to get out of it is to get into jail which is not a hard job. The most of the loafers spend most of their time there and the other part stealing. Some end the debate on starving or working by throwing themselves into the Yarra. But this is bad logic.   Safe in the arms of the policeman Safe in Pentridge jail   18 months hard labour  For cutting off an old cow's tail  The above is better. I would prefer hard work any day to the Yarra [...]   A great many people were disappointed in me. They thought that because the other fellow cleared that I would be disheartened and throw the thing up and that I could not manage them without him. However it happened that I held on to my purpose and the bees have done better under my own separate care than when he was with me. There is a man in Kew who was talking to me today. He was very anxious for me to join partnership with him next year but no more partnerships for John.   [...] You will be surprised to know that Oscar Amey departed this life on the 20th at the Alfred Hospital Melbourne (South) he died of typhoid fever and congestion of the lungs. Linch (Kitchen's gardner) Fraser and I undertook to bury him in Kew cemetery in a private grave the deeds of which will be sent home to his father. It will cost me about £1. He was buried on Tuesday last.   About ten weeks ago I knocked off work for about three weeks but this was through being over worked and want of nourishing food but I must say that within the last month I have not had better health since I came to Australia. I am at present at work in a nursery about a mile and a half from here and as I work by the day I start work at 8 every morning and knock off at 6 - one hour too long but as I am going to work in a neighbouring nursery in about ten days or when I have done where I am at present I will work only till five. I have 6s. a day. In the spring I will be able to get 6s. 6d. or 7s. Last week I got 2s. 6d. more than my wages so you see I am able to do my work   I intend going into the bees next spring with all the capital I can muster and give it a good trial. It will likely to be some part of Gippsland which I will select for the apiary. I would like to establish about 50 or 60 hives. The 14 which I have got will give off a good swarm each next spring which will mean 28 and with purchasing all the swarms I could get in the district I could likely raise the remainder.   Had Amey done right we ought to have had 50 now but he acted the rogue and the worse for himself for had he remained about a healthy place like Kew he would not have caught the fever.    [...] I daresay if you do come out to Victoria you would be less troubled with cold in the chest etc. I think it would be advisable for you to give it a trial if you don't get things to your satisfaction in Belfast. You would be more at home at any rate than John and I were when we came. You know something about where you are going; we did not.   One thing you would not have much trouble in bettering your wages here although you need not expect to start with as much as you will get when you are a little time here. There is a little advantage taken of the new chums that way.   McVicker is getting along pretty well although he was hardly pleased at the first. However he has got a couple of rises of screw. Perhaps a few remarks would not be out of place in case you do decide on coming out.   A few good suits of clothes fashionable made are never out of place; white shirts socks good boots and things much the same as we brought; a common suit (old) for aboard ship and a soft hat (light colour). Hard hats and clothes generally are worn much the same here as at home (bring John and I a blackthorn stick each).   Provisions for Voyage  Butter is useful especially if the ship's butter is bad (it is sometimes very good); a tin of biscuits tea coffee and milk gooseberry and currant jams to be kept till the warm weather when the home butter is done; butter should not reach the hot region but used at the early part of the voyage or it will run to oil. If you are fond of cheese a little one would be no harm (this article I would say please yourself). Note a panikin is a common pint tin such as used at table but a mug is better for the hot tea; have nothing to do with cups and saucers; they are too easily upset. Do not bring ham; you might find trouble in getting it cooked (at least I would not). A £1 or 30s. given to the steward and cook is well laid out in little instalments. Don't give much at first but often and they will get to know you. I think the enclosed cabins are better than the open berths which is sometimes a rough ground. There are four people in an enclosed cabin. [150] Of course they are dearer than open berths. Choice of boats; Austral Orient Liguria Iberia are the largest and best; the others are all much alike. The Austral will save nearly a week on some of the smaller boats.   Don't stow away fruit in your box it will only rot. Leave your gloves behind you; they would spot on the voyage. A dozen nice neckties are safe four in hand shape or windsors according to taste; collars stylish shape (John and I wear 16); pocket handkerchiefs only if good and cheap.   Do not burden too much with anything. Some people make a mistake in bringing too many things.   [...] take a run in the bush the length of Echuca and see what it is like. I think he would do very well here and the dry climate might suit him better than home. I must say for myself that I like the country well although it is rough and wild looking in places. Indeed I would not like going to Belfast and taking a situation there at the wages I could get. I always hold up the name of Belfast here but still wages are small [...]   I observed by James's last letters that he is in half a notion of coming to Australia. I say half a notion for I never take a great deal of notice of people coming to Australia until I see they have taken their passage. However as James is so much troubled with coughs and colds I believe it is the best thing he could do.   In fact I have been inclined to think but perhaps I am mistaken that the whole family would do well to come out and take up land. They could select about 2000 acres and as good horses sell at a good price (as high as at home) about Melbourne there could be a better living made out here at breeding horses. A good draught horse trained to harness will bring about £40 and a very good one more. Good carriage horses bring full better prices than at home but bits of saddle and spring cart - horses are not worth rearing.   I'm beginning to think that if times does not improve next season it would not be a bad thing for the whole family to try their fortune in the land of the Golden Fleece. It is not such a big thing coming to Australia as home people generally think. Hoping to have your opinion on this subject...    [...] I see by the paper that Gladstone proposes to raise a loan of £200000000 to buy out the landlords. There certainly needs to be something done. People could never pay high rents at the ruling price of produce. What is your opinion at the prospect of Home Rule? The North seems to be as much against it as the rest of Ireland is for it.   I notice by the Melbourne papers that the Protestants of the North of Ireland are arming themselves with all possible haste in prospect of the Home Rule Bill passing. I suppose it is the Orangemen principally who are making this ado. I don't think the Home Rule Bill can possibly be passed. I am sorry Mr. Gladstone made such a mistake. I believe it would be a bad thing for the Protestants if it was to become law.   Regarding Home Rule it is most extraordinary how people differ at home from people out here or rather how they are situated and how they act. Every man who is over 21 and has his name registered has a right to vote at time of Parliamentary elections. Every man votes for the candidate who he believes will look after his interest irrespective of religion (save the Catholics who are greatly influenced by their ecclesiastical dignitaries as they are in Ireland).   Our present government is formed of a coalition of conservatives and liberals who act and work very well together attending to the making and amending of laws with far greater dispatch than your English parliament. Your parliament is made too much a debating society. Its members are too fond of their own aggrandizement to look after the interests of the people who the govern. Our parliament is made up of members who are paid £300 a year for making our laws and if a member returned by an constituency does not endeavour to forward the interest of their constituents he is not re-elected and his place is taken by a candidate who will. Our parliamentary term lasts only three years not seven like yours.   It is a grievous thing to think that Irishmen's bigotry should stand between men and their own interests. The only part of the Irish community who as a whole look after their own interest very closely and make use of every means in their powers is the landed proprietors. They have used with great dexterity - at the same time deceiving the world most surprisingly - the Orangemen of Ulster who unfortunately are too ignorant to perceive how they are made tools of by those who if it did not suit their interest would not strike a blow in the defence of the cause which they make such boast.   The majority of those Orangemen who talk of upholding Protestantism and Protestant Ascendancy are men who may see the inside of a church once in twelve months and though the may be strict church goers what Christianity can there be in their hearts if they persist in upholding unjust laws. If injustice is a part of Protestantism it is high time there was an indepent body of Christians. [152] [153] Injustice was the cause of Protestantism and now to uphold the same said Protestantism injustice its origin is again practised. It is evident those kind of people are of a very similar type to those who persecuted the heretics. There are a great many people who think they are fighting for God and Christianity when in truth they are fighting for their own bigoted opinion. It is so with your Orangemen. Christ did teach us oppression - quite the reverse. Then how can it be Christian to oppress.   Last Monday was Easter Monday. On Good Friday which is also a general holiday there was a picnic for the children of the Sunday School in connection with the Presbyterian Church. It was held in the Echuca park. I went down to it and joined in the fun. There was a picnic arranged for Easter Monday for teachers choir and bible class; I am not in either although I very often attend choir practise on Friday evening. I heard that I was to be invited about a week ago - I was invited on Sunday afternoon.   We all gathered at the church on Monday morning about 9a.m. and started off in 6 traps for a drive of 10 miles to the selected picnic grounds. It was a splendid day neither hot nor cold. We reached our destination all right unyoked our horses and tied them to trees and began to enjoy ourselves in real earnest. We had all sorts of games refreshed ourselves twice on the nice things the ladies had provided. We yoked up and started for home as it was beginning to get dark. There were three young ladies in our trap good singers. We sang all the way home songs hymns and all sorts. I enjoyed the day's outing immensely [...] I find the colonial lad and lass friendly agreeable free and easy and kind hearted. I have always been treated with respect by all and never got the cold shoulder because I am an Irishman. It is people's own fault if they get treated with disrespect and their conduct the cause. I think I might safely say that Easter Monday was the most agreeable day I have spent this side of the line [...]   I'm still attending the singing class and beginning to make some improvement. It is a very good way of spending one evening of the week. I have got another iron in the fire now. I was elected on the committee of the early closing association; it meets once a fortnight.   I am getting along pretty well in my crib. We have a very nice kind of a governor. I have not heard him growl at any of the hands yet. I like Echuca better than Heathcote. It is much larger and prefer it to Melbourne. One does not get to know many in a large town like Melbourne [...]   At present I am out of work and has been for the past two weeks. However I have utilized my time as best I could. I had heard that there was a very good job to be had on the new cable tramways once one could get on. I applied and was informed that I was the sort of men they wanted and if I could get a good reference from some respectable person they would give me a trial. So Mr. Agnew my old benefactor furnished me with a character that would have pleased anybody. I went for training on last Monday week and passed on my seventh day's practise. I got my certificate and was told they would send for me when the new lines opened as there are several under construction at present. It will unfortunately be three or perhaps six months before I will get on. I will be what is called engineer (a rather big word for what I will have to do). It is commonly called gripman. The tram-car is drawn by an endless rope running on underground pullies driven by a stationary engine of great power. The cable runs underneath the pavement between the runs and is caught by a grip wrought by a lever which passed down through a groove about two inches wide. The rope never stops but slips through the grip when the car is at a standstill. There are as many as 20 of these cars all on the rope at once [...]   Besides enjoying perfect health he seems to be enjoying life better than he ever did at home. However that is not to be wondered at. At home he had long hours low wages and few holidays. [155] Here he has good hours good wages and half a holiday once a week besides all other public holidays. To this I may add that he has formed a great many acquaintances some of the feminine gender who he has introduced me to are the finest I have the honour of being acquainted on this side of the line.   Echuca is a quiet country town occupying about five times as much ground as it ought compared with the number of houses and the population. It has been designed for a large town but its progress was stopped and it has greatly decreased since the railway passed over the Murray and on to Denilquin up till that time it being the terminus and a great emporium of the cattle and horse trade of New South Wales the stock being transported across the river in a boat.   The country surrounding is quite flat not as much as a mountain to relieve the eye in the distance. Although the climate is very dry there is a little tillage farming the soil being admirably suited being very rich.   Doctor Graham a medical practitioner in this town has been giving a number of lectures instructing how to attend patients in case of accidents or otherwise when a surgeon is not at hand. Hugh attended them all. They have formed a St. John's Ambulance Society. The Doctor will enter into instruction more minutely and each student or member will be furnished with a handbook with instructions how to deal with accidents etc. etc [...]    [...] Well as far as I can see it is a wise step and one which I think he will not regret. He will have a better chance of getting along here once he gets a start made. He will have a better chance of getting a good screw than he would in R. and Co's. If he comes away before the winter sets in at home he will have two summers so he will have every chance to escaping cold this Christmas.   [...] you will all have a much easier mind about James coming away than you had about us as you now know something about the place and you had very little knowledge of it then. Besides he will feel it different having someone here before him to what we did having I might say no-one. Now John and I are both in work. Then we did not know how we might fall in as to work and one of us not very able to do work of any kind. We have indeed a great deal to be thankful for. Our welfare has not consisted in abundance of riches but in the fewness of our wants which have all been liberally supplied. I hope you will all look on the brighter side of the matter. Father and mother can at least feel that they are sending a living message to their two younger sons 13000 miles away.   It is possible that James may have started before this reaches you so that any remarks or information I could give him would be too late. However I would advise him not to burden himself too much in bringing a lot of things but to leave room in his box for a couple of tins of good biscuits a few pots of jam etc. which he will find very nice on board ship. If he is fortunate enough to have any money I would recommend him not to bring it on his person but send it to one of the Melbourne banks. That can be done by going to any of the Belfast banks and depositing it and then lifting it out here. I cannot tell you how to go about this banking business but he will probably know something about it himself or can get the desired information from some of the banks. [156]  No doubt one could bring a considerable sum of money about his person in safety. Still there is some risk of losing it. When one has not the money about him (but sent on by the banking company) he has not the care of it on his mind. Of course one must carry enough to meet all expenses on the journey which often runs up more than he first counts upon. It is not wise to leave oneself bare as that sort of thing would be most awkward for one could not borrow from his neighbour when he is amongst strangers.   A soft felt or tweed hat would be the best during the entire journey. He should wear the worst suit of clothes he brings. Never mind appearances he will find many less tidy than himself on board. By the way Mary don't let him forget the sprigs of scheilleagh. I want a stick badly.   John has not had any word about his crib on the trams yet. However he is doing garden work and can wait a while. Of course the wages will be better on the trams than he now earns. He is keeping strong and now that the winter is over he will get along nicely.   [...] I have not made up my mind about going home to get an Irish wife yet. If I had been half up to snuff I would have had one on the triste and brought her out at any time. However what can't be cured must be endured so I had better look out for a Colonial I think; that is the only thing left me. By the way the Colonial girls are not to be despised and they are not half so scarce as you people at home think.   I met Miss Christy of Bangor. She lives about 15 miles from here with some friends an aunt I think. She was in the shop getting something and happened to find out who I was. We had a long chat in the course of which I could see that she lacks the polish and refinement to be found in most of the Colonial girls. However she seems to be a nice kind of young lady all the same free in her style and manner etc. etc [...]    [...] is not the delicate looking scobe he was when he left home; he is hardy looking in the face and muscular in limbs. He tells me he was something weightier some time ago but I expect he will soon pull it up again as he has got a situation with the Cable Tramway Company which is very light. He passed the examination some time ago (which he informed us). His post is engineering (as it is called) of the brakes - a very responsible position indeed and composed of the most respectable young men in Melbourne. He was changed off the dummy or engine of the tram to what is called time-keeper; this post he has had for the last week this he may be at for a fortnight a month or perhaps more. He can do with this as long as it does with him; has got nothing to do but walk up and down a footpath and see that the buses are started in proper time and that they are not overloaded. The only objection I see to the time-keeping is that the hours are late (viz. 11.15) but not long as he gets it in spells. He commences at 9.30 am relieved at 2 pm on again at 5 is allowed time for tea between that and 11.15. He (John) is still lodging with Mr. Fisher of Kew where he keeps his bees. He wants me to start and hive a lot of them for him as he has not much time at his disposal. I wanted to start right off but he insists on me going up to Echuca (pronounced Etuca) tomorrow morning Wednesday (I don't know how long I may be there perhaps until the Christmas holidays. Hugh intends taking a run down then to see his friends in Melbourne).   John came here and slept with me. He lay and talked until 4 this morning. He is troubled a little with his cough yet but nothing to signify. He is very thankful for the different nice presents sent him by his friends [...] he will write you by next mail or so; his time for writing is limited now. I went round along with John and saw Mr. Agnew and Mr. Purce his brother-in-law and partner yesterday. They were very friendly and asked me if I intended looking for a situation right off I told them I didn't mind dropping into a situation but that I intended going up country to see Hugh. They advised me to do that and not to be in too big a hurry. Mr. Purce told me that he would introduce me to Mr. Cullen the hardware partner when I returned from country and he Mr. Cullen might be able to put me on a good track. He in the meantime would keep me in his memory. This he proposed without soliciting. Of course Mr. Purce had sounded my business capacities while Mr. Agnew was engaged chatting to R. and J. Hanna who had called before us. We of course in business like manner made our visit short with promising to call when I return from Echuca.   Called with Mr. F. Crickard and delivered his stick and parcel. He was very busy and took my address and came round to Mr. McD and spent the evening with me. He is a fine chatty fellow and not the stuck up man I took him for. I am to call with him when I return as he wants me for dinner some Sunday.    [...] John gave me a trial overhauling some bee frames. He has a job that will keep me going for a fortnight if I don't get another in the hardware line. I purpose calling with Mr. Agnew tomorrow as promised. He may have an opening or know of one. I would just as soon not take crib for a fortnight but will not refuse a good thing if it turns up. [158] I am most anxious about the bees. There would be more go to loss than I could gain out of a month's screw. John dropped into this billet (our situation) (as mentioned in last letter) a month too soon but it would not wait on him [...]    [...] we purpose staying at Fisher's convenient to where the bees are or taking the house connected with the gardens the bees are in. The only inconvenience in connection with the latter is we would have to keep a housekeeper and that I would not like to risk in the hands of a stranger. If we had some trustworthy friend it would suit well.   Agnew then had a short conversation with the Company partner (Mr Cullen). I was brought forward and introduced to him. Of course I soon saw that I had been talked about before as Mr. Purce another co-partner (brother-in-law to Mr Agnew and a country man of ours) had sounded me the first day I was in. They then made me an offer viz. £2 per week to begin the following morning and I would have charge of a department after the holidays when stock would be taken so you see I have been assisting the man in charge up to Friday 24th being the day before Christmas and when I was getting paid (being only a week past on Thursday previous they paid me for a week and a half viz. £3 wasn't bad for a start was it?) Mr. Agnew fully initiated me as charge of the hardware side of that flat to commence after the holiday viz. 28th December. He told me the better I made it pay the better it was for myself and for them.   The holidays commenced on Saturday (Christmas day) and continues until tomorrow Tuesday. We will have another holiday on Saturday being the New Year. I spent Christmas quieter than usual went over to Kew and had dinner with John as I was invited by his landlady but unfortunately John had to go on duty at 2pm until 8pm. He is now on the grip (or engineer) as extra man. He had 8 runs yesterday (Sunday) and 11 for today which means about 1s. per run. He is in great spirit since he got on the dummy was dull enough at the time-keeping; the hours were too long and there was not enough of go in it for Jack. You must excuse him for not writing as he has been kept rather close to duty since I landed [...] told me you always got most letters when he was not in the best of health or when he was off for spells so from this you may conclude he is in good health when he is not writing. I did not see him yesterday but went on foot to Fitzroy this afternoon (a distance of about 2 miles) and met him on his engine a little way from the terminus and had a ride to the other end of the line with him. He could only talk to me occasionally as it is forbidden that the engineers should talk to passengers in case their attention is drawn off their duty. John says quite coolly they have to watch and not kill any of them (meaning the people. You would think it was bees he was talking about). He (John) intends taking a run round this week to try and get suitable lodgings for us both convenient to the bees. They have been neglected lately [...] you will be glad to know that all the Bangorians except George Smith and he may be into a good job but we have not heard of him. [159] R. Hanna is in a store in Paran (I think is the name) convenient to Melbourne. John Hanna is in the same house as myself. D. McClintock is in one of the stations I think Spencer Street station. S. Cullough went away last week to a crib near Sydney; so far we have been fortunate.   [...] it would appear it is paying well; if I were her I would not confine myself at that sort of thing; it is quite too confining for her constitution [...] it is right enough for the two old people and it may be right enough for her providing she works at it to rest herself from other work. I am sure Mary has too much to do [...] I fancy I see her sluching about the back-door in mud and water.   Footscray August 18th. '87   My Dear Friend Lar   You will no doubt think myself amongst the many friends you have got in Australia very ungrateful for not corresponding with you more regularly. Long may be the hour my Dear Old Friend from me when fond recollections of you all & Dear Old Ireland shall cease & when I repeat this I hope you will consider me sincere. We received a very fond & affectionate letter from Kate of Farside this past week & were very glad to learn from it of you all being engoying good health.   I may mention also that we had the pleasure of a visit from a portly Son of Erin one W. Cotter who put in an apperance about 9 o'c. p.m. when we were just thinking of easing our weary frames. We were taken by surprise at his marshal bearing accompanied by a magnificent Black Thorn the gift of a lady friend to me & one which shall be dearly cherished by me as long as I live. Johney has it hung up in his own room & sometimes flourishes it with as much pride as the heroes of Old times did at Donnybrook fair. He gave us a lot of useful information or rather pleasant information about many things but supplied us with the sad news of the passing away of many of the Dear Friends & grand Old Neighbours of Lurrig Castlemary & Ancient Cloyne also the N. League the tyrany of Landlords the depression in trade the failure of crops the competition from other lands all all he says (which is very true) has a strong tendancy to Keep in subjection the hard wrought tenant farmers of Ireland. I think He will be safe enough out here. We are going to have a little party of our own out here next Sunday a genuine Irish one. Katy Murphy promised to come also one Miss O Brien sister to poor O Brien one of the Manchester Martyrs in honour of whom you & I walked many a mile in proscession about twenty years ago. They are all doing very well out here they are Contented & happy. John & Family are all well as is Pat & Mike. He is still at the same buisness in town & doing very well.   With regard to myself I cannot say much but I may mention that I got a very good job about two years ago & which I hold still in the Melbourne Cattle market as Yardsman counting out Cattle & sheep. W. Cotter was out one day with me & was surprised at the Quality & quantity of stock about 40000 sheep & 2000 head of Cattle every week. All the meat supply of Melbourne is disposed of in these markets they are all sold by salesmen. There is no hard work attached to it only to be careful in the count so as everybody will get their own.   How I came by this I will just mention. A Russian scare took place here. I was then eight years in the Melbourne Harbour Trust a body similarly constituted to the Cork Harbour Board & with many others I was told if I did not put on the red & blue I would be disrated or discharged. [264] About one hundred joined six were discharged & I was taken from a easy post & put to hard work again a thing I would not do. So in the presence of Turks Jews & Gentiles John Bull's Germans & all others I pitched the Queen & all Her followers to Hell & left. Of course I was called a dynamitard but what did I care. I was & is still thinking that considering the cruel manner in which poor Ireland is used no Irishman should be so mean as to assist Queen Vic in any shape or form. But as I said before Dear Lar I do not care. The Youngsters are growing up well educated with pure Irish blood running in their veins with one of the best Mothers in Victoria to steer them through a virtuous life. Why should I be dismayed. I got this job I mentioned & is now better of than ever I was in my life & so are all the rest of my old associates who left the Harbour Trust with me.   Johney is getting on first class at College in Melbourne. He is surprising the Jesuit Fathers in there. He is so clever. A neighbour a woman who is very fond of Kate asked Him a few days ago what He intended doing with Himself. He replied He would yet be a member of Parliament in Ireland.   We are just after receiving a letter from Kate of Farside. She mentioned many things about home & how you all were situated. We all here were very glad when we heard you were all well in the Dear Old Spot where we first saw the light of God's own day & breathed the pure air of the beautiful atmosphere of them grand Old hills in the background & of the fertile valley in the front. It grieves us very much to hear of the terrible devastation of the Country. Myself & Pat often come to the conclusion that nothing will save Ireland but a home legislature or otherwise a war that will rake Ingland from one of her dominions to the other. May God send either of the two if it would have for its affect the saving of poor helpless Irish families.   Well Dear Lar we could not help laughing when the New Chum (as a new arival is called out here) told us that Garret Barry was married to the fifth wife. Why we all agreed that He had some systematic manner of doing away with them. Surely if they all lived He would have as large a harem as the Grand Turk if there were no law. Poor Tim Aherne who remained longer than either of us had the illuck of losing his wife. We were surprised to hear that three Scannells were still in the farm & Ned Fitzgerald being married at the back of the Hag-g-art or farm yard with James as his foreman & often thought most of these were away long ago but it seems they are still hanging on.   I forgot to mention that Kate comes very heavy on the stepmother. Well She may have good cause no doubt Her Father appears to be very distant with you well that should not be. I think You were always a good Friend to Him far more so than He was to you. I never cared much for Him although I believe Him to be a very respectable man but I suppose other powers are brought to bear on His good intentions & causes a sad change oftentimes in Him who would be as good a Brother I believe as any you have got if only left to Himself. [265] But that is not so because your nearest Friends out here think more about your little finger than of his whole frame. She also appears to think that She will be sent for again. So far I am not in a position to say anything on that matter as I believe the question is to be considered at a meeting of the full house here. You can tell Her Kate is going to write to Her concerning it. I think She acted very unwise in not coming before. It may be very hard for a young person like her to travel alone & of course it is. The greatest difficulty a young woman would have is in going to London & getting on board a ship but after that She would be all right. Her uncles & aunt was very much dissapointed in She not coming. I Knew from the tone of Her first letter after receiving the ticket that She would not be allowed to come. I Know it's very hard for Her to bear up against the combined force of Her Stepmother & stepbrother why she should have the wit & ability of Bidy Moriarty who once encountered the great Daniel O Connell on the Quay of Dublin to stand them both but if She is possessed of the same luck & stern nerve of her namesake She will surely hold out a little longer.   We have had a grand season in Victoria this year & sheep & cattle are coming in rolling fat big heavy weight Bullocks fetching only at the rate of one pound per Cwt & best Quality sheep about twelve shillings per head. The only thing that brings a high price is veal. Butter is also very dear in Winter & so are eggs the former as high as 2 / 6 lb & the latter 2 / per dozen. Beacon is also dear as high as 10 pence per lb. Butter & eggs we do have plenty of our own & you Know already the sort of butter Kate is Capable of manifacturing. I always introduce it to my Friends as Cork's first Quality.   Well my Friend there may be very many items in this that may be of no interest to you but however it may have the effect of a Friendly chat between yourselves in that grand Old Homestead wherein once resided a pure & unconquered Patriot very near a Century ago & which in latter days gave birth to honorable & warm hearted Men & Women. Though it's sad to part with such Friends Still it will be a consolation for you all to Know that they are all happy out here away from perhaps tyranical landlords & Irish Bailiffs. Glorious My Dear Old Friend Glorious it would appear to us if you all in Ireland were possessed of the same amount of freedom that we have out here & without which no people can be prosperous but I hope a change will soon take place. Things cannot continue as they are much longer if the situation is not altered then I pity the poor starving Children of Erin.   I now consider I am pretty well advanced with what I had to say & it now only remains for me to ask of you to sometimes see my Dear Old Father who now must be fast & I am sure is preparing for I hope a happy Eternity. [266] Utter to Him & Sisters a few words of Consolation & advice & ask of them to remember your humble Friend who is far away in Australia together with his Care in their prayers & I am sure your entreaty will have the desired effect because with all my faults & I Know I had many I believe they do still think of me. Tell them that Johney promised me He would Come from Queensland but has not arrived yet. I think He will soon Come. Ask Mary My sister to write to me its many years since She wrote to me now. Tell Her that She is always somehow in my memory if you like you can give this to Her to read & I will soon write to Her.   Now I will draw to a close by asking you to remember us all fondly to your Mother Bridget & Mrs Quirk & family to all the Old neighbours who may enquire about our welfare to My Father & Sisters in Castlemary & - Good Bye My Dear & affectionate Friend & if we all never again shall have the pleasure of meeting here below I hope we shall in the Glorious Land of Promise.   From your Unalterable Friend Phil Mahoney   Mr. L. Shanahan   Lurrig Tell mother we are just after receiving Her letter -   I was thinking you would been married by this time that you could have sent Doley out to me. Ned Heggan was saying that it was near time I had my speal of her; you were saying that Aunt Marget is going to America. I wish she would come to me but it is a long way but I could give her a good home. James is married and William will be in lodgings; she would suit me very well; she might not care for so quiet a place as farming in the bush of Australia. I do all my owen cooking; it takes up a good deal of my time; she would be comfortable and would like the climat very well and I believe her and I would get along very well; if she is not gone away you might see what she would think of it; she will think it rather unkind of me never writing to her.   I feel in a difficulty when I try to tell you everything in the way of advice. In the first place I fear you should not feel at home or happy in any other calling then the one you are in so long as you are able to discharge the duties pertaining to it.   And I also see the difficulty of combining it with any other so as to make both contribute to your support and that of your family. Then again supposing that you decided that it is your duty to abandon the work of the Ministry in order to make better provision for your family the most promising thing for you and that which you could best do would be to go back into the country and purchase or select a block of land 2 or 3000 acres or more on which you could do a little cultivation and graze on the remainder. But would that be the kind of life you would chose for your family or would they like it.   You might be within an hour's ride of your nearest neighbour and 3 or 4 times that distance from the nearest school and that not much good if there was one in the district at all. You might have no church unless you made it in your own house and as to society you can judge.   Accepting these drawbacks (as most people would reckon them) and have a fair amount of capital to start with success financially is pretty certain.   I have often thought such a life much more natural than the way we do live packed together in large towns. It is certainly more patriarchal.   But are there no other modes of living open to a man like me beside going and getting buried alive in the bush? There are and some of our ministers here who have become unfit for the active work but who have physical strength and mental energy are going well as insurance agents and in business [...] that sort of thing would allow you to live in the heart of the community near to the best schools and colleges and where you could preach as often as you liked for nothing. And you might get something for preaching too; it often happens that a new district wants developing and a circuit does not wish to take the responsibility of going to conference for a young man which means a married man after 4 years but to pay £100 or £150 to a good local man or superannuated man for doing the work. And besides there would be opportunities for the young ladies if so disposed to earn some money by teaching either privately or in some of the schools or colleges. Or another way which I suppose most people would call best of all if you had sufficient money to invest you could live on the profits and just do as much good as you could and in any way you pleased.   There is a very much better return for money invested or lent here than in your country. Banks give from 5 to 6 per cent and building societies which are as safe as banks give 7 per cent for money deposited for 12 months. But capitalists can often find customers for money at 10 or 12 per cent with ample security.   I do not know if I can say anything more that might assist in deciding as to your course. I do not know what amount of capital you could bring with you nor do I know if you have any right conception of the character of a new country like this or America. I know that the whole thing was a surprise to me [...]   I am glad I came for several reasons and I still believe it to be in many respects the best country under the sun. [57] Yet when all that is said many come here and are disappointed not finding a niche into which they can fit themselves and where they have the means sometimes after wasting time and money return to the old land.   I had half a notion all along that he would get a start there even before I advised James to come here. No doubt you will all think this is a fine flowery land this Australia when one can get into a situation so soon. Well all that I can say is that some people are not so fortunate in falling into a crib as James has been. You will also be made aware of the fine screw that John now gets. Things were not always so bright. A great deal is owing to dogged perserverance [...]   I am very sorry to know that things keep so dull and the prospect so bad. However I hope you will be able to tide over the bad times if all goes well etc. In compliance with mother's request I forward a little money to James which he will forward from Melbourne when he writes. It is all I can spare as we have had a lot to do with our savings. I need not begin to enumerate them but they have been greater I daresay than you would naturally think. Our bee scheme has incurred a great many necessary expenses and up to the present we have had no return. I hope however that that will go all right bye and bye.   We would like very much to select a farm (that is an unimproved piece of land in the natural bush) as the tram work may or may not suit John's health for any length of time so that he would have something to fall back on in the case of being unable to carry on the tram work. However at present funds will not allow of that so we cannot venture it yet a bit. I hope we will eventually be able to carry out our plans in that direction.   Tell Susanna I am very sorry that I can't undertake to do any collecting or even give a subscription to the funds of the bazaar of which the gentleman Mr. Coates (I think the name is I don't happen to know him) speaks of sending out collecting books. The people have to give a good deal to local churches hospitals and charities and some of them do not get their money as easily as Mr. Coates may imagine.   Enclosed please find Post Office order of £7 which Hugh sent me to forward to you payable at the Belfast Post Office same as the last which I hope went all right. I would liked to have made it out £10 but neither John nor I had it to spare. [160] John has not been working on the trams since the second week in January so you see money is not as flush with us as it would have been had it been otherwise.   John had to give up the time-keeping owing to the hours being long and late. Then he was on the tramcar for a fortnight the time of the holidays which ended his work on the trams until a new line is opened up which may not take place for another month or so. He is going into town tomorrow to ascertain if there is any new hands wanted. You will be glad to hear that John and I are stopping together since 1st February [...] tell Susanna I will not be able to do anything in the way of collecting money for a bazaar. I need not tell you that collecting money is a thing I don't care for and besides I have little to spare myself. The church that John is in connection with is building a new one so they can do with a subscription from both of us.   Robbie Hanna was here spending the day with us last Sunday. He told me he had got a book sent by Mrs. Furey. He has been round with Mr. Agnew and Mr. Purse. They gave him £1 each. He has several other pounds.    [...] I was very sorry to see by Mary's letter that things look so bad at home. It has ever been Hugh and my great [ambition?] to try and take up some land with the hope of bettering our position and perhaps opening a way for you all out here seeing things do not improve at home but unfortunately it has not been our luck. It requires capital and we have not that at our disposal owing to ill-health and other disappointments but we hope ere next year to be able to take up an allotment so as to enable us to establish bee - farming on a very extensive scale to which could be added other industries [...]   I ask you to rejoice to know that we are in a country that we have a show (a chance) to make men of ourselves. I know I feel a better man today than ever I did within the last three years.   Tramcar engineering is a pretty difficult job and requires a good deal of care strength quickness and judgement but practise has made me pretty proficient in the management of my little train. There was at least one accident a week these last three or four. The other night a drunken man was knocked down and crushed; he almost died immediately. I have been pretty lucky not having hurt or killed anybody for so far. However I had one accident by a horse shying and running against the front of my dummy.   The trains consists of a dummy and large sized tramcar very similar to the ones in Belfast only they are better got up. The dummy is the car which is in front and to which the car is coupled. It has seats all round very much like an Irish jaunting car. There is a seat across in front and behind exactly the same (either ends being front or rear according to which ways it is running - if it runs east the end which is the front was the back when running west). The side seats sit over the wheels exactly the same an Irish jaunting car. The grip space inside of which are the levers for starting and stopping the motion of the train there is room enough for a dozen persons to stand but nothing but the engineer is allowed in it except the conductor when collecting fares[...]  It is pleasant work along clear streets but where there is much traffic it is very troublesome [...]    [...] since the last time I wrote home we have had uncommonly wet weather. The roads in this district are like ploughed fields. There is no gravel within 40 miles or more of here. Therefore the roads are merely beaten tracks fenced in. They do very well in our dry climate in the summer time and dry weather but when we get much rain like what we have had the last 4 weeks the are almost impassable.   [...] on Wednesday evening next there is to be a social ball in connection with the Half-Holiday Association. It is expected to be a very nice turnout. All the shop people who are interested in the half-holiday movement turn out to it besides a great many of the general public. Of course there are any amount of nice young ladies in Echuca so one has not much difficulty in getting a partner. Echuca is very dull without something of this sort to enliven it up.   we have great illuminations here on Jubilee week. There was a bullock and three sheep roasted whole in the park and the meat was divided among poor people.    [...] the affair came off with great eclat. The young ladies many of whom are subscribers to the Association's funds turned out in full evening dress and I must say that I have not seen anything to equal the style even at home. You must understand that the Victorian young ladies are as a rule highly accomplished and well educated. They also know how to dress with taste and to advantage. Neither is there any scarcity of them as is generally supposed at home. I might say that at our social we had more ladies than gentlemen   William again asked my opinion regarding his coming out here as he is frightened to risk another winter on the breadcarts. You can see by the already mentioned that we have got cold weather here as well as at home but the atmosphere is much clearer. I would rather not give any advice to William further than what I have done as there is a second party interested in the matter viz. Sarah and that is my reason for not advising him for or against. If I did it would simply be a repetition of what I have already told him in a former letter. If he came out here or any other person they have to run the risk of getting a situation to suit them. Some are very fortunate and others are not but a man or woman that is willing to take a turn at anything for a time has never any reason to cry want. Although times are dull here at present yet there is always work for a man with a willing mind. But men of capital have a better chance here than a man that is depending on his work graft.   I believe if we had enough money to give us a start in a store up country that we could do well yet I have no reason to grumble and I may here mention that I don't regret coming out as regards money matters. Of course the mind often wanders back to the old home and home has always its tighes.  If he comes he must come with the intention to rough it for a bit and at any rate. I earn £2 12s. a week but if I do I work sixty hours a week for it and has only one holiday every three weeks - at it both Sundays and weekdays. Another thing William could not get a job like mine for he is too old; 35 is the age you must be under but he could earn from a pound to 25s. and board at ploughing.   Of course a man like him would get plenty of work with the farmers at about £1 a week and board all the year round but he would have to be like any other serving man.   The climate up country (that is inland) is much better than in and around Melbourne. The Melbourne climate is very changeable. We have spring summer and winter weather all in one day sometimes. [163] The heat is very great in some parts except the cool parts of Gippsland [...]   Times seem pretty bad at present all over the world. Melbourne although much better than the adjacent colonies has at present a great slackness in almost every branch of business. There have been great meetings of the unemployed these last few days. Of course all first class men get employment pretty easily but the country contains a good many who if knocked out of their usual way have not the aptitude to turn their hand to something else. Besides there are a great many good for nothing sort of folks. These folks expect to have work at as good wages as others who are worth their wages.   Last winter the unemployed of Melbourne were given work by the government. They were quite insulted on being offered 4s. a day for breaking stones. Probably something like that will be done for them this winter. You see our government looks better after the working man than they do at home.   As every man has a vote in this country and as our members of parliament are paid £300 a year the members of parliament are very careful to keep the favour of the working men. You see the unemployed receive a good deal of sympathy with their fellow working people consequently the above result   I'm glad to inform you that John has got changed into another line. It goes out to Clifden Hill a very nice and healthy suburb. We will be able to live together there if we can get our ideas carried out. Mrs. Welby the woman whom I am staying with has sold this cottage and purposes taking a cottage at Clifden Hill to suit us. John is anxious for this and so am I as she is a very nice person and tuckers well I may here tell you that I have eaten more flesh meat since I came to the colony than I did in two years at home. I have a plate of nice porridge and new milk every morning except Sunday and a nice chop or fresh fish or rabbit with tea and toast [...]   he gives the landlady the extra 2s. so that he can have anything he fancies such as a couple of raw eggs beat up in tea coffee or milk when he is going to bed or working late. He has been on the late shift this week and has not done till 11.30pm; pretty late isn't it? But again he does not start until 11.00 o'clock when on this shift. I generally take him in a good plate of porridge and he has that in bed. Then he has a snooze rises at 10 has breakfast and goes to work and knocks off at about 4 or 4.30 for a spell has dinner returns to work at 6.30. The night work is not good for him. I am surprised to see how he stood the winter and a pretty severe one too. I believe if he had only to work during the day that he would get rid of his cough [...] We three are trying to save what money we can as we purpose investing in a farm or select. We have been getting information from a young man from Derry (Ireland) who has taken up a selection and I intend when on my holidays going to see the country where land is available and convenient to where this young man has selected. [164] If it was a good bee country they would be a good industry.   I shall not dwell further on the subject as I cannot say much about it until I see the place. John intends sticking to the tram company until he runs a bit of a cheque together. If the land already mentioned is not selected or taken up the opportunity slips and in a few years good land will not be to had in a reasonable distance from a railway or township.   The already mentioned regarding land we wish to be kept among yourselves strictly secret.    [...] I hope and speak the sentiments of the others when I say we hope that you look on yesterday a year ago and yesterday 4 years ago with joy and not with sorrow. We ask you all to rejoice to know that we are spared to prosper in the land of our adoption notwithstanding the little difficulties we have had to contend with. We feel thankful that our position is improved although the home tithes binds us to friends much dearer than any in this side of the globe.   [...] he says he is much disappointed with the country; there is many a one like him. Their idea of the country is that they have nothing to do but walk into a large store and ask for a situation believing that they have little or nothing to do and get a large salary. This is a very erroneous idea. Situations are hard to get especially in Melbourne being overrun with people from other colonies and when a situation is obtained you have got to work pretty hard at least harder than Sam was ever used to in the old country. For my part I don't think I've got to work as hard as I did at Riddels. The only drawback here (or at least in Agnew's) is that the discipline is bad.    [...] I am now in a position to state that I in fact we have no reason to regret coming to Victoria as far as prospects are concerned. I have not the least doubt that we all will get along better than if we had remained at home. Of course there are social disadvantages such as not being near the rest of you and not being able to see you all occasionally.    [...] I feel sure that if the whole family could have come and taken up selections and used the same industry they have done at home that in the course of 10 or 15 years or perhaps less they would be worth a bit more money than they would be at home or I may say the land would be worth the money for in the course of 10 years land will not be to had and in this way its value will increase.   We don't know what William is likely to tackle first. Our idea is stock raising and if we can get things to our minds we will give it a trial. Of course it is up hill work for a year or two but if a man is able to hold his own for the first 3 years he may consider himself pretty safe and after that with the improvements that is put on the land is worth a bit of money. You see the Government pays as high as £10 per acre for improvements.   The great drawback here with farmers or people that pretend to be farmers or stock raisers is that more than the half of them knows nothing whatever about it; thus they are kept feeling their way for years. I firmly believe if William gave it a trial that he would succeed unless he is much changed from what he used to be.   I am sure you are all busy preparing for them starting. I have just been speaking to Mrs. Welby our landlady and making arrangements for William and Sarah. She Mrs. W shall be very glad to accommodate them. They will feel more at home with us than with strangers and Mrs. Welby will be nice company for Sarah and the little one until they get settled. I will write to Adelaide so that they will get instructions three days before they arrive at Williamstown Melbourne. The Hanna family and us have arranged to go and welcome them.   10 November [...] we are glad that William is leaving Newtownards. I never liked the idea of him going round and serving the bread.   She should have never been out of the asylum. James and I went and got her fixed in a place at 8s. per week with a woman that kept boarders and we have not heard anything of her since. I have written to James to go and try and find where she is as she would soon go through her £5. I had to give her money when she landed and James paid her train up to Melbourne.   The landlady Miss Reiley is North of Ireland has lived near Carrickfergus and in Belfast; is about 7 years in Victoria. She is a music teacher as well as keeping boarders; is an old maid or at any rate a bit on the shelf; is rather peculiar looking but is very attentive to the boarders - that's the main thing.   [...] it was arranged that two of our party viz. Frank and Eddie Beggs would start on Friday morning with a trap and convey the victuals and 3 tents one of which was large enough to accommodate 14 ladies and the other two were for the gents. Our friends did not get to the arranged camping ground until the following evening owing to the state of the roads. The remainder of the party went by rail to Lilydale thence coach to Fernshaw a distance of 15 miles [...] the place selected for camping was on the side of the Black Spur Mountain.   1887. May 18  At 4.55 p.m. bade farewell to Flory (who came with me to the train) and started for Albury. - In the carriage besides myself were an elderly gentleman a young man who looked like a bank clerk a very handsome young lady of 28 and a little girl of 10. - Fell into a train (an abstract not a railway train) of melancholy musing - then into a doze - wakened up by guard shouting out "Twenty minutes here for refreshments." - Found I was at Seymour - went into refreshment room and had tea and bread and butter: paid 1s / 6d for same. Got into train again and away we went. - Fell into conversation with old gentleman - talked 16 to the dozen on political social personal etc. etc. topics - Old gentn. very intelligent and well informed - After a long talk told him who I was - expression of great surprise and pleasure at meeting the far-famed Journalist and Historian of Australasia - he said he had been hearing of me reading me and talking about me for 30 years - told me he was Mr Beeby a sawmiller of Corowa in N.S.W. - Gave me a hearty invitation to go and stay with him for a month - plenty of good shooting etc. etc. - Promised him I would go when I could find time - Beeby got out at Wangaratta. [187]  All this time a violent flirtation going on between young lady and gentleman - took them to be a newly married couple out for the honeymoon - little girl asleep I having made up a bed for her with the rug - after a while discovered that the young flirts had quarrelled - he went to one side of the carriage and stuck his head out of the window she came over and sat down by me - began to abuse young gentn. as being a brainless fellow very conceited etc. etc. - said she had been listening to my conversation with old gentn. - began to pile on the flattery - said I did not look more than 50 and would never believe I was 75 - hinted that she was not married and would be only too happy to have a gentn. for a husband of exactly my age appearance and size - said she thought a Travelling Technological Commissioner must be a very high and mighty Personage with more to the same effect - ended up with fairly popping the question to me!!! - I was in the very act of telling her I should give the question into my most serious consideration when the train came to a dead-stop and guard shouted "Albury" - awfully glad to hear the sound - shook hands with my ardent admirer (whose name I never asked) took up my traps and bolted - train started - and my fair postulant vanished with it into space - Walking to my hotel recollected that she had never enquired whether I was married or single! - Taken all round this was the most surprising illustration of feminine bashfulness and reserve I have ever encountered in all my life - Got to my hotel (the Globe) and so to bed. [...]  Albury to Sydney  May 20th  Wrote up my diary and posted it with the 2 newspapers containing the puffs for home - had much pleasant talk with Mr Plouskowski and a young squatter (married and from Melbourne) named Johnson.  - At 2.45 started in the slow train for Sydney.  With a resolute purpose of escaping the importunate flattery and offers of marriage of handsome young ladies of 28 who may be running about in railways in search of matrimony I got into the smoking carriage first class. - Memo. As my free pass had not come the polite stationmaster at Albury wired to his Superintendent for leave to pass me on and passed on I was accordingly. - Several civil fellows in the carriage with me who got out at intervals at passing stations and were replaced by others equally civil - much talking some joking not very much smoking.  Country travelled over before dusk rather uninteresting and too well known to require describing afresh - was almost startled when I found myself crossing the Murrumbidgee. [188]  As night came on talk slackened and smoking increased - to keep up the sociality I rattled off no end of jokes and anecdotes mostly drawn from the old and well-worn lecture on "National Wit and Humour" - never heard fellows roar with laughter as they did the jokes being evidently new to them - towards midnight wrapped myself in the rug - night not very cold - dropped asleep at 1.30 and awoke feeling strange and chilled at 5.30 - raw morning after a rainy night - everything seemed confused when about 7.30 we reached Sydney - genial fellow-passenger hired a hansom cab (there seem to be none but hansom cabs in Sydney) and took me and my traps to the Metropolitan Hotel in Castlereagh Street (corner of King St) - had breakfast a wash and so to bed.  Got up at 11.30 - dressed and went out to have a first look at Sydney - did not at all recognise the old Sydney which I knew in 1850 - 51 - was struck at once with the stamp of inferiority to Melbourne in everything: streets people buildings etc. - city seems to have been stuck down "every which way" - no regularity no straight lines of grand buildings as in Melbourne - people all common-looking - could not see the pretty faces that were common enough when I was courting Mamma in 1850 - some of the public buildings very fine but all in such bad situations that they don't show out to advantage. [...]  After dinner went for a stroll through the city until tea-time - resolved as it was Saturday and I was still in a rather limp condition from the 16 1/2 hours in the railway train that I would not show myself to any of my grand friends till Monday morning - Nesbit went with some friends to the Agricultural Show at Moore Park so I was alone - did not meet a soul I knew except the lad who shaved and trimmed me up generally in a barber's shop in George Street who knew me well in Melbourne - paid 1s / 3d for the barbering - told the barber that the last time I paid 5d. for a shave in the same shop (or one near it) in the same street was in Decr. 1851 - Barber stared at me as if I had two heads on me - came across a mean and shabby place called the Haymarket where a very poor sort of a Paddy's Market was going on - everybody looked poor and miserable not jolly and happy as in the Eastern Market in Melbourne on a Saturday night.  Strolled along George Street which I could not recollect - admired the English cathedral and Town hall but both badly situated - was deafened with the noise of the tramcars and omnibuses - tried to find the spots (sacred to memory!) where I first saw walked with preached to courted and proposed to Mamma: but could not find one of them - returned to tea at 6 - found Nesbit awaiting me - after tea sat in the smoking room chatting till 9 when he went - encountered my old acquaintance Habbe the scene painter - had a long talk with him - he had with him a Dane (who talks good English) who is going to England to give evidence in the case of the Claimant he (the Dane) having sailed with him in the Osprey in 1852 - to bed at 12 in good health and spirits thanks to God! [189]  In Sydney Once More  May 22nd - Sunday  A glorious morning all Australian sunshine and balmy airs - awoke wonderfully refreshed after a good night's rest and feeling as young as I felt 37 years ago in this very same Sydney - can it be that I am actually an "old fogey" of 67? [...]  After dinner went down to the quay and went on board the Clontarf steamboat for a trip round the harbour (ticket is.) - fell into conversation with an old sea-captain from Cork - he pointed out to me all the notable spots in the harbour; e.g. the spot where O'Farrell shot the Duke of Edinburgh the old captain being at the moment in the marquee into which the Prince was carried; the place where the Dun-bar was wrecked; Wentworth's house at Vaucluse Dalley's house at Manley Beach and other notable mansions - old sea-captain said he had seen all the fine harbours in the world and that Port Jackson is out of all sight the finest. I fully believed him. Viewed simply as one of Nature's works it is a masterpiece - I should dearly love to explore it in company with all my loved ones at home Dr Bevan and John Ruskin. (Mem. - Perhaps I shall some day.)  After tea wrote up diary and composed a sonnet - meditated deeply over my past life which really began here in Sydney in 1850 and ended on the mournful 24th January 1887 - In this subdued but serene frame of mind went quietly to bed - have thus been two whole days in Sydney and as yet have not met anybody from Melbourne.  May 23rd  Another splendid morning - after breakfast went to call on Sir Henry Parkes at the Treasury - found the old man with his lion-like head and shaggy gray mane seated at the Premier's table with a wilderness of papers and official documents scattered about him - had a hearty reception from him but only stayed a few minutes as he was in the full swing of work - left him and walked about the city till dinner time - Wynyard Square very fine as a small city park - amazing expansion of the city since I left it in Decr. 1851 - recollect the site where Wynyard Square now stands an open waste dirty and cheerless surrounded in part by ranges of filthy old shanties fallen to ruin which were I believe a female penitentiary in the early days - the change is from a pigstye to a palace. [190]  Dined and then dressed for the levee - a great crowd there as I thought but newspapers reported it a small number only - the usual display of showy official costumes; officers naval and military University dons with trencher caps judges in horsehair and ermine barristers and clergymen aldermen in knee-breeches and silk stockings and some hundreds of common citizens in swallow-tail coats (myself one of them) looking as dignified as they each knew how - had a pleasant smile and hearty shake of the hand from Lord Carrington a bright-looking handsome man in gorgeous apparel - thought he looked at me and pressed my hand as if he meant to say "Mr Blair I have heard your distinguished name before." But this is only my own egregious vanity of course - met at the levee only two persons who recognised me; many persons looked at me dubiously as much as to say "Think I have seen you before somewhere." Well I have been there once or twice in my time.  At the levee shook hands with the Premier and walked with him and the Ministry to the Treasury an imposing building just outside the gate of Government House - Premier introduced me to two of his colleagues Mr Roberts Post-Master General and Mr Abigail: the former a youngish good-looking man with a cheerful face; the other a small limping man with a keenly intellectual face but not in any way notable - both very civil - Noticed at the levee the gorgeous liveries of the footmen: crimson plush breeches white silk stockings blue swallow-tailed coats with enormous buttons etc. - were I to meet one of these Magnificent Personages alone by himself walking along the streets I should take him to be the Lord High Admiral of Corea at the very least - walking back from the levee admired the beauty of the matchless situation with the superb views of the Harbour the luminous skies the ultramarine tint of the water contrasting with the deep green of the brushwood on the shores - Garden Island Pott's Point Fort Denison etc. etc. - "Where all save the spirit of Man is divine" - not that the Sydneyites are any worse than their neighbours.  May 24th  Queen's birthday: all Sydney keeping holiday - weather divine - rambled about after breakfast admiring the bunting-covered ships in the harbour - cannons firing - street thronged with people but the crowd much more commonplace in appearance than the Melbourne one - soldiers marching with bands playing to grand review at Moore Park - called in at Treasury - found that Parkes had gone to review with Governor - sat for a while in Chief Secretary's library dipping into some of the new books - stood on the balcony outside admiring the superb scenery - went over the Executive Council chamber: very fine with splendid ornaments statues vases etc. etc. - sat in the Governor's and the Chief Secretary's chairs - Treasury chambers really grand as the work-rooms of a Government ruling a great nation ought to be. [191]  Left the Treasury and walked into Hyde Park - magnificent change since I lodged here at this house No. 1 Burdekin Terrace in 1850! - I was then a bachelor very enthusiastic deeply religious full of intellectual and religious fervour an omnivorous reader utterly careless about worldly affairs or personal prospects taking Our Blessed Lord's injunctions to His disciples in all their literal meaning. Yet I have survived through 37 years of the battle of life!  And here it was I first met Annie and fell at once and for life deeply in love with that beautiful girl with the loveliest face I ever saw in my life and who for 36 years (time of courtship included) was my more than other self; for whom alone I lived and having lost her have lost all desire to live. Here is the very green sward upon which we were wont to walk upon sunny afternoons and moonlight nights talking of life and love and God and Heaven. There is the street up which I was accustomed to turn my steps as regularly every evening I set out from my solitary room to visit the cottage on the Surry Hills. There still stands the side-wall of the cottage that marked the corner of the street in which lived my Annie - my Annie even then - and by which waymark I could find my road on even the darkest nights. But the cottage itself is no longer there and the spot is altogether changed in aspect. A new world and I a solitary lingerer from the old world that has vanished for ever! Here was the very spot then the little garden of the cottage in which I first declared my deep passion and was accepted and the first kiss of engagement was given and taken! Ah me! What a throng of memories crowd upon my mind whilst on this sacred spot I stand and meditate of times and joys departed! Two things only stand conspicuously out amidst the thronging multitude of recollections: the first is how amazingly beautiful She was; and the second how passionately I loved Her. Dear and sainted Annie! Never did I meet a second woman in all my long life who awoke in me even the semblance of the same deep absorbing passion nor a woman whom as I have always felt since first I looked upon your lovely and lustrous countenance I should have asked to be my wife. The universe for me possessed only one Annie Grant; and there never was nor will be another. [192]  But these thoughts are too deep and too sacred for utterance in words. Silence and Thought alone are fitting here. Ah me!  In the afternoon I calmed my mind by taking a second trip round the Harbour in company with Mr Callaghan of Melbourne whom I met on the quay: and so back to the hotel to dinner and to bed.  Wrote up my diary in the morning and posted it - After luncheon went to the Treasury and had a long chat with my old friend Parkes. He gave me a commission to visit all the public institutions in N.S.W. and asked me to come and dine with him next day at his house in Parramatta. Stopped with him - he putting off all public business and refusing to see any of his numerous callers for as he said the pleasure of talking freely with D.B. - Left him setting to work again at 4.30 p.m. - Strolled about the domain (an unrivalled park!) - Mused on the glorious afternoons long long ago when I wandered here enraptured in company with Her. - After tea went to the old School of Arts where I lectured in 1850 and read till 10 o'clock - (Memo. The old institution is still substantially the same primitive place it was 37 years ago. The Sydneyites are not now and never were an intellectually cultured people.) - back to hotel and to bed.  had got leave of absence owing to not being very well; he was troubled with his liver and kidneys. I left here on a Wednesday morning and got into Melbourne at half past eleven same morning. John and me started for Sale Gippsland by the early train on Thursday; arrived there about 1 o'clock; took the boat which plys on the Gippsland lakes between Sale and Bairnsdale. There are three lakes which we pass through on the trip. We arrived at Bairnsdale about 8.30 pm stopped there all night and started next day at 7.30pm by coach for a small township called Bruthen; arrived there about 10 o'clock same evening. [167] On Saturday morning we again started by coach at 5 o'clock and got to Tambo Crossing at 9 o'clock in time for breakfast. We were now at our journey's end. We soon found Mr. Wilson the young man that has taken up a block of land there. John and I started off to have a look at the lands available for selection. We were rather disappointed as we found it all extremely hilly indeed mountainous in some places.   I was obliged to return on my homeward journey on Monday afternoon so had I only Saturday Sunday and Monday morning to look around but in that time we came across nothing sufficiently tempting. John stayed behind for a couple of days or so to have a further look but I am inclined to think he would come across nothing to suit.   There was a strike with the tram men and John of course was one of the ones that struck but as the majority were not true to each other and went crawling back to work before they were three days out the Company (or employers) has the best of it. [168] The best of the men resigned and said they would not go back to work under the old rules so John was one of these men that stuck true to his colours and true to his fellowman. He John did not intend staying longer on the trams than about a couple of months as the late hours seemed to knock him out of tune and the dust made him cough more than he would do otherwise. He has gone up to Yackandandah to Mr. George Reid's and will go on from that to Robert Reid's at Kiewa River. He purposes riding from that to Barnawartha to see William and his household being a distance of 15 or 20 miles I believe. He may drop into some sort of work up there for a few months that will suit him better than the trams. If he gets the selection he will have to go to it in about 6 months.   I had a letter from him a week ago in which he says he is in pretty good health. The few days the strike lasted he lost 4£bs. weight. He was one of the committee that was appointed to go through the wavering men and strengthen them. This was worse on him than his work [...]   [...] he does not complain; he knows he need not bother himself grumbling for if people get good wages they must work. I have to graft just as hard as him - there is get out of it (please excuse slang for you will pick it up in spite of yourselves).    [...] I was away with grapes today at Mr. Baumgarten's. He makes wine. He gets the grapes at 5 pound per ton; that is only a little over one half penny per pound. I have tasted the juice of them both sweet and fermented. If I had you here I could give you some of my own making. All it wants is age. We can make either white or dark wine and no adulteration in it. The local makers sometimes only gets one and sometimes 2s. per gallon when selling to large vintners. [169] One ton of grapes will make from 120 till 160 gallons of wine. The picking is hot work and sore on the back but we have all ours away and is waiting for rain to start ploughing.   I have two young horses under training at present. I intend to make a good job of them. The colonial when training thinks they are doing great things when they take a fresh colt and mounts him on the first or second day. How it is done is this way; when a young horse is brought in he is run into the crush (a small passage made of strong posts just the width of the colt and a pair of skakes same as you would put a cow into. There is also two strong poles put across behind him so he can neither get up back or forward) then he is either bridled or haltered. Believe me they get rough usage. Well they are chased and beaten with a large stock whip until they cannot go any longer. Then he is mounted and ridden while he is able to go. The same is repeated for two or three days and then he is broken. After that when his owner puts him into either plough or cart he is sure to be a jibber or buckjumper. I have not seen a proper mouthed horse since I came to the colonies. A jibber is what we would call at home ruster and sulky not doing what they are able.   Mr. Newson went to Melbourne today to spend his Easter holidays so I have charge till he comes back. The young man that was here has left and a young fellow from Tasmania is here to get colonial knowledge. He is not very smart but has plenty of presumption.   We'll have a single and double furrow going also the disc harrow with 8 bullocks in it. When the ground is loose the disc can prepare the ground without ploughing. In the second turn with the disc we can sow the seed.   Machinery and agricultural implements are very dear in this country. Mr. Newson bought stripper at £50 a winnower at £25 reaping machine £30 with gearing to drive a chaff cutter; chaff cutter £15 and means to get a sheep shearing machine for next year.   If cousin James was coming out along with the Henrys you might send a pair of buttoned boots No. 6 at about 10s. 0d. and a pair of cloth slippers No. 6; also a print dress made skirt and jacket or some would call it a blouse with stringcase at the waist so as they will almost fit anyone. The same measure does her still. Make the skirt pretty plain as they are easiest washed. Also two or three aprons. Let some be checked linen and some spotted or checked muslin; more of a dress with lace a pretty good size also a pair of corsets 27 inches not too expensive. She gave 7s. 6d. for a pair and not very good at that. You might put in a few bits of lace and a few cheap handkerchiefs imitation of silk to wear round our necks in the summer and a piece of Indian muslin or any kind of old fashioned muslin scarf to tie round my own hat in the summer. Mrs. Henry can tell you what we wear.   Suzie will not need any dresses as Mrs. Newson is making some out of hers but you might send her some white pinnies with a good deal of Swiss work. Mrs. Watson's suited her very well only too short as she is 3 feet 5 1/4 inches long in her little shoes. She is in very good health and as good a colour as if she was at home.   She has just minded about a black lustre apron a good size at about 14 or 16 pence. If James does not come it does not matter I would not like to trouble any other body. He could tell them that Sarah's things is the wife's.   I am going to turn farmer in the course of six months. The land is not very good not as regards the nature of the soil but it is very hilly. It was the best I could get except the scrubby country which would take a man with a big capital a stout heart and plenty of muscle. The first and last commodities I am a bit deficient in. I believe when I get (I should say we for the boys are finding the cash but the land is applied for and recommended in my name) the fences up and the timber killed it will be a good grass country. The block contains 800 acres. One half is very good but the other is almost valueless. It will be under a government lease for 10 years or 14 years from the passing of the Act which came into operation at the beginning of 1884. Out of the leasehold I can select 320 acres which will be excised from the leasehold and subject to a yearly payment of 1s. an acre per year for 20 years when it will be a freehold. [172] [173] The remainder of the land I will be paid for improvement up to the value of 10s. but not exceeding that amount on the expiration of the lease. Then James has purchased four building allotments at £10 each. They will likely be worth a good bit some day for property about Melbourne is increasing in value very rapidly.   I have turned gardner again; the tram driving did not suit my health. My health has much improved within the last month. I was troubled with my liver and kidneys. I got examined by a herb doctor and am now drinking herbs or the tea of herbs. I believe herbs are the best as they have no injurious effect whatever [...]    [...] you will be delighted to know that I am a Rechabite. Some of you will know what that order is. It is a very strong society here. First members require to be total abstainers and to be such for sometime before they are allowed to join. By paying about 1s. 3d. per week you have the benefit of a doctor without any further fee and after being joined a year members are entitled to £1 per week in case of injury or ill health that may prevent them from business or work.   You will also be pleased to know that I purchased a block of land containing 4 allotments. It isn't much but still it may be a good deal some day. It is big enough to build 4 cottages on. The Hannas bought some of the same. We got a chance of it cheap [...]   I am still with Mr. Agnew and getting along well. I am round the city every alternate morning taking orders. My health is pretty good but occasionally troubled with indigestion especially when I don't take enough exercise.   I have been a visit to Melbourne to see poor Sam Hanna who is now very ill in consumption indeed too ill to be a long liver. I believe he has been dabbling a good deal in stocks lately. He has made a lot of money. I believe he is worth nearly £1000 but if he has made money he has ruined his health....   [...] you will be surprised to know that John is up with us for a few weeks. Mr. Newson wanted a man so I wrote for John as the climate up here is better for him than at Melbourne or Lilydale. He seems and says he is a great deal better since he came up. I do not know how long he may be here. He never looked so well since we came to the colony as what he does now and is one stone heavier. I was surprised to see the change in him when he came here. He is still troubled with a cough in the mornings and if wet or close. I wish he had been here two or three months earlier when the weather was nice and dry it having changed just a day or two before he came.   He means to go to his selection as soon as the spring comes to get it fenced. James has made application for 740 acres just next to John's. If he gets it John will be able to look after both. They think that it would be healthier than in town. They mean to go in for cattle rearing and fattening bullocks. It will not be so sore on them as heavy work. Hugh says if it turns out anything well that he will quit selling rags. He is working hard for promotion. He is liked very well where he is and John says he is greatly changed. He goes to parties balls and picnics and is very popular among the young ladies. We have never seen him yet but he is in good health. John had letters from him a few days ago making enquiries about his selection and also about some shares in mining that he (Hugh) has bought. Hugh wanted me to go in for some shares but I declined as I would rather put my money in house property or land as I think it would be the best investment.   We will be here six months on the 16th of this month when I will have another instalment for the bank. James does that kind of work for me. This is the country to make money if you have your health.   There is an old man that lives on a patch of 3 acres that he has taken from Mr. Newson at £2 per acre and he sold £30 work of grapes this year besides a lot of other fruit of all kinds.   We will have our wheat finished in about another week. I am glad it is so near done as it has been a busy time. Do you think she would venture out to Australia. She would have to make up her mind to stay and not be thinking long for home as bush life is quite different to what she has been used to. There is not so much company as at home nor what she would call home comforts. However if she would think of coming we would send for her. The boys would have sent home a present for mother only it will take all they can muster to pay for the survey fees and for fencing but if they are anything fortunate they will do something after sometime. They do not want to borrow money as interest is high here.   [...] better for her to take a trip to Victoria if the doctor thinks well of it. It is with much pain that I make the suggestion as no doubt you will think that she will not come home again. But we don't mean that we simply mean that she could come away (as Hugh suggests) not later than the autumn early in October. By doing so she would escape the winter and land here about the middle of November before the very hot weather would set in and then if she thought well of it could return before winter would set in here. [175] In the meantime we have agreed (I mean Hugh and I) to send home £10 each or so which would make £20. With this you can use to her benefit as you think best. We cannot offer her much encouragement to come here as none of us has a home of our own and has to depend on the strangers for everything. But we are willing to do the best in our power for her if she comes. I don't know that she ever mentioned the idea of coming but perhaps she was waiting until we would suggest it. This I did not like to do knowing what a trial it is for both parties.   I would give it as my opinion that there will not be much good health for any of the delicate members of the family while there is so much wet around the house. I am now speaking from experience. You all know how I used to whistle and cough during the winter months. Well I can tell you I never have a cough. I mean a cough that sticks to me. No doubt people will catch colds here but they can shake it off. I took a cold last July and also one this July with a sore throat but I blamed shaving and nearly everybody had it. I used a little eucalyptus oil and a piece of new flannel round my neck and was soon well again.   No doubt the voyage would be more likely to do her good if she travelled second as the accommodation and food would be much better. On the other hand if she came third it would very likely put her farther back than she would benefit by being here for the first 6 months. After all the difference in the passage money is not so very much when you count up bedding etc. and tips for better food etc.   I think I will be able to send you the money the next time I write to you. However it would be well to impress upon them at home the desirability of Susannah coming second class and we can send the money as soon as we find it convenient.   In second class (I think) bedding and all table utensils are provided by the ship's company. Besides the bunks are very much more comfortable and the food is a great deal better (which is a very important item to a delicate person who has not a good appetite and cannot eat anything that may be given to them.) Let me here say that I would by no means advise coming by third class. I want to impress upon you the importance of this.   It is not necessary for you to bring a lot of clothes as you might not find them quite suitable to the climate but be sure to have something warm to wear in the cold parts of the voyage also some light to wear in the hot parts as you will find a great change of climate in the whole course of the voyage.   Decide at once about whether you are coming or not and when you have decided take your passage in the earliest possible steamer. The best steamers are the Orizaba Ormuz Oroya Austral Orient Liguria. These are the biggest newest and swiftest steamers but any of them are swift and I think the second class accommodation on any of them would be pretty fair.   If you start soon you shall be in time to see our great exhibition. It is a very grand affair I believe. [176] The building covers about 35 1/2 acres. I would like to see it very much but shall put that off until you come when I can kill two birds with the one stone that is go down to Melbourne to meet you and see the exhibition. James will forward some money shortly which will help to pay for your expenses of travelling.    [...] Indeed I would not advise you. It was the sorest trial ever I came across leaving them both in their old age when they both need my help most. But if God so wills it that we do not meet on this earth but on that land beyond not made with hands immortal in the heavens but I trust they may both be spared and have long and happy days.   John just left here on this day fortnight the day after the harvest fair at home. He was in good health only troubled with a little cough in the mornings or in foggy weather. I believe he is troubled with asthma but he takes great care of himself. We were very much vexed when he went away as we miss his company and it made it like home. He intends going to his selection very soon as he is making preparations for going. Yambulla is the name of the townland on or near the banks of the Tambo river Gippsland. James made application for a selection adjoining John's and met the Land Board at Bairnsdale on 17th of last month; had a letter from him last week saying he was trying to get a transfer to one on the other end of John's which it seems is better than the one he first applied for. If James gets either of these John will be able to look after both and James and Hugh will stay at their business and make a little money. John thinks he will be able to make a living from bees as they do well in the country and it would be easier looking after them than hard work.   James is greatly changed since he came here to this colony. He used to be gay and lively and Hugh the reserved old man but they seem to have changed places. James has joined some religious society which abstains from all strong drinks reads a chapter in his bible at night before going to bed and asks a blessing before taking food this from keeping good company. [177] [...]   [...] we have started a young man's mutual improvement society in connection with the church in which I am a member also a committee man. This was one of the nights of the meeting and a lecture was rendered by a Mr. Morrow one of the vice presidents and a North of Ireland man. In fact there were several north of Ireland people in it. The lecture was on gossip or Mrs. Grundy and her friends. It was very good and very instructive and one that any person could advise from. I am forgetting myself; this is not interesting to you.   John has made a start on his selection. He has got a horse and is now making ready to erect his little house. He stays at the hotel at Tambo Crossing where the Post Office is also a kind of wayside hotel where the mail coach stops on its route. He has his horse to ride to and from the land. No doubt he will give you more particulars some time when he writes than I can. However you may not be surprised if he does not write very often as he will be tired.  DEAR DAD  In my last letter I omitted to mention one or two things so as I have lots of time now worse luck I may as well write you a few lines.  Besides I feel very lonely here a stranger in a far land and the time hangs very heavy. I am waiting till Leeds comes back to start a mob of cattle away we finished the last trip much sooner than was expected I don't expect he will be back till the end of the month - In regard to that affair of Reece's if you will procure me his address I will write. As you say it is a matter that wants looking after perhaps Higinbotham knows his whereabouts but I am much mistaken in my knowledge of Reece if a letter will make him ante up - and most unfortunately I don't see that I have any claim in a legal point of view - of course if he were a man of honor there would be no difficulty but I am afraid Reece & honesty quarrelled long ago. [99] It is not a bit of use though crying over spilt milk - When I think of that miserable episode I feel as contemptible in my own eyes as you must have found me then - Only for that I would in all probability be in Sydney now it is strange how easily the current of our life is turned.  I don't think in Sydney I could have found the pleasure in life that exists for me here that is at times oftener I feel sick of the whole thing and long for some other country and a more stirring life - There is a pleasure in a mad gallop or in watching the dawn of day on a cattle camp - to see the beasts take shape and change from an indistinguishable mass of white & black into their natural colours - Or in the dead of night to find yourself alone with the cattle all the camp asleep perhaps only a red spark betokening the camp - I always (when I think of it) find something unearthly in this assemblage of huge animals ready at any moment to burst forth like a pent up torrent and equally irresistable in their force - when every beast is down asleep or resting just pull up & listen you will hear a low moaning sound rising to a roar then subsiding to a murmur like distant surf or as I fancy the cry of the damned in Dante's Inferno - when the cattle are like that it is a good sign - But in the moonlight this strange noise the dark mass of cattle with the occasional flash of an eye or a polished horn catching the light - it always conjures up strange fancies in me I seem to be in some other world - If I could only write it there is a poem to be made out of the back country some man will come yet who will be able to grasp the romance of Western Queensland and all that equally mysterious country in Central & Northern Australia for there is a romance though a grim one a story of drought & flood fever & famine murder & suicide; courage & endurance and who reaps the benefit not the poor bushman but Messrs. So & So merchants of Sydney or Melbourne or the mutual consolidated cut-down-the drovers wages Co. Litd or some other capitalist if you showed them the map half of them could not point out the position of their runs all they know is that their cheques come in regularly from the buyers and if the expenses pass the limit they in their ignorance place they sack the manager and get another easy enough.  Yes - I wonder if a day will come when these men will rise up when the wealthy man perhaps renowned inside for his benevolence shall see pass before him a band of men all of whom died in his service & whose unhallowed graves dot his run - The greater portion hollow shrunken burning with the pangs of thirst others covered with the evil slime of the Diamantina Cooper and those far Western rivers - burnt unrecognisably in bush fires struck down by sunstroke ripped up by cattle dashed against some tree by their horse - killed in a dozen different ways and what for? a few shillings a week and these are begrudged them; while their employer travels the continent and lives in all the luxury his wealth can command they are sweating out their lives under a tragic sun on damper & beef - this is no exaggerated picture I can assure you - Marcus Clarke has grasped the meaning of Australia's Mountains & forests in his eloquent preface to Gordon's Poems but neither he nor Gordon have written about the plains & sandhills of the far west it remains for some future poet to do that. [100]  I got a volume of Gordon here the other day and at length had an opportunity of studying his writings in their entirety I have long been familiar with his most well known poems there is no man within the last century who has achieved such lasting fame as he has his poems appeal not only to one class of cultured minds as Tennyson or Browning and that lot but there is not a bushman who does not know a verse or two of... 'how we beat the favorite' or 'the sick stockrider' I call this fame - Gordon is the favorite I may say only poet of the back blocker and I am sorry to say Emile Zola is his favorite prose writer his books are published now in very cheap form and have a tremendous circulation a strange partnership indeed for these two men so different in their tone to share popularity. I am afraid after all the bushman is not a very fine animal but at any rate even in his most vicious moments he is far above many of the so-called respectable dwellers in towns - well I must write a letter to Addie now so will say goodbye - give my love to Addie and Grannie  YOURS AFFECTIONATELY / BARTIE  Brisbane May the 5 / 1884   My Dearest father & mother   I for once in 12 mounths sit to have a few words of conversation with you by a message which I must say is my hardest Job to get through. I got Your letter about 10 days ago which I often wanderd ware You dead or what became of You. As for my Brother & sisters I Quite forgive them as they have got children of their owne to [?look two] & me a child or a lost I am far away from home & nation. To think my father & mother at the end of a long year could cast a thout on me & wright me a letter. Wasent it a chearing present to a true hart from the Dearest frind.   Well now I must thank god for his kindness to spare you they health to do so & also for my own health which I am enjoying grand. I would like to know what did do to my Brother Jack & Winney. One of those fine days I shall encourage some of those girls away from them as I intend to live an old maid. John I heare they ar growing up fine girls like their Aunt Biddy as Mary A used to say when she used to call me they Black Top & denie her father & mother & tell her mother Winney to go home to Clude & take Dinea & leave Vronkey [?pet names for Mary Ann's sisters Delia and Bridget] with her. Dont I often wish I could see them now & that strange girl Keattey. I hope she is lik her ant Biddy as well.   I suppose my Sister Mary hasent got a Bit of paper to soil on a sister. I shanent write again untill I write to my boy Martin. I am glad to here what a fine stout woman Mary became & also I am sorrow for her sister in law Mrs Sulvan of Galway for they wreched life her Mother in law is given her. [156] I here she abuses her fine. I hope M. Walsh is well & as for his sones I supose they ar fine men now. I am comming home one of those days to have a look & a fine old talk to they lot of Yea & father. You never told anny thing about my uncle Larrance [Laurence] what became of him & family. I supose M. A. is a grown up woman & Mick[?] a big man now. Also my uncle Ml how ever is he. I supose Bridget & Henery ar grown up as well also Young William. I dare say I would see a change their now & not forgeting Dear old Mrs Goley which I must call her. How is she & has she got onely one boy & the Dear little soul I expect she has onely 2 girls. How ar they all & not forgetting Aunt Biddy or Aunt Peg also all my cousins & friends & not forgeting the old neighbours of sweet Balrobuck beg. I supose it as green & as wet as ever.   I am glad that stock is standing a good price but I am sorrow for the corn & & things to get to such a loe price. I supose the potatoes ar still getting Black. Theire is no such a thing as a black potae in Queensland & they native potates we can plant the stalks like gerreamen [?geranium] slips at home in- pots. They plant them the same here in the fields & potatoes grows as large as turnips at home. These ar Called sweet potatoes. We have the English potates the same as the home potatoes & turnips & all sorte of vegetables the same as home & anny amount of Beef & mutton & also of meat. Beef is 31/2 a lb mutton the same veal & pork from 4d to 6 pence a pound tea 1S. 10d a pound sugar 3 a lb. potatoes ar 1s. a stone to 1s. 6 flour 15d a pound fowles 5S a pair geese 14S a pair turkeys pound to 25S a pair & every thing is much dear this year than ever fore [for] the summer been so hot.   It was the hotest summer in Queensland with the last 20 years. You must think it was hot when the plaits on the dresser should be handled with a cloth. I dont think we had a wet day with the last 12 mounths. We might have a storm or 3 since but not a wet day. Altogether they men cannot sit Idle in this country from wet weather. Now the summer is over & the winter comming on I am so glad. I did feel the heat so much boath night & day we could not sleep. It was Quite enough for us to keep the the sweet of our facess [sweat off our faces].   I supose Yea had a cold winter of it home & I dare say father & Mother you had a lonely Christmas of it & so had I. My brother Patt is out the Bush with the last 14 Mounths. I expected him in at Christmas time & his Job was not finished & did not come. He is comming into town in 3 mounth time but I here from everry week. Dont think for a moment its for anny gammling he is in the Bush. No he is a good boy & works 10 hours a day for 12S & is saving a lot of money. There ar young fellows in this town with they last 10 years & they ar not worth a penney & that is not like poor Patt. [157] He works hard for it & knows how to save it. A lot of [?them] Camps in the Bush in tents & feels as happy as the day is long & each man takes it in turn a week cooking & dont they have nice tea.   Now I must tell you some about my uncle. He came to pay me a visit about 6 mounths ago. He feel alright & also all they family. He was saying something about gone home irl a year or n if he would be spared. I might goe that is if Patt comes well [we'll] all goe & see the old sod once more. But I dont supose I could live there now altho its the deepest thought in rny heart does the water still come into the Yard in winter times & I supose all the Visstoers [visitors] they same as ever. Dont I often think of them times.   Well now about my owne self I am in grand health & is enjoying Queensland verry much. I am sorrow that I hadent come 5 years before I did come I would have a lot of money now. That is when my mother used call me a foulish girl & now every body tell me I have got too much sence but it dosent matter. When I grow older & save some more money I can live Quite happy then. I am sending you one [on] three pounds for to drink my health & once more. Well now my Dearest father & Mother I hope your are well & also My Dear old Brother John & Winney. I am making none difference nor never will for I know that Winney will be as kind to You father & Mother as if she was a daughter of Your owne. [158]  And does my poor Mother get as bad a head ache as ever. My head gets verry bad sometimes eather they heat or the cold does not agree with it. I have to nearly always keep a hat one in the house & its makes me often think of my poor Mothers head. They Docters say its from the cold in the feet. I wore cloth boots & I got a weting from Geting cought in thunder Storm & got my feet wett & a dreadfull bad cold in the head & eever since then my head is tender but now I am carefull. Thunder storms is verry dangese [dangerous] in this countrey they come in less than a minnits notice. So Mind You Mother be sure & keep warm boots one & the Feaver is verry bad in this climat & there is a lot of people dinen [?dying]. Some days ther is from 2 to 3 deaths in the Hospital thoes that has no home to go to & a lot more from they homes as well. If you neglect Yourself in this country Your as soon Done for.   Now I Must talk to the Girls which I am glad to here that they filling up My old home. Try & bring them up well John & dond keep them at home from School & Winny mind & give a Mothers advise to each of them for you know that it takes a girl all her time to keep her place. I often think of My Mother now how she used to talk to me. This is the place that foolish girls ar knowing. & dont forget to get them boots. Well now I suppose you will be tirde of reading my letter. I must conclud with fond Love & remaining your daughter & a loving sister & a sincere Aunt untill Death.   B. Burke. To her father & mother M. & P. Burke. + + + + +   Wright soone & send me all the Nuse. You never tell me a thing about any body. Let me Now about every body. +++++ Good by all. Kisses + + + +   How is Clude & J. & P.  I am almost four years married now and I think I can truly say that Lillie has never cost me one minute one second of unhappiness. She makes my interest in everything hers. If she sees I take pleasure in anything she tries to also to have our pleasure mutual. A wife is something more than a beautiful [...] figure. A wife ought to be a helpmeet not only for this world but for the world to come. Again if you see a girl that you think would suit you and be slow to make up your mind on that point be very sure of it try and calmly and dispassionately weigh both your own and her disposition and see if they will balance but having done so and come to the conclusion that they will do not let any false feeling of pride keep you from getting married because you cannot start where your or her parents leave off. We have to crawl before we can walk and no girl is worth marrying who is not willing to start with her husband at the foot of the ladder and help him to climb it rung by rung until he is in a position to give her many things that she has had to do without but against his will. It is a mistake I think for men or women to delay marrying. The longer the delay the more fixed and formed the habits of life are and the more difficult it is to form a real amalgamation. Like two young trees when young you can twine them round and round each other but in a few years if not united they will grow nearer and nearer but they will never unite like they would in their young days. Again you cannot know the happiness that is to be enjoyed in knowing that there is one being dependent upon you who loves you better than all the world beside and whose interest is yours and yours is hers. I wish I had married five years sooner.   Sarah wishes you to send her the making of a black cashmere dress buttons and body lining. A very poor black cashmere costs 4s. 6d. or 5s. 0d. There is such heavy duty here now that all the Irish people are sending home for dress goods. [170] Also a white sunshade for Susie to go to church. What she wants is something with a puff in the crown with a ribbon across either with or without; about what would fit Mary Johnstone.   Would James send me a black hard hat size 67 / 8 at about 5s. 0d. or 5s.6d. also a soft light grey for the summer. Send with James Colven if he is able to pack them. If not he could bring a small deal box about 18 inches by 24 inches. And she wants a few cheap silk handkerchiefs. Perhaps Mrs. Henry could help him to fetch them. Sarah has not a chance of wholesale prices here. Don't send them by post owing to the duty only if J. Colven comes.   PS Please send the account of these things.  [...] indeed I think she brought on her death by overwork. They are all so anxious to make money that the work is over done. I don't object to people trying to make what money thy can but I object to people making slaves of themselves for the sake of this world's gain. [174]  Now dear Mary you will see by the enclosed syllabus that I am trying to come out of my shell. You will see that I am still on the committee (I sent one of these before) and have myself down to give a paper or essay on Success which I have been studying for the last month or so. It is a wide subject and requires a deal of study and contracting as we are only allowed twenty minutes [...]   He is a very energetic fellow. He is the sort we want here people with push and courage to tackle anything and determination to overcome obstacles [...]   When down in town I went out to the Tambo Crossing to see John found that he was well only a little cold he had got after a wetting he got some time previous. However I left him considerably better and in better spirits. When there we had a ride over some blocks of land that he wanted me to buy. We settled on one. If John and the present owner can come to terms there is only one block of 550 acres between the boys and this one. There is quite a lot of kangaroo and wallaby. Anybody that was good with the gun could make a pile of money shooting them for their skin. John has got a splendid Martini Henry rifle that can hit a kangaroo at 200 yards away. He seems pretty comfortable only the cooking does not suit him as he does not care for too much heat. Bob Wilson and him are often together. He lives on the other side of the river from John. Sometimes he stops all night with John.   William seems frightened to tackle land as Sarah is more on for town life so I don't think he will mind it in the meantime [...] let by contract the ringing of the block known as mine viz. 450 acres. It is nearly completed and the men will soon start to do a contract of fencing. John has been looking after some cows as we purpose putting on cattle instead of sheep for a few years at any rate as there are wild dogs (or dingoes) in the district and we could not afford to lose any of our little flock. [179]  Speaking about John's house I can give little information on it only to say that the fireplace and chimney is just like a blacksmith's hob only the hearth is on the floor instead of being raised. The back and sides of the fire is lined with clay instead of mortar and stone to prevent the wood (with which the walls and chimney of the house is built) from catching fire. I shall not attempt to describe it further as I have not been there to see John's house. My description is what I saw of another house in the neighbourhood.   I got the parcels sent with Messrs Graham and Barnes and forwarded them to William which I asked him to write you and acknowledge. Mr. Graham has got into a situation long since but I don't know that he likes the country. You know he is a married man and has a wife and two children which will no doubt make him home sick. However let that be as it may it should not be the means of giving him a bad impression of the country. We all have our home ties which is inseparable. At the same this country is not to be compared with home as far as business and in fact all industries are concerned.   Mr. Graham called with me the next morning after he arrived. I had a long chat with him. He left me to go and see a second cousin who came out with John and Hugh. This cousin (lives in Richmond about 4 miles from Melbourne) told him of a job which he went about and got. I advised him to go to the country but he preferred staying in Melbourne and suburbs.    [...] You will be sorry to learn that Miss Knubley and her three sisters have all been laid up with typhoid fever. They all had to take their beds about four weeks ago. I am happy to say however that they are all on a fair way to recovery. I had a letter today written by Miss Knubley herself to the effect that the doctor said that the fever had left them all now and they were allowed a little change in their diet. Of course when the fever was on them they were only allowed liquid food such as mutton broth chicken broth water and milk and soda and milk. Miss Knubley is just able to sit up in bed and write a short note with a pencil. It is very shaky yet. It seems that they have not had the fever in its worst form but even so it is bad enough when four patients are laid up in one house. I hope however that the worst is over now and only time is necessary to restore them to health again.   You will be glad to know that James is likely to start business on his own account in one of the best provincial towns of the colony the city of Sandhurst on the line between this and Melbourne about 56 miles from Echuca and 100 from Melbourne. [180]  All being well he is to be married about Easter I think Tuesday 8 April. Of course that is as far as I know just now but no doubt he will have given you all particulars himself before this.   We have made arrangements that William and Sarah John and myself will try and be in Melbourne on the date of the ceremony all being well. It might be a long time before we would have a chance of all meeting together again so it would be well to embrace this event as a suitable occasion for a mass meeting of the Maxwell family in the Southern hemisphere. You know this will be the first time we have all met at once.   James wrote lately that it was their intention to invite Miss Knubley but I am afraid that she will not be strong enough to go. I would like very much that she could. We will see how things go before that.   The last word I had from John a few days ago he said that he had not been so bright for the last week or two. I attribute that to the extreme heat of the weather. It has been trying on strong people so he must feel it. I know that it pulled me down a good deal. In fact everybody is or rather was complaining of exhaustion. The month of January and part of February was one continuous heat said to be the greatest heat for continuity at a high temperature for the last fifty years. There has been individual hotter days by several degrees but not lasting more than two or three days.   John is getting on with his operations fairly. He has a ready market for what potatoes and vegetables he can spare of which he can grow abundantly in his garden. The mare has foaled and it is a fairly good one. [...] When last I heard from William they were well but feel the heat a good deal. There is some talk of a woollen mill being started in Echuca on the limited company lines. I hope it may be a success [...]   Every man 21 years of age has a vote here. There is some candidates propose extending the franchise to women but it has not become a burning question yet. However I believe it will be extended to women before another 10 years passes over the politics of this colony. You will no doubt notice the tone of self content in regard to the prosperity of this colony as compared with the other sister colonies in the papers from time to time. There is no doubt that Victoria is in a very much better financial state than either New South Wales or South Australia. Of course our papers do not forget to trumpet it forth to its admiring readers - the Victorians or those like myself who have adopted it as our home. There is a great deal of truth in it all for Victoria is a favoured part of the world at the present time. The advantages of all classes have here compare or rather contrast to a wonderful degree with that of poor old Ireland   The syphon can be had at a wholesale tobacconist and hairdressers in Bourke Street East nearly opposite the post office only a little farther up. The barbers use them to spray your hair after cutting. [181] I use it to throw a spray of solution of phenol and water over the combs and brood in a diseased stock of bees. They also can be had at the chemists but I think they charge more.   One of the young Maddens has been off with toothache for four days but he is now back at work. I got the wire put on the line yesterday but as the have nearly all the piece of ground grubbed and it will only take them a few days more to finish it I think it advisable to let them work on till the end of the week and complete it. The trees were very hard to grub owing to having had a lot of tap roots running down and thus involving a great deal of extra labour. It is beautiful soil where the trees are worst to grub being exactly chocolate.   The Madden's purpose going honey hunting after they get the wire in. I purpose trying to get Bannister's fencing for them. I could not take it with any likelihood of making anything out of it first because I would want a strong draught horse second because I would not be able to pitch into the work myself. Had I both a horse and plenty of strength there would be very little in it.   The reason I want the Maddens to get the job is this. It would give Jima work for a month or two for we can do without him for a while from a pecuniary point of view and I would keep him as it were in my employment. Why I would like to keep him under my eye is this: he is a splendid worker and reliable. After Bannister's fence would be done we could finish the line between our two blocks before stocking at our leisure. I would not fence any more only the small paddock and would only carry a few head.   We will require 30 new hives next season so I think you would do well to send to America for a list of hives and bee appliances etc as if for Agnew and Co. I believe we could import them much cheaper then we could have them made in Melbourne. You could write to A. J. Root Medina Ohio United States of America.   After you get the catalogue and list of prices of the bee hives and bee appliances we could then make up our minds how many to send for and get them through Agnew and Co or to yourself whichever would be best. You will have to send away at once as there will be no time to lose between now and the time they will be required and it would be a great loss if the bees would be inclined to swarm and us have no hives ready for them. If the bees get justice they will do us a good turn next season. If the don't of course we can expect no profit.   You could send the socks and the phenol and syphon by parcels post as on account of the car the John and Elizabeth is so uncertain. Be careful how you pack them. I would like to have the goods as soon as possible as I am now beginning to run short.   I will do as you desired about the cash. I paid for the carriage freight and commission. It in all came to £6 18s. 0d.   If you can send the dog with Bannister so much the better for he could tie him on behind the coach. If you send him to Bairnsdale I think the best one would be Scott the draper where you sent the bags and I would get some of the bullock drivers to bring him up. Before you send him away send me a letter saying what day you intended sending him so as I could be on the look out for someone to bring him up and not have Scott keeping him long. You would do well to send Scott word before you send the dog so as he would know to expect him. The parcels man would take him to Scott from the railway.   I forwarded John his socks sent from Ireland along with some other little articles he wanted. I also sent him another supply of groceries and some little ironmongery. The last letter I had from him he writes in good spirits and says his health is tolerab good. He has now all that little parcel of land of mine viz. 345 or 350 acre rung also about one and a half miles of fencing done. He had the men cutting down some trees and grubbing a bit of ground for an orchard and garden (when I say grubbing I mean clearing roots of trees and stones). He has had three men working since October or early in November. This means a lot of money never speak of what the first cost of the land was. But I hope we will if spared be able to make the thing swim. No doubt it is a great undertaking but I have not the slightest doubt of its success.   I was talking to a Mr. Thomas (who is a cousin to Mr. Wilson John's neighbour) who is in business in Melbourne. He had been up paying his cousin a visit and he told me that he was surprised to see the vegetables John had grown turnips that could not be surpassed also French beans and vegetable marrow the latter being the length of his forearm. The above did not get any manure and in fact very little rain as it was an exceptionally dry season. This report speaks well for the soil of Tambo Crossing. John also speaks highly of the appearance of the grass where the trees are rung. You see we have to ring the trees that is to cut a nick with an axe through the bark right into the pith so as to kill the tree as grass will not grow under them on account of the sun being shut out and the trees use up all the rain. We have no stock yet but we hope to be able to put on some in spring. I am afraid we will have to put cattle on instead of sheep on account of the wild dogs. I am sorry for that as we could have stocked it cheaper with sheep and had a quicker return.   Now dear mother with reference to John and his hut: I mentioned about it before but I know you like to hear something fresh. His house some would call it a hut but I think the proper name for it is a house for it is big enough to accommodate three people to sleep in as Mr. Thomas and Mr. Wilson stayed with John all the time. Mr. T was up and Mr. Thomas says it is very comfortable. I sent John 20 yards hessian to line it with which will also add to the comfort. I also sent him another pair of blankets to keep him warm during the winter.   [...] the young ladies in this colony compared favourably with that of any other country. I was surprised to know that Mrs P held such a humble opinion of foreign country ladies and such a high opinion of North of Ireland girls. Well had I the option or privilege of giving my mind on the matter I could tell her that the young ladies of this colony compared favourably with that of any other country (North of Ireland I speak from experience and other countries from what I read and hear). [183] First their forefathers being of a most energetic class of people; this is proved by their action in leaving the old country; thus their offspring inherit it. Second because they have the quick activeness of the Americans whom they come in contact with every day. Third because the pride in working when they work so that they are enabled to spend a sixth of their time in pleasure if they wish.   There is also many other reasons I could give if I did not feel I was filling my letter with something that was not interesting to you. Indeed I find I have often to put on a double quick pace to keep time with those in business around me although I do boast of discipline which is daily getting infused into them.   There is another idea I might have mentioned viz. that of education. Schools are kept by the State and according to the law of the country every father and mother must send their children to school where all the different branches of education is taught them free of charge.   Dear mother you will think that all this is a lot of stuff and that it is because the young lady of my choice happens to be a Victoria colonial. Perhaps there may be something in it but you will see that my argument has reason and facts. Speaking of the young lady I might as well (and I think it only my duty as a son to set your mind at rest concerning this matter) say that there is an understanding between us which is financial. Had I not undertook this land business I purpose getting married about September or October next but as funds are at a low ebb and likely to be for some time we thought better not to jump into such an undertaking until things were set agoing properly.   Her father Mr. R. bought a splendid cottage last week. It costs £1325. They purpose living in the old house for 6 months. The new one they are to receive 27s. 0d. per week rent from the party who sold it and built it [...]   [...] to sluggishness of the liver caused by eating meat during the hot weather. Meat is an article of food that is on the Australian table at every meal. And it seems to me the longer you are in the country the fonder you get of meat and most people never think the table properly furnished unless there is meat. However I restrict myself to eating it twice a day breakfast and dinner my third meal being generally bread and treacle and I find the treacle acts as a medicine and prevents any lodgement of bile. [...] Although in Gippsland a land that might be said to be flowing with milk and honey it is impossible to procure for either love or money a bit of butter and as I did not get any cows as I purposed on account of not having any land fenced in and it would have been great trouble to keep a cow in the open bush. As it is now in the middle of winter it would not be advisable to buy. We have an 80 acre paddock fenced in and expect to have the other 270 acres fencing by spring. Then we intend putting on a few head of young stock as many as there will be money to buy.   I have about two acres with the timber grubbed that is the trees are stripped at the roots of the earth and the roots are cut and thus the tree falls uprooted all save the very ends of the roots which are afterwards followed along as far as is necessary and cut out so as the plough or spade will not strike against them.   I find the soil around my hut very productive (in fact all the block in James name and about the half of a block in my name is all very much alike with a rich black soil on the surface of a gritty clay subsoil) I having now proof of it in the shape of turnips cabbages and cauliflowers and vegetable marrows. There are cabbages as big as my head grown without manure. When one compared this land with yours under the terms which they are held it seems a marvel that there is not even a greater amount emigration from the old country.   Undoubtedly a young farmer starting on a piece of new land has a great many inconveniences to contend with but there is one grand thing about it: the land is becoming your own and there will be no landlord craving you for the rent.   I am now over helping Mr. Wilson with his sheep. They are now lambing and we have had great trouble guarding them every night on account of the dingoes which has killed no less than 14 or 15. They are a great pest to sheep owners [...]   He has engaged a man to help to do some splitting of posts for fencing. He has not put on any cattle yet. He wants the grass to get well up. It requires a year or so to let the grass get a closs bottom after ringing. John left here for Gippsland a year ago tomorrow. It seems but half the time. He has ordered a lot more groceries also his honey extractor (this is a machine for taking the honey out of the bar frames without damaging the combs). I purpose going to see him at Christmas at same time inspect my estate. [185] In a letter some time ago John mentioned that a man the name of Johnston (our neighbour) had sold his block of land for £800 I think he said if Johnston's was worth that the block in my name was worth £500. I am inclined to think that John is over valuing it but we will suppose the half of that amount. It ain't bad is it?   You will all be pleased to know that I got my title deed for Braybrook a month ago. It is not very large. You will understand it is for building purposes. The frontage is 120 feet by 120 feet deep which is large enough for 6 cottages. There has been some lands sold convenient at one pound per foot. Robbie Hanna advises me to hold to it. He believes it will be worth two pounds per foot in another year or so. However I may be obliged to sell sooner as I would like to put as much steam into Gippsland as possible. And another thing I would like a little of that money so that I would be able to make a little home in case I thought of getting the better half.    [...] I am in good health myself only a little tired drafting sheep and weaning lambs. I believe we will be stripping wheat next week. There is plenty of bulk but the rust is on the straw of both wheat and oats. We threshed the oats when Mr. Newson was in Melboume had the steam thresher and engine which threshed 162 bags of oats in 7 3 / 4 hours.   We are digging new potatoes now. There is not many grown here in this part of the colony as it is too warm. Mr. Newson has done well with his wool this year. He had 52 bales which brought £730 2s.2d....   PS We will be here two years in six more days when we will have £40 to lift and does not know when we will be leaving. Mr. N is trying to get a girl to help in time of harvest [...]   [...] in the same place at St Patricks he told us he saw a Priest drop dead & afterwards saw the Blessd Virgin walk towards him taking him by the hand & raised him to life. Before he got bad at all Kate one night saw her mother in a dream she thought she had a few angry words with her. Then your mother went straight into the room where he stept stooped over him & Kissed him. Ever afterwards he was not well.   My Poor Johnev's last words were Mother you Keep my watch & dont be crying. He was so very fond of his Mother that he Could not bear her to be away from him one minute. So now we feel sad & lonley after him my life is a misery to me & to his Poor mother after his nineteen years & three months. His name was John Laurence because he was very near twelve months before being baptised & Kate was always saying he had a head like you & truly it was so & therefore his name. On yesterday Sunday we laid some flowers on his grave & shed some silent tears over him who was loved by all that Knew him. You will let Poor Father & sister Know of our sad loss. [267]  John was telling me Poor Tom Quirk died. Poor Fellow many a happy day we spent together. Give our fond love to Mrs & Family. I would like to say more but cant for the present. Yours fondly   Phil -   Please excuse this wr[it]ing  Lilly goes to a nice situation tomorrow morning in a high classed art store a place I have been able to get here and though she really has had no experience of business she gets a good salary to start with and she is greatly pleased at this.   As to Mr. and Mrs. Beazley they have not quite decided yet what line they will go into but I fear not that in a very short time I shall be able to locate them safely in some handy place either to manage a small club or boarding house. There are some fine places of that kind here [...]   I have been making considerable headway and have had the doings of some first class ballrooms etc. and all my efforts have met with success and been very much admired by the guests and spoken highly of by the Press so that is good and I am glad to find that my experience gained in the old country serves me well here and will doubtless stand to me a.1.   I have joined hands with a Portrush chap a Mr. Richardson better known as the chap who used to win a lot of races at the swimming races at Pickie Rock at Bangor so is it not really wonderful how people tumble together nowadays. Truly the world is small. He is a very handy sort of fellow and as he was looking out for something of the line we are in we tumbled together and took a place which so far suits us well and are kept very busy and your new nurios [?] that I have introduced for ballroom decoration and sale take well so that we never know what results may come yet.   We had a great strike all over the country New Zealand as well as all the mines were stopped for five weeks and all the coasting steamers are still stopped as the men are still out on strike. It was with the shipping that the strike first started as the sailors were all union men so then the ship owners got blackleg labour to run the boats so the coal miners would not let the boats get coal so steam boats and railways have been stopped. The Government sent large forces of police and volunteers to shoot the men down but the men all turned out to a man and were well armed and drove the police and volunteers back and took some of the cannons of them that the Government sent to shoot the miners with so now the miners will shoot them with them; the men are stiking [sic] well together and the Government can't do nothing with them so I think the strike will soon be settled. [...]  I have been away from Broken Hill for a short time as we have all been out on strike for the last 17 weeks and no telling when we will go to work again. The mine owners was wanting to lower the wages so the men all struck to a man; there is 7000 men on strike; we struck on the 4th July last so things are in a very bad state in Broken Hill as there is no other work but minen in this part of New South Wales so all the men are walking about the streets. There has been about 1500 men left the Hill since the strike. There has been some ruff work here since the strike as the mine owners have been fetching miners from other parts so the government have sent large bodies of police to keep law and order; there has been some shots fired but no lives lost as yet there are 8 of our leaders in jail; their trial is going on at present; we all thought that they would get about five years but I think the way the trial is going that they will get off with a short term; they are all married but three.    [...] We have got the harvest ended. Sarah had Maggie McGilton up for 4 weeks helping her. She and I are going away tomorrow to Murchison where I am going for my holidays. You will be proud to know that Mr. Newson has just given me a present of £10 to defray expenses and told me that he was more than satisfied with both me and my wife and to take a fortnight's spell but I will only take a week [...]   [...] is head milliner in a good house; has about £3 or £4 per week [...] She seems a fine woman and as far as I can learn has got a good principle.   James's young lady is very quiet and reserved but very clever. She matriculated at the Ladies College in Melbourne intending to go for governess but her health began to fail with too much study so her father and mother thought better and brought her home so she has learned dressmaking and makes for her own family and teaches her younger sisters music. [186] [...]   Maggie is just the woman to make a poor man's wife. She is very saving and can manage well.   We gave James a splendid cruit [jug] John a tea pot Hugh curtains Agnews' employees a black marble clock and Robert Hanna a cake basket. The rest I took no interest in. Sarah bids me say that the bride was dressed in white with a wreath and veil [...] The bridesmaid wore cream trimmed with black ribboned velvet [...]   [...] trade is not very brisk in Sandhurst at present. However he is getting a very fair share. It is satisfactory to note that his takings are steadily increasing week by week. James expects a hard fight with the other hardware people but he intends sticking to them and get the best of them if possible and I believe he will succeed.   I had a letter from John about a fortnight ago. He expects to get the fence finished that will enclose a total of about 350 acres about the middle of July. He has let the grass of it to a neighbour for 12 months when we hope to get a little cash together to put on some stock. It takes a lot of money to put up so much fencing. On account of James starting business he cannot help now with the money matters for the farm so it makes it all the stiffer for John and myself. However little by little we hope to get things into working order bye and bye.   One thing will be a great advantage to him I think he is a man that will adapt himself to circumstances. Indeed that is what a fellow must do when he tries his fortune in a new country like this. [...]  Perhaps he may be disappointed in Australia after his experience in that splendid land where he has spent a good part of his lifetime for there can be no doubt that America especially the United States is one of the finest countries in the world for its natural resources social advantages and material prosperity. [187]  This is even a more baby country. America is now a full grown man. It is certainly true that there are better chances for the individual for getting on in a new country than there is in an old country - to wit the scion of the Maxwell family that has been transplanted to the land of the Golden Fleece. One thing I think we have an advantage over America in that is climate. We may have as hot summers but our winters are not severe as the American winters undoubtedly are. I have often mentioned the autumn weather here. Well we are now in full enjoyment of weather that might please anybody. We could do with more rain in this part of the continent. In the interior in New South Wales and Queensland they are having some terrible floods at present while here we could do with the surplus water and not hurt [...]   Your letter containing the news of David's marriage to hand last week. We were sorry to know that he had been so unwise as to make a country's talk of himself by the mean way he got it done especially as it will grieve both father and mother. If I were you all I would not make too rash a decision about send him out here as father is not so able to look after things as he used to do. Of course I should not like all the time I wrought hard and sore to go back to any of Henry McClintock's grand-daughters. I have had letters from both James and Hugh stating that if the girl is decent and bears a good character that David is of age and ought to make his own choice. I believe the better way would have been to have let him have the farm at a valuation and let him marry Miss Jennings sometime ago. However that opportunity is lost now so we will have to make the best of a bad job. If he comes out here either by himself or with his wife we all shall join in giving him all the help and advice that lies in our power as he is our own brother. I think it would have been wiser to have let James Colven come along with him if he comes as it will be very lonely and awkward for him to come by himself he being not over quick and not having travelled much. If he comes we Sarah and I will help and I am sure the boys will do the same to pay for a good man to assist father in the farm work.   [...] was not such as would meet with the approval of all but I must say in all fairness that I cannot commend the action taken in the matter. [188] After all this is a matter in which a man must please himself and in pleasing himself it is just very likely that it will not please other people. I think a less arbitrary I course should have been taken which I think would eventually have brought about more desirable results to all concerned. Leaving all sentiment aside a fit out and passage paid to a foreign country can hardly be said to be a fair remuneration to one who has always been acknowledged to be an industrial main stay to the place.   David will be more missed after he has left home than you are at present inclined to think. I consider with an impartial mind that a big mistake has been made that if a more lenient course had been taken it would have been much wiser [...]   I wrote to him to Agnew's and Co giving him all instructions about how to act but I have had no reply from him which cause the delay of this letter. I suppose he is not going to write to me. I question if he has written home yet. We could have given him work here and had written to him telling him so if he could get her into some place in Melbourne or if she had any friends with whom to stop with for a while. He could have done better to have left her at home and sent money home to keep her. I had word through a letter from Mr. Newson's that they were looking for a situation as a married couple and is stopping in Mr. Hanna's. I suppose it is with the old man out at Mitcham. I think you were wrong to send them to John as he has no accommodation for a married couple. He would have to put up a partition wall and board the floor. He could have done with David single handed as we could given him fencing and ring barking of timber and besides it is 30 miles off a doctor where John is which might make things rather awkward in case David's wife would need one. Hugh also wrote to James to try and meet them but he says he could not leave the business as he had nobody but a little fellow of 14 to look after the shop so you see it would feel very awkward for them and John has no money to spend on training 180 miles while I am 178 miles and Hugh about the same James 90 miles. James wrote to the ship at Adelaide giving him instructions how to act and also sent one to John Hanna asking him to assist David with his boxes etc. I do wish he may be successful in getting a place. I should have liked very much to have seen him. Perhaps I will at a more convenient season. Who paid for the wife's passage and how much money had they. Let us know who seen them off by the boat and if any of her friends were there [...]   Perhaps the remarks which I may make may not be as smooth to your mind as the ought to be but you will excuse me for my rude way of addressing all of you knowing that all my surroundings are in their wild - or almost so - primieval state it is natural that I would borrow a little of their wild roughness [...]   David and his wife did not come here for I have no accommodation for married people. The house I am living in is all in one room and has to serve the threefold places of kitchen dining room and bedroom. Had I enough money I could put a partition and make a pretty comfortable little place out of it but as I am very scarce of that much desired commodity cannot afford to do it now.   In truth since James started storekeeping we have had a hard struggle to get ends to meet. If we had had about another £100 it would been different but James withdrew his help when we had almost reached a position which a little more would have made the place keep itself. You know 345 acres of country fenced and covered with a good coat of grass will not make you any money without you can buy stock to grow increase and fatten. We are just like a cart without a horse.   Had David been a single man we could have found tucker for him till he got a job or had I had a proper house the both could have come here provided she was not too heavy footed. In that case it would have been great folly for the nearest doctor is 40 miles away which would have to be traversed by coach or horse back and a visit of a doctor would cost £10. Of course you have no idea of what back bush life is in Australia therefore thought they would be all right if they were here.   Always when you think of Yambulla fancy you are in the midst of a big forest thousands of square miles in extent with the trees growing as thick as they are in Portavoe and that you are looking down from the top of a very big hill very steep on the side you are looking down that you see a creek (a burn) flowing in towards the big hill and when it runs right up against it it bends round at right angles to your left and flows about half a mile then joins the waters of the Tambo. In front of you is another nice hill which slopes gradually back for about half of a mile; about a hundred yards up this sloping hill from the creek imagine you see a very little house with walls built of small trees laid parallel with one door one small window about the size of the window above the slop trough looking out on your back grounds. This little house has an iron roof. Not far from this little house imagine you see a shed about 20 feet and 15 feet wide built of bark. When you do this you will form a better idea of how new selecters are housed in Australia.   Although I live in this humble way I have no reason for complaint for we have got on very well in the time this being the most improved block of land in the district. It can boast of what no other can about here a garden. But you all have had enough about this place so we will speak of something else. Well I must say that it is now you will perhaps deem me a little bold in my remarks. Those remarks bear reference to your action with David (perhaps I should say father's action but I now speak to all of you). In the first place for your own sakes it was unwise. [190] Remember I quite agree with you that David did what was not much to his credit but it was an unwise thing for father to send away his last son. It was like taking the last prop from the family. You must undoubtedly fall for what is to prevent you. Father is an old man and who will take his place and attend to the management of the farm when he is no longer blessed with strength and energy. I say it was absolute madness. Do you girls imagine for one moment that you are capable of managing the farm? If you are it will be one of the exceptions for I never saw a well managed farm that was managed by a woman. I do not mean to cast discredit on women but when a woman is out of doors she is like a fish out of water. Another thing father did very wrong by sending David to Australia without giving him what he has worked for. It is height of injustice to expect a man to work the best days of his life in drudgery and when he commits an error to kick him off to Australia with only his passage money. The law may justify you but the law of justice will not. And another thing is you had no right to throw your refuse on our door. We have a little self respect as well as you and you must not think that our acquaintances in Australia do not know as much about it as we do ourselves. By sending them here you did not hide your disgrace one bit and you have threw it on us more than otherwise it would have done. If instead of rushing at things headlong and after you had made up your minds to send him to Australia [...] you had first asked for advice you could have kept David on the farm for a bit and if you found you could not endure his wife you might have made arrangements with him about the working of the farm. I am very sorry for all parties concerned. I will draw this disagreeable letter to a close with the sincere hope that none of you will suffer from your imprudence and that you may enjoy better health [...]   They are stopping at Mr. R. Hanna's at Mitcham. I suppose it is the wife that has prevented him from writing. But she need not begin with any of her nonsense as no of us cares or will take any notice of such stuff.   Mother would like to know about John's young lady. I believe he met her after he left Fassifern. Her father was a ship merchant now dead in India and an uncle was executor for the widow and family and he robbed the orphans and they had to go out as governesses. They being able to read music and two or three languages; one of them is master of five different languages. She is a very nice quiet girl with dark eyes and brown hair plump cheeks and always a smile playing about face and seems healthy looking. She is a great favourite of Sarah's.   Had a letter from John yesterday wanting Sarah to take up the grazing area beside the block that I have got. You will be surprised to know that we have got 780 acres. [191] I applied for a block about 3 months ago and got notice to attend on the 23 April at Bairnsdale and I had the good luck to meet John at the Princes Bridge station and he stayed in Bairnsdale till after the court was held and I got it recommended to me. There is a block alongside that John wishes Sarah to take up but I do not know whether she will do so or not.  Sarah made an application for a block of land beside mine. It will turn in useful for us to sell or perhaps give to David as he could not make an application for land until he has been in the colony one year [...]   As far as I can gather John has got the fencing of the 350 acre block completed and has let the grazing of it for 12 months to one of his neighbours for at present we have not capital to put the necessary stock on. John has reserved the right to run 2 cows the mare and foal on the grass. He is busy now getting his garden ready for crop vegetables etc which he gets ready sale for at the Crossing hotel.   I don't think there would be much good in David going up to John unless John got a contract for fencing some of his neighbour's land. In that case there would be work for them both but not otherwise. Besides the accommodations are not very great for John's is only a one roomed logged hut about 20 feet by 12 feet.   David is helping the Hanna family to do some work at pruning and clearing orchard beside them which they had took a contract for. D has £1 and his wife has 10s. 0d. per week.   [...] Sarah Susie and I went to Beechworth on last Friday to take her affidavit concerning a block of land that adjoins mine. It will save her from having to go to Bairnsdale. She has a good chance to get it. I have got notice to pay my first half year's rent and survey fees; will pay it next week as I have it ready. If nothing better turns up I will be able to give David work for a spell. I sent John some vine cuttings last week which will be useful to stock both places. I sent him a lot last year and they are doing well. His fruit trees is looking well now and expects a good crop from them. He intends planting two acres of potatoes along with his other vegetables which he is very proficient at. John intends keeping a few pigs to use up refuse vegetables milk etc. He sold half ton of melons and vegetable marrows. All he wants now is enough money to put on a good stock of either sheep or cattle and I suppose he would need a wife too.   You will be surprised to know that Sarah applied for a block of land (700 acres) adjoining mine which she has been recommended for but awaiting the approval of the Minister of Lands. I have paid my survey fees making our lease and first half year's rent in all £20 £1s. 10d. for 742 acres of which I can select 320 acres and then keep the remainder in leasehold. Sarah's is leasehold but I can get somebody to dummy it and get 320 of Sarah's to put along with mine and make 640 which will be useful some day. I believe it will be good interest for our money as we can either let it or sell it.   We are thankful that mother is still able to knit and sew and hope that we may be able to repay her yet. Sarah having got a block of 700 acres she has been noticed to pay part of her survey fees now and with James getting married and going into business he was not able to assist John so I have been helping them to get theirs rung and fenced as if not done in three years they would have to forfeit and lose your improvements. You see although we have so much land it is all bush or you would understand it better by looking at the inside of Mountstewart or Lord Dufferin's demesne only the trees are box and gums from 12 to 36 inches in diameter. Many gentlemen at home would be proud to have such bush. Of course we can sell our rights at any time as this is the way we are investing our money. We had a letter from James last week in which he mentioned that David's wife had got a son three weeks old but supposed we had heard of it. They have been very kind to both David and her and brought up Mrs. Ricketts to attend her to save paying a nurse which costs from 25s. 0d. to 30s. 0d. per week. But he says she is very ignorant like as if he had come out of the moss.    [...] With reference to poor David you will all be pleased to know that we had them for some time especially his wife. On going to Melbourne to see them sometime after they arrived I then found her in such a state of health that would necessitate the abandonment of house duties in a very short time. I then purposed to David for them to come and stay with us until she got over her trouble. This offer was solely on his account and as a brother I could not think of them staying with strangers. They came here about 29th September. David knocked about for 8 or 10 days until I procured him a situation with a farmer about 21 miles from here. Time passed on and a baby boy was born early in November. They are both doing well. They remained here for three weeks are now living in a nice cottage on the farm where David is working. I do pity David poor fellow he is badly mated but he has made the choice and will have to submit to the consequences. [193] It is to be hoped they will stay where they are for a long time. I assure you I don't want her company here again. You are quite right when you say she talks and tells things she has no right to and things that never happened. She had the cheek to tell me that you were all offended because I married. I asked her what grounds she had for saying so but she would give me no reason. However in the course of her talk and story making she told Maggie or Maggie's mother that you were all offended at us all for thinking of marrying that you wanted us to remain single so that you would get our earnings thus classing David. She need not have made up any such yarns for I knew to the contrary.   Without doubt David has been stuffing them (the Kyles) with information to suit himself. On hearing him talk I could see that it was all a one sided story from beginning to end. Despite all this I could not see them homeless and gave them the best I could afford and put them on square footing for themselves. I hope he will make the best of it. I don't want to have her here again I have been cut to the bone repeatedly. I do not wonder at the steps father took although I thought it hard at first but it is evident that David has played the part of an undutiful son as well as doing that which is injurious to himself. It was no little that made father part with his last son now in his old age just when he wanted help. I was just saying to Maggie the other day if I had not been stuck up with this business I would not have thought twice about going home to work the farm. It is an awful thing that father is so badly situated. William wrote to me some time ago asking my advice but I reserved it. However as I am writing to headquarters will venture to give my advice although not asked for. My advice is for father to put the farm in crop and sell it on foot and then dispose of the land stock and implements. He will surely be able to get as much for it as will keep those at home comfortable the remainder of their days. What is this life to mother and him if they cannot take it easy when they are old and infirm. I feel sure you would all have your health better if you were to live privately in some nice healthy little cottage. Now dear Susannah this is now the last Sunday in 1890. I began my letter a few days ago but have been kept so busy that I could not get time to finish it. However as my work is cut out for every night to the end of the year I thought I could not spend it better than stay at home from church and finish this epistle.   Another Christmas has gone. Who will be spared to see the next. God alone knows. We have been thinking about sending some little thing to mother and poor aunt as Christmas presents but things are so very tight and money scarce that we have not been able to afford it. However it is to be hoped that we will be able before long to send some little thing.   The strike has been pretty hard on me owing to my business being cash. However it is to be hoped that business will stir up after harvest.   I herewith enclose £3 which will carry you over for a little. I will get some rape seed and also some peas tomorrow. You will find the peas useful for table use before Christmas. I think they will grow well enough on the ground where you had the potatoes last year as they are a different kind of crop. I want you to dig round the fruit trees and sow the rape a few feet round; then when it has grown 8 or 10 inches dig it down for manure. If there is any part of the garden where you do not want to plant other seeds or crop throw a few seeds of the rape about and when growing down it is a splendid green manure.   We have decided not to charge you anything for the garden for last year nor for the incoming year. The only conditions are that you dig around trees and sow rape as above stated. A few peas sown among the rape also makes a good manure but you had better keep the peas for use. Try some new ground for a few potatoes. Throw wood ashes where you plant the peas also horse dung if there is any [...]   You are right in boarding your man. Then you have any little benefit there is from the milk and the garden. But I would advise you to make arrangements with him to pay him only for the [time?] he is working. You cannot afford to pay him for wet days when he is loafing about the hut. It is quite enough for you to feed him on such occasions. Be sure you make these arrangements before he starts work with you. If he does not like that let him go. You could keep on the young fellow for a little while at any rate but should the weather set in wet I do not think you would be wise in keeping him as there would be too much broken time. Keep up your heart the block will come in useful to you yet. Don't ring every tree it takes too much time; leave a good few here and there; at some future time you could go through them [...] besides you make a bigger show for your work. Leave the good straight trees. [200]  You will be glad to know that I am to be married on the 31st of this month God willing. If the journey was not so great we would go the length of the Crossing [...] are there any neighbours to erect half of your dividing fences. I mean those on adjoining blocks and yours [...]   DEAR FINK  Here do I sit under a banana tree all in a garden fair - with orange & scarlet nasturtiums violets aloes peach blossom bright geranium marguerite Roses & Everlastings & all these are sleeping & dreaming with me in the hot noon.  Tuesday morning found my mother Roberts & I on the 'Massilia' - we leave the pier hand-shakes kisses tears & tender adieu our vessel moves off Melbourne growing fainter & fonder like a thin line on the horizon with its spires (& tripy Government House very much on the line).  - Long gazing at the receding line of civilization as the good old sun drops low - then again looking east one sees the brilliant 'Mercury' proudly riding high over the long impressive line of the Dandenong Ranges (the latter like a great pale blue dragon dreaming in the twilight) - and one doesn't feel Smike any more but Byron instead &  'Yon sun that sets upon the sea We follow in his flight Farewell a while to him and thee My native land ... Good night ...'  On deck again after tea. Wilson's Promontory & the general coast dim. The throb of the giant machinery & the pulse of the mighty ocean gently lifting the good ship a little. 'Smike' lies smoking an Indian (6 a bob) on a deck chair blinking at the new moon which plays hide-and-seek behind the great black funnel bravely breathing across the 'Milky Way' & with a slight pulsation the firm masts knock across the bright 'Southern Cross'.  9 pm - I'm writing in a room where they're all singing hymns & find it darn hard write at all - 'Oh Yes singing 'Those in peril on the sea' therefore do not so critical.  Let's see where was I in the sun this morning - Oh Yes Thursday morning we enter the heads slow winding up the harbor past men-of-war who salute & dip their flags in honor of ourselves & R M 'Massilia' & one feels beastly proud. [105]  'And the chest expands with its madd'ning might - Gods glorious oxygen' Gordon  Then Circular quay with many steamers busy & bright - towering behind em Metropole Customs & Morts & beautiful Sydney all glowing & oriental - Little steamers puffing hard and skipping over the blue water clouds of smoke next the steamers whistle & flute in different keys & over all the bright harmony the warm palpitating sky of the Sunny South - Sydney is an artists' city - glorious - Roberts & I go to Mossman's Bay & pull through the lazy green water & then lunch under the shade in the open air eggs meat cheese & 2 big bottles of claret grown in Australia - The little Bay seemed all asleep & so very peaceful - Oh Such a rest - Warm balmy air blue orchids & the purple glory of sarsaparilla - A Land of passion-fruit & poetry - In the afternoon down to Coogee - where the great green rollers tumble in like huge heavy cylinders of liquid glass spreading glory everywhere & playing a great symphony of thunder on the golden shore where the lovers sit in safety & watch & murmur & kiss in the twilight before they cross the heavy silver sand towards the tram when the flowing tide comes in.  I'm reading my 'Joaquin Miller' & also a fine book given me by Telemachus 'The Golden Treasury'.  YOURS TRULY / SMIKE  DEAR 'BDG'  This morning hot windy & warm as I travel down the line & the mirage sizzling & jiggering over the railway track. I arrive at my cutting 'The fatal cutting' & inwardly rejoice at the prosperous warmth all glowing before me as I descend & reascend the opposite side up to my shading shelving sandstone rock perched right up. I wipe the wholesome moisture from my pale brow - & having partaken of a pull at my billy (like a somewhat lengthy & affectionate kiss) I look up & down at my subject - is it worth painting? Why of course damn it all! - that is providing I'm capable of translating my impression to the canvas - all is serene as I work & peg away: retiring under the rock a bit when the light any shots - then 'Up with that Bl- F-g waggon Bill'. x -   11.20. the 'Fish' struggles over the hill & round to Glenbrook.  12 O'CLOCK The next shift comes toddling down the hot track with their billies & I commence to discuss my lunch & tea (of which I consume over a qt of every lunch) - & now I hear 'Fire! Fire's On!' in [illegible] the gang close by rest my billy on the rock take out my pipe & listen for the shots with my eye watching the bright red gum yonder - BOOM & then rumbling of rock the navvy under the rock with me & watching says Man killed - He runs down the sheltered side & cries 'man killed!'; another takes it up & now it has run through the camp. more shots & crashing rock we peep over & he lies all hidden bar his legs - & now men nippers & 2 women hurry down a woman with a bottle & rags - all the shots are gone but one & all wait & dare not go near - then someone says the last hole was not lit - & they raise the rock & lift him on to the stretcher fold his arms over his chest & slowly 6 of 'em carry him past me - Oh how full of dread is the grey mysterious expression of death - 'tis like a whirlpool for the eyes - Blown to death 20 yds from me - & as a navvy said 'twas 'Anorrible sight' - By jove - a passing corpse does chain your eyes & indeed all your senses just as strongly as love - all the men followed slowly up the hill & now all are gone but me & the fatal rocks & I dont feel up to my lunch - so have a smoke & peg away at my gem: but the poor chap who I was speaking to only yesterday haunted me so that I put my gem away & came away too - & had a shower & smoke & read & thought of him all the while - I asked a navvy if the chap was married - 'No Sir. But one of the Shannon girls is a good bit cut up' - it seems he was engaged to be married -   THURSDAY  The men didn't go back to work - this sort of thing skeers em a bit. go tomorrow all right I suppose.  GOOD NIGHT & / HOW ARE YOU GETTING ON / SMIKE  Lillie planned it all herself and I am constantly reminded of her in every turn in it and it makes me very very sad to think that after all she cannot share it with me. Often since my wee wife was taken from me I have wished that I were dead and laid beside her. I have nothing to live for now no interest to work for. Before I did not mind how hard the work was or how long the hours so long as I was earning something that would help to make my Lillie more comfortable or provide for her future in case anything happened to me. I sometimes feel as if I could not bear to stay in Melbourne there are so many associations that continually remind me of the past. If I see an opening on a station in some of the other Colonies I think I will try for it and go there.   [...] I have nothing more to write about now. I think in fact I wrote more for the sake of having someone to talk to than that I had anything to write but I am lonely and I have not what I could call a friend here and I do feel so lonely so completely isolated at times that I wish all were ended.   I have been doing everything since I came riding shooting cutting timber. Frank (Geoff's brother) and I rode 30 miles through the bush to a man called Brockman to get the shooting of his paddock. We can have the shooting if we ring-bark some of his trees. We rode around to see if it was worth it and we think we can make a £20 note out of it as we saw plenty of kangaroos but it was a windy day and they are always wild on a windy one. Though we came up the wind they never let us nearer than 1000 yards. We had rifles of course. I had a 10 shot Winchester [...]  We will build a hut in the paddock while at it. I can ride like a bushwhacker and jump my horse over fallen timber. Geoff rides a buckjumper. He is a toff at riding and has never been thrown. He is the best rifle shot ever I saw: never misses. [86] I shot some cockatoos (3) they are good eating. Frank got a small doe kangaroo yesterday. We have soup and roast ever since I came It is the best grub ever I tasted.   I can't write at all and as I cut my finger with an axe half an hour ago. wish you all were out here nothing but big gum trees everywhere you go. have never seen 30 yards of clear ground since I came [...]   You wouldn't know me now with a big hat and a Winchester on a fiery mare and a big knife for skinning in my belt [...] Frank and I run together now (he is older than Geoff) as Geoff has been away prospecting. He is going again on Monday. Frank thinks to get the ring-barking of Brockman's place (6s. 0d. to 9s. 0d. each a day) after we shoot the kangaroos [...]   We passed several parties of kangaroo hunters when coming out here. All of them have blacks with them. I wish I had brought a rifle with me. I will have to buy one soon. We are going tamar hunting this evening. It is a small animal of the kangaroo species and very numerous. I will send Carrie some possum skins when they dry. The girls trap them by the dozen and sell the skins.   I have been miles away in the bush camped for the last three weeks. It is simply glorious. I was out in a paddock shooting kangaroos but we (cousin Frank and I) only made out expenses. The fellows from the tin fields poached them all out of it. I have to pay £5 for the use of the paddock for one year and when we paid our £5 each we found we had just cleared ourselves. But you see we can go in the paddock now anytime in the year and will make pounds if the skins still keep going up in price. We have given them a rest just now for a month or two as I am going fencing as jackaroo or man of all works to two other fellows [...]   My first kangaroo I shot off hand at 150 yards. He stood nearly 6 feet high. I shot a brush or silver grey kangaroo before I shot this one but we don't reckon them as being kangaroos they are so small.   I am going on peelers (mounted) but won't be called for a bit yet (pay up to £10 per month) for a common peeler. Mr. Wright when he was on got £15 a month and would have been a judge by this time if he hadn't took to liquor.   I had a letter from a sister of Mr. McClintock who came out with William. She is in great want and has requested me to write to her brother and ask him to assist her which I did but never had a reply. It is a shame for them to leave her like that in a strange country; besides she is hardly right in her mind.    [...] we don't know what she will be able to do in this colony. She meant to take in boarders but the woman has no manners and knows nothing about cooking and lodgers would soon her out of house and home as she could not guide them and would give them far too much and waste food and besides it takes all that Jim has to keep himself.   please break the following news to mother and the rest as gently as possible [...] I received a telegram of Robert Wilson stating that John had died suddenly that morning (Monday) and to come at once. James was nearest the train and he got away at once and Hugh was a little later and as the train was the last one when I got the telegram I was unable to be at the funeral. When James arrived after travelling night and day he found everything done as we would wish except the death of our brother having been washed and dressed and the coffin ordered from Bruthen. I shall give you the particulars. In the first place he had two young men working for him who slept in the house. One of them named Jock Anderson had been away on his holidays and came back on Sunday afternoon. He asked John if he had got his dinner and John replied he had not as he had taken a drink of sweet milk. So Anderson said he would put the kettle on and make the tea for all and John took a hearty meal and remarked with a little laugh that he was nearly dead since he (Anderson) had went away and he thought he had burst a small blood vessel and was spitting a little blood. Well Anderson said to John that he must be making fun as he never saw John look better for John had just took off his beard that same day before his departure to Melbourne to get married to Miss Wilton on April 21st. The invitations were sent to the friends to attend the ceremony (on Monday morning before James told her). On Sunday evening he had a chat with the boys and said that they would not go to the fencing on Monday as they would take a ride and see how much of a fence our blocks would take as he wished to leave work for them when he was in Melbourne. He then filled his census papers with perfect correctness and went to bed fairly well considering the spitting of blood. On Monday morning the boys lay long being tired with their journey when about 8 or a quarter past 8 o'clock Anderson heard John vomiting and jumped out of bed and John called him to come as he was dying and that his hour was come. [195] Anderson cleaned his mouth and held him in his arms and asked John if he had any message to leave to any of his brothers or friends and if he could do anything more for him but John answered him no "all you can do is to pray for me".  James and Hugh went to a solicitor about poor John's affairs. I have a paper to sign stating that I had no claim on John's property and effects. The boys did not know whether my name would do as they might have to send one paper for you to sign. Of course I told the boys that I did not want anything off the land as I thought Hugh had a right to all that was in John's name. The land was taken out in John's name but in reality they were partners Hugh giving money and John labour and experience.   We settled for them to keep the land for another year and appoint Bob Wilson as agent to look after some fencing letting of grass selling cattle and horses etc for which he is to be paid a percentage. I also gave him power to sell Sarah's block and mine as I have not the heart to go there now since John's decease. We would have been there before this only waiting to gather a little money together before we could go as the boys had all we had before this. However if we had known there was anything the matter or that John was in delicate health we surely would have been there. I am extremely sorry that I did not spend my holidays with John instead of going to the river but was keeping the money to send to him.  I was talking to James and Hugh when we last met that we thought we should go home as it would be only right to do so as father mother and aunt was getting not so able to look after things as they used to and they said without doubt it would as it was our duty to look after the old people but financially speaking that we were better here. But owing to the way that David had acted it changed the programme of affairs in many ways.   I had a letter from James last night stating that David his wife and her child had left where they were and had gone to New Zealand and they never thought worthwhile to let him know that they were going. David's wife wrote a note and sent it by a neighbour asking for the price of a small basin stand that they left there at same time remarking that if he had not time to send a reply by bearer not to write until she would write to him again. James wrote me on 20th and said they had left on Tuesday week which would be May 12th. [196] After all that James and Maggie has done for them she has not forgot to speak her mind pretty freely about Maggie especially and not in her favour and James also remarks that he is not all sorry that they left as her scandalous tongue would have done him a lot of harm in his business. I expect if they do not succeed in New Zealand that you will have them home with you soon.  He has sent no money home since Christmas and I doubt if he has anything worth to send as he has bought a horse and is very fond of dress and spent a lot of money. I don't think he spends his money in bad company. He says he will not go home and that they may sell the farm as he had written home to that effect.   trade with James is as good as can be expected. Things in general are very dull all over Australia. There seems to be a depression in trade of all kinds at present. There are a great many people out of employment and the tendency of wages is downward.   There has been a great many strikes in various classes of labour which have done a great deal of harm. In Melbourne the shopkeepers have a great deal of surplus stock left on their hands after their winter trade which they are now selling at very low prices in order to clear stocks which of course shows that trade is dull and money scarce.   I had a letter from Mr. Wilson last week. He thinks that Mr. Johnston will re-take the grazing of the paddock for another term. We left the garden and beehives to Mr. Wilson at a nominal rate as the things - fruit trees beehives etc will be better looked after than they otherwise would be. It is just possible that I may go on the land about this time next year. Things would be better looked after and seen to besides there is not much sign of a rise in the drapery trade and I might be better off in the long run on the land. I will wait the development of circumstances and weigh carefully the best course to pursue.    [...] be careful to keep the bowels open eat wheaten bread and as much fruit as possible. Do not drink much tea or coffee. A little new milk with hot water in it will be a good substitute. I don't think oatmeal or wheaten meal porridge would do you any harm. It is easily digested and keeps the bowels open.   Speaking of myself I have given up drinking coffee altogether and only drink one cup of tea in the day sometimes only half a cup of tea. I eat a plate of porridge every morning except Sunday when it is not made in the hotel. I usually take a light tea and do not eat later than half past six o'clock in the evening. [197] Late suppers are not good for either man or woman. Do not wear tight stays. Suspend the skirts and petticoats from bands over the shoulders - if possible - instead of buttoning them tight round the waist.    [...] we are satisfied to go home to help father and mother now in their old days. But I think it right to one and all that father should settle his affairs. It will not shorten his days one hour but rather lighten them as he would be more content [...] David and his wife have been keeping a lot of talk about us going home and is angry that they did not get the farm so they would give all the trouble that they could. If he had got some decent respectable woman for his wife I would be only satisfied that he should have got the place as it means a loss to us of about £70 per year besides sacrificing our land. But for father mother and aunt Grace's sake we would as you say sacrifice something for them.   We have quite a farm here now 3 cows 8 or 9 calves and heifers horses ducks geese and fowl. It is a fine healthy place here. We have both had better health since we came here. In fact I have not had so good health for many years [...]  186 & 188 Farraday Street Carlton. October 23 1892.   Dear Frank   I Know you will be much surprised at not my writing home but to be Candid thare is no employment in Melbourne that is the Cause which detained me. - William O'Dwyer Came to the Cuzco and brought me to his place he has a splendid hotel. I Can never forget his Kindness to me and his good wife as nice and as affectionate a woman as I ever meet. He has a good Situation at the draipery in one of the first houses in the City - I Saw Anthony O'Lughlin he received me most affectionaly he has a good Situation and most steady.   I Came to Australia at an age not Suitable to the Climate a strange land and a strange people. I never Could live here in fact it is impossible to Get a Job here. I am writing this note at F. Hennessys - he is one of my best friends. I Saw a Great number from Ennistimon and every one of them treated me with the greatest affection. [248] I long to be home again. Send me the Clare Examiner and write me a long Etter.   Blive me from your fond   Brother Edward to Mr Francis Comber   Why don't he try his hand at something else. If I was out of work like that I would try any kind of work rather than be idle. Since the strike took place myself and four other men went out prospecting; we walk 100 miles out and in and carried our 'swagges'. So if a man was to sit down in this country he would starve here just the same as he would in the home country; they nothing got here but what a man works for.   The best rifle to use here is the ordinary Snider a sporting Snider (1000 yards) by Hollis to take a 577 boxer ammunition is the best rifle for kangaroos. [87]  A Martini is very good but too long to carry on horse back in the bush and it drives the bullet so quick that it does them no harm unless it hits a bone whereas the boxer 577 which is hollow fronted turns inside out when it hits anything and the wound bleeds freely. I was surprised to see the damage it does. A Snider gets leaded very fast and for accurate shooting must be sponged well every third shot [...]   I am glad to hear about the business doing so well and that £100 is a veritable Godsend. It will start me. I would not advise you to come here till I look around a bit. You see you and I are totally different. I am only fit for roughing it and take delight in so doing. Some rough fellows some days ago were trying to disgust me by eating the grubs out of the black boys but I at once asked for one and it really went fine. For nearly a week I was camped with some niggers and they having taken a fancy to me gave me a grand corroberie a thing few of the colonials have seen.   I would not advise you to come here on mere spec. You no doubt would get a situation in Perth and be one of the first in the place on account of your education. If you can see young Stewart's father he might write to his son who is aide-de- camp to the Governor in Perth (Claud Stewart). He could do a lot for you. You can be sure of a living anyhow.   I expect to be with the surveyors soon. I have not earned a penny only on an odd boomer skin. As for being a burden to the Wright's I work very hard for them as Geoff is so lazy and Mr. Wright is too old for work so Frank and I do the most of it. Geoff can shoot ride and reap and this is all. Frank who owns the stock and land is a hard worker and very decent. He is making £3 a week shooting at kangaroos but he uses two horses a day. I tried but could not manage on foot. They are much tamer when you are mounted with a bell on the horse. He has made £3 a day with his bullocks hauling timber at the saw mills. Geoff was too proud to do such work but goes shooting and then never gives his parents anything and never bought any stock. I have persuaded him to apply with me for a job with the surveyors but he only wrote today. Elyjah and Harry are in comfort but have to work hard.   When I got here I could not sleep; the house is full of bugs. It is made of split mahogany slabs and mud and has 4 rooms.   Christmas was spent shooting a sweepstake and athletic sports and then we danced till daylight. I can dance a bit colonial still. The girls here are a fine lot and can work like horses. I don't see why you put Mr. on my letters. Excuse dirt as I have been out with the rifle.   There is a new line starting from Bunbury to the Vasse a small seaport 32 miles from Bunbury. I went down yesterday and being out of work applied to the contractor for an axe at 1s. 0d. an hour. I am going down again with my kit on Tuesday. The line will last about 9 months and I ought to pull at least 60 pounds off it. I can make plenty of money here but only by hard 'graft'.   I told you long ago I had sent in my name and I then thought they would send for me when wanted (I wrote to the Commissioner Perth). A fortnight ago he wrote the inspector Bunbury and he wrote to me. I went in and passed a rough exam and a stiff medical one. I had to pay the medical myself 10s.6d. for the certificate. The Inspector said I would probably have to go to Perth and get sworn in almost immediately but I have not got orders yet. The pay is about £7 per month but you have to grub yourself (£1 a week out here). I wish I was on the force. I am about sick of here [...]   I am sure to be sent North where the niggers are committing great depredations. They chained up a copper the other day and sacked the station.   Geoff sends his love. He and I are going to try our fortunes up in the North (Derby) among the wild niggers. We start next month sometime after Christmas. We ought each to get £100 per annum up there on one of the stations. You see sheep and cattle with a few horses constitute a station. It is too hot for anything to grow so no actual farming is carried on. The country up there is sparsely settled but a lot of men are wanted on the stations and high wages are given as men are scarce and the gold fields draw them all off so if we can keep steady and save a little there is nothing to stop us having a station of our own eventually; sheep increase so and land only 10s. 0d. per 1000 acres (lease perpetual) and good feeding land too [...]   By the way I cut my knee on the edge of the kneecap so badly that although done a month and over I am lame still and I'm in doubts whether I won't always be a bit rickety. I cut one of the sinews badly. It had to be sewn up.   [...] as for port wine if you were here you could get plenty of it at 4s. and 6s. per gallon for the best quality and 2s. 6d. for light wine or what you call sherry at home. We have not the slightest doubt but if you had a change of air that you would be the better from it.   [...] rain is very much wanted as grass is very scarce in this northern district of Victoria. Besides ploughing cannot well be carried on till the ground has been softened by a good fall of rain times are very dull in Australia at present. Melbourne in particular is in a bad state and things are expected to be worse during the coming winter. [198] There has been a season of prosperity but it was not quite real prosperity. There has been over-speculation in many ways especially in land and building. Then there was the great strike and there has been many failures of financial institutions. Indeed things will be in a bad state for some little time to come. This would be a very bad time for anyone to come to Victoria for one has to know the ropes to get along or obtain employment. There is to be great retrenchment by the new government which will shortly be elected as the governments of the last six years have been spending money far too fast. In fact the whole family of the Victorian people are on the saving lines at present or in other words are whipping the cat. Well it is natural after all for a country any more than an individual cannot spend more than it earns and at the same time keep its head above water [...]  You will think it something new that the men should do the milking. You will find William will have a lot of new ideas which will be a great improvement on the home ones.    [...] we have joined the cavalry or as you would call it the soldiers but I may tell you we are high class. We are volunteers and are drilled two nights per week and two hours during our half holiday which is on horseback. The government provide us with uniform which is blue with yellow stripes. We provide horse saddle and riding boots. I might say this is the only recreation or amusement we have and we are paid for it [...] I have completed my second year here and am just taking stock. I hope it will turn out well. I have every reason to think so although business in general has been very quiet.   [...] Hugh was down here on Easter Monday. He and I had hard scraping up to get as much money as would buy 20 store heifers. Our land would carry a good number of cattle now but we cannot stock it; will have to be satisfied with re-letting a portion and stocking part. I am sorry I cannot do my share towards stocking it owing to all available cash [...]  [...] the usual dull times are felt in Echuca as well as other parts of the colony. There has been changes at our place lately. Mr. Scott a man who has been in the establishment for over 12 years; the millinery saleswoman who has also been there about 12 years and the milliner about a year have all got the swap owing of course to dullness of trade. Mr. Scott will not be replaced and a milliner and saleswoman combined will take the place of the two ladies. The rest of us that were getting anything of a screw have been reduced 5s. a week. However it won't be much loss to me as I will have a greater run of sales owing to getting first sale in the department Mr. Scott left besides my own department as usual. We get premiums of many things we sell so you see I will have more work and possibly more premiums.   It is not generally known that the vessels engaged in this traffic are the property of the planters who man each vessel the- Government agent alone being paid by the State Before sailing on a recruiting cruise stores - food and clothing - for the round voyage which must not exceed six months are taken on board. These stores are carefully supervised by the Resident Polynesian Inspector at each port of embarkation. But the vessel carries a great deal more over which there is no supervision nor in the loading of which is there let or hindrance. A cargo of miscellaneous wares - called "trade" - representing in value £500 or £600 forms the most important part of the equipment of every recruiting vessel and without which the business might be abandoned. These wares consist of knives tobacco pipes tomahawks needles looking-glasses long and short handled axes Jew's harps earthenware armlets and bracelets felt hats gaudy-coloured handkerchiefs strings of bright hued beads etc. Arrived at the island the anchor is generally lowered when two or three miles from the coast. When the natives desire to recruit or rather the "trade" boat to come ashore they invariably show themselves on the beach or light a fire. The boatswain on the voyage to the islands becomes the "recruiter" when there and he is the direct medium on behalf of the planters in securing "recruits." [214] Operations are commenced by lowering two boats - the recruiter's containing one white man and two Kanakas the Government agent's manned by two white men and three Kanakas. Each man is armed with a Winchester or Snider the agent and recruiter carrying a revolver in the first - named boat is the "trade" chest containing a variety of the articles mentioned. These are gifts from the planters to the friends of recruits and at first sight this seems a considerate move to assuage their grief at parting. The friends may choose goods to the value of from £1 to £3. Giving presents in this way is "a standing rule of the trade" practised by the French German Fijian etc.; all except the British including fire-arms and fire-water. As he nears the shore with the Government agent about four boat's lengths behind him he (the recruiter) turns his boat stern on to the beach but does not land. His oarsmen are ready to pull off at a moment's notice and have their weapons ready in case of sudden attack from the natives. As the natives gather round the recruiter asks them in pigeon-English if they wish to "volunteer" for Queensland. When one steps forward he is immediately followed by his friends for their present. Now the "trade" chest comes into requisition. The scene is exciting as they are handling the different wares but midst it all if the presents do not satisfy them they will not allow their boy to leave the island. What follows? Almost within grasp is the recruit to be lost for the sake of a few more sticks of tobacco another tomahawk or string of beads? No says the planter who has provided accordingly; and the beads tomahawk and tobacco are given; the friends are satisfied and consent; then and not till then the "recruit" recruits. This is what the Government of Queensland and the planters uphold as honest recruiting! Physical kidnapping strictly speaking it is not? But certainly it partakes of barter bribery or decoying. It is the white man's wares versus the black man's body. The strange point is that no Queensland Act or regulation had been framed to deal with this feature of the traffic and every vessel carries its supply of "trade" with as much regularity as it carries food and water. It is openly done evidently with the support and protection of the law in the person of the agent who would use his weapon if he saw interference with the recruiter.  She has great times paying and receiving visits as she mooves in the upper ten as I call them the are all so fine. I do the rough Irish man by the way and takes sum of the down about their language. The seem to know so much in one generation by their forefathers as they were clumsey allowing themselves to be catched thieving and then getting a free passage and rashings. The don't like it for the are realy good looking and smart.   The Queen's Birthday is over it is a general holiday and all classes seem to be loyal and rejoice alike. I suppose you will be that way in dear old Ireland after you have turned your speers into plough and your swords into prooning hooks but very likely you may use them a little first more fools you.   I am sorry that I am not in a position to give you the desired information as to Willy whereabouts. About 5 years ago I heard from him; he was at a place in the north west of Queensland about 2000 miles from here. If I remember right it was the Seatopa gold fields he was on at the time he wrote me. I have not heard from him since nor of him from anyone.   I often see the Joseph of our family in the form of our oldest brother Patrick but as he and the writer has not spoken for the past 13 years any information that he could give me on the subject I am not likely to get but in this case I will get a friend of mine to interview him on the subject of Willy's whereabouts. I will write to my friends in the different Queensland gold fields and see if I can find him; as soon as I can get any trace of him I will let you know at once. There is very little doubt but he is all right in some of the colonies; I suppose by this he is hitched to some of the banana women in the north or west of Queensland with a family of his own and quite forgotten that he left an old mother in the Emerald Isle to mourn his loss or to dream about his death or otherwise. However old gairl you can make yourself quite easy in your mind for he will turn up some day all right perhaps with a big nugget in his fob and half a dozen of young Bells with him and Mrs. Bell but let us hope that she won't be black as I was very near getting hitched up to a black myself. There is nothing impossible for a colonial in the back blocks to be up to but for fear you should think that I married a black princess or an old jin for to colonize myself I will get Mrs. D. Quigley to send you her photo and that of my gairl Doris Bell Quigley who was 2 and a half years and my son so she say Charles Banister who was 1 year and 6 months at the time the pictures were taken. [59] I got married in June 1889 and of course those two are the result of that union. Do you think that I got hitched up too young; of course they say that the older we get the foolisher we become.   I have been all over the country where Willy is now some nineteen years ago and I may be able to find him out: to advertise for him might be useless for I have been in places where we never seen a newspaper from Christmas to the next Christmas. I am sorry to hear that you have been troubled but Burns said that man was made to mourn and I suppose he meant woman too.   You will think that I have forgotten you all but no I never can do that but things has been very bad out here and I kept waiting for a turn but none has come as yet but I hope that you will forgive me for the way I have neglected of writing to you years ago but dear mother I have been knocked about a great deal since I wrote last. I have been at death door in Queensland twice with the fever but thank God I pulled through but it was touch and go with me the last time for when I got over the fever I had no money and I was among strangers and far away back in Queensland and as weak as a child so it was pretty hard lines but I thank God I pulled through. I left Queensland soon after and came to New South Wales. A man an old mate of mine paid my way down to Sydney and from there up the country 300 miles and we both got work on a new railway that was a making. So dear mother things were so bad I did not care about writing as I had no good news to send but I hope that the will soon take a change for the better.   They are making a continuation of the railway from Bunbury out in this direction bringing it now within 14 miles of Wright's. I have been felling timber on the line. It is reckoned the hardest work a man can go at out here. I got 1s. 0d. per hour 8 hours a day. I did well and was saving fast when the weather broke and the Australian winter came on rendering work by the hour or day no good as one could only make tucker (3 bob a day).   You can see by this that I am a better man by twice than when I left home and a passable axeman as you have to be to get on a felling gang. But had the weather not broke up I would have had to gone home as I caught a severe cold and a terrible attack of dysentery of which I am afraid it will cost me something to get rid of. All the evacuations are mucus and blood in large quantities and at very short intervals.   It is just possible I will go to the gold fields this winter if this disease don't put me under. In the bush one can't get medicine and only the most local and cheap remedies are all I can obtain such as warmth rest castor oil laudanum and chlorodyne. I have been a week now and no improvement. I wish I was well as I think I see my chance of making £40 or £50 in a few months. My knee is not painful nor am I lame as expected but it feels stiff in wet weather or when I squat down etc. [...] [89]  I cannot make up my mind here for more than a month at a time. I mean that Geoff and I talk now of going fencing then off gold seeking then off Kimberley and God knows what next. He was grubbing trees on the line and Elyjah and I felling. Where the rails and embankments and cuttings go the trees must be grubbed up by the roots but 22 yards each side can be chopped and felled as they more commonly call it.   I am getting on extremely well that is I am making a living which means in its turn that I have always enough tough damper and salt mutton to eat. I am still on the extreme head of the Preston River and about 50 miles from Wright's. I have been out over some of the back country looking for land. We rode day after day over a barren wilderness of sand and iron-stone gravel and saw (what would delight your eyes) herds of wild horses as we neared the better land on the other side of the said wilderness. We saw kangaroos in one place like flocks of sheep and emus too. Should the price of kangaroos skin rise I could make about £500 in about 12 months out there. The place has been seldom explored by whites. A few shepherds etc. are about the only ones. This country is covered by a plant or rather shrub which has a very pretty flower of a passionate red colour but it is a deadly poison to all stock. Sheep must be shepherded and kept out of the poison except horses (which don't chew the cud and of course kangaroos etc) so that you see settlement has been afraid to venture out. But the present responsible Government have recently made some very lenient acts relating to the purchase of this Poison Land as it is called. In fact they all but give it away only charging a £1 per 1000 acres per annum for 21 years when if you have the poison cleared off it and have it stocked and fenced you get a grant or the land becomes yours for ever and ever amen'. I thought on reading up the Poison Act that as the terms were so lenient I would go out and see the country and I went and liked it very well. I could take up 3000 or 4000 acres and in a few years if I picked (as you may bet I would) a place where the plant grew thin I could have a fine living and place. But before taking up any of it I am about to start out again to see more about it.  At present I am splitting a few thousand slabs and a few hundred posts and rails for a settler on the river here. I can tell you 9 feet rails (mahogany) take belting out with a heaw maul or beetle and a dozen or so steel wedges. I am as strong as a wild bull and my heart is stout so I don't care a curse and never get down on my luck. Somehow I feel as if I must come out right. I have done so well all along. I have got a grand name for being a good worker. When I was navvying the navvies used to call me Jimmy the pony I was such a little stickler.    [...] I had a letter from Hugh yesterday. It contains rather bad news about his land as the lands department decline to take the improvements already effected as sufficient to comply with the Act. However they have given him three months to complete same. It will put him about a bit as he is not financially in a position to comply with their request. It has been a source of trouble and worry from the beginning up to the present. However I hope it will repay us later on.   I shall be glad should James Colven need more money than what is now due to him in wages to hand him over an amount equal to your year's interest as your letter sanctions. At the same time I will be careful only to advance such money in case it should be absolutely necessary to carry through the necessary improvements thereby conserving your interest in the block for as you have a sum of money against the block it is necessary in your interest that the improvements should be made complete so that the land may be worth some rent for grazing.   As far as I am concerned I will render him any assistance that may be in my power and as I know the rape a bit my advice may come in useful. There is some further work to do on our own front block and of course I will give it to him to do so that he may have some ready cash. The use of the garden he will also have free for keeping it in order.   I am glad to say that I have at last got the half year's rent which was due in February but it was only yesterday that I received a post office order for the amount.   I hope to have a better man to take the paddock next term. The letting has not been taken out of the hands of ML Wilson therefore he has a perfect right to the commission and as it is only 2 1/2% I consider he earns it.   James has moved to his new home in Bendigo. trade is keeping up very well with him considering the dull state of the times [...]   PS The Lands Department have passed my block as satisfactory. The improvements on it now amount to £228 odd.   He has just finished stock taking. Trade was never so dull. Our boasted Melbourne is in a shocking state. You may have seen all sorts of accounts in the papers. Hundreds and thousands of people who became rich at a bound have as suddenly lost all just through this land panic. Consequently hundreds are out of employment. Retrench is the Government cry and taxes are heaped upon us poor unfortunates. We hope that this state of things will not last long. Some of the more hopeful tell us it will not [...]   MY DEAR SPENCER  How is the world using you? As I sit here in the old ochre smelling den which you know so well I can imagine I see you demonstrating the anatomy of a Cockroach to a lot of Callow Youth of both sexes do you I wonder ever wish that you could transport yourself to the wilds of the McDonnells. I often wish that you could I missed you very much indeed you were here just long enough to make yourself a part of our home life and in such a small Community. I got thus far when the hope of the House of Gillen appeared upon the scene with a long time dead and much mutilated lizard which he insisted upon me examining. He then deposited it in my Photographic Material box observing 'Fessa papa Fessa Blib Baloo give Fessa.' Whenever the young imp sees a lizard or any crawling creature he recollects you and your surroundings in this room which you would hardly know now it is so beastly band boxafied. I am sending you a few Prints this mail most of which you and I developed. I am forced to admit that with less exposure than of old I am getting much clearer and better pictures as far as possible I have sent you unmounted copies. The developing and printing material arrived a few days ago and I tried my hand at printing on Bromide paper with awful results sample of which I enclose. Have not yet had time to try silver printing but hope to have some good results to send you next mail. Have taken a number of Corroboree pictures since you left and shall get some more in a few days. If I am successful in printing you shall have a copy of anything I consider sufficiently interesting. If there is any picture that you would specially like to have you can let me know. Have got a splendid lot of stone Chooringa together since you left including some from the Kytiche tribe Barrow Creek. I have taken impressions of some of them in ink and am sending on to Stirling this mail. Some Glen Helen natives are now En route with a selection from the tribe inhabiting that locality of which I think you have some personal Knowledge since you left I have learnt that a number of Chooringa belonging to the Chichika tribe are deposited in a cave known to one of my Niggers and situated about 105 miles North West of here and I am about to organize a little expedition to annex the whole collection. [112] No rats since you left though Nigs have been on the look out but we have just had some nice rain the weather is becoming warm and we hope to have some before next mail. Byrne tells me they are plentiful at the Charlotte after rain he is sending French a couple by this mail. I was glad to hear that he gave you those moles he sent me a very fine one this mail and is to send me another later on. Stirling has been interesting himself in Souths affair the upshot is that South is not to be removed until the beginning of the year and if he plays his Cards well he may be allowed to remain altogether. We had one rather amusing Case on Court day this week and I thought of you during the proceedings which would I am sure have interested you and disturbed your risible faculties pleasantly. It was a typical bush case which only a Mark Twain could do justice to - Here's the Wife announcing tea Bacon and Eggs. She joins with me in kindest regards and all the members of the staff including Hanley send kind remembrances.  SLIANTHE. / YOURS FAITHFULLY / F.J. GILLEN  PS Would Mrs Spencer like an Alexandra parrot? I hope to have some shortly. FJG  I am to manage a store at some big saw mills which have just been started some miles from this place. When I say manage I mean that I will only have to manage myself the store and a horse no under-hands. My wages for a start are £1 per week and myself and horse found in all but clothes (the horse clothes himself).   When I said I was going farming I really intended to do so and did in fact put in a fortnight ring-barking and felling. But this job which is permanent and out here a gentleman's billet was too good to be lost so as I had only paid £6 or £7 on the land in work and cash I let it go to Government. If the store should be a failure I will go to the fields (Gold). A fellow never knows what his luck is going to be till he tries and anything is better than knocking about at contract work or navvying on railways.   When I come to think over it all I can see that it is the best thing that could have happened to me my coming out here. I always succeed everywhere I go and as I have never let liquor cross my lips nor done anything mean or ungentlemanlike I am well liked and get into the elites of society. You would not believe the offers I get of employment of all sorts. I can't go wrong. It would open your optics to see me falling all sweat and charcoal and the next day mounted on my thoroughbred (Rainbow) on a £6 6s. 0d. saddle togged up to the nines going to a ball or cricket match. I am invited down to the coast to some very nice people for a fortnight's duck and swan shooting and sea fishing not to mention a little flirtation with the pretty daughters. As far as money goes I have enough and to spare though I want more like everybody else [...]   I was offered £150 and found !! a year to go up to the Murchison district (North) to keep a store but my life would not be worth a kangaroo's owing to the fever and ague. You will wonder at my getting this offer and my present billet but you must bear in mind the illiterate state of a people without schools and descended for the most part from convicts.   Tell William that James Colven has been granted five months from about a month ago to complete the improvements. The last word I had from him he was busy getting up posts and pushing on as fast as possible with the work. He seems to have taken more heart again in the prospects of the land. It is pretty well certain now that a butter factory will be started at Ensay and possibly a creamery at the Crossing. Should it be so it will be good for James as well as for ourselves.   Everything is very depressed here at present the price of wheat being so low leaves the farmers with very little money to spend. Wages have fallen in every department of industry and thousands of men are out of employment in Victoria alone.   One good thing gold mining is reviving a good deal at present. Some mines that have been in working for a long time are yielding better now than ever they did. [201] Besides there has been a lot of new discoveries both surface diggings and quartz mining. The new discoveries are owing simply to the fact that men both with money and those who have little but their labour to put in it are giving much attention to gold mining and digging. When people are out of other employment and can get none they turn their attention more to the search for gold and the result is very satisfactory so far. It will help to pull the country through the bad times. There has been a find of a deep lead near Barnawartha which is expected to turn out well. There has also been some finds near Bairnsdale in the county of Dargo and also at Omeo. This will help on Gippsland a bit.   I suppose it will not be a matter of great surprise to you to know that I have left Echuca - further retrenchment. They are filling up vacancies with cheap young hands from Melbourne. Just now young fellows are willing to take anything over and above what will pay their board anything from 25s. to 35s. a week and very few get the chance of the latter wages.   Trade has been slow in Echuca for a considerable time and the outlay was greater than the income so the largest salaries must go. However I have had a good innings in Echuca and as I put a bit of money into Tambo Crossing while I had a good salary it will come in very useful now.   I am not going to lose any time looking for a billet as they are too scarce and the wages now offered I would not accept (having the land to fall back on)   I will therefore be off to Tambo Crossing next week and help J. Colven with his fencing and then get his help to get a better crop into the garden. Fannie the little one and myself have stayed over a fortnight at Bendigo. Fannie will stay here for a while at her mother's till I get things a bit fixed up at the Crossing. Besides she will be just as well here for a little while till she gets stronger and the baby is a bit older.   [...] things generally in fact everything has been very bad during the last winter. The Government is in a bad state financially hence retrenchment has been the order of the day right and left; this with the Bank failures has affected everybody directly or indirectly. However I am pleased to say that with all I have been able to keep up my returns. Indeed I shall be very much disappointed if this year is not as good as last so far it is better.   Sunday August 4 1895 Passed a cold night. Got up at 7.00 am. Cold morning and fairly warm day. Breakfast at 8.00 am:- porridge damper jam and a mug of cocoa. After breakfast I piled up my outfit on the wheelbarrow which consisted of the following things:- the tent blankets provisions pick and shovel sieve two prospecting dishes two waterbags and the shaker. Amongst the many sundries are four books namely:- Shakespeare's plays and sonnets Lord Byron and Sir Walter Scott's poetical works and Thomas Paine's theological works. This done I then went to say goodbye to George Reilly of Bendigo. Paid the shilling which I owed him then presented him with a tin opener.  At 10.05 am I started for Pendennie which is 170 miles from Lake Darlot. I found the load intolerably heavy so after travelling about three miles I plunged the shaker in the bush even then the load was still heavy. A little further on I noticed that I was walking on a trail of sugar. It was rather too late when I discovered that the wheel had torn a hole in the tucker bag and I had lost most of the scanty quantity I possessed.  I must strive to reach the soak before nightfall and camp with the party of men with two horses and a cart going to the Pendennie Rush namely:- Jack McTamaray Samuel Keenan James Bell Thomas Malcolm Carmichael and Rowland Anderson. [25]  Arrived at the soak at 7.05 pm which is 16 miles from Lake Darlot. At 7.35 pm I ate some damper a bit tin mutton a bit onion and cocoa. I chatted with the men by the fire till 9.00 pm then I laid to sleep at 9.05 pm. It is glorious moonlight and calm. Felt very tired.  P.S. The country I passed through today is flat with poor soil and dwarf Mulga. The 16 Mile Soak is situated in a sandy watercourse about five chains wide. It has nearly a dozen holes each with a few inches of water. There are a lot of Cork trees growing here. Some of them are about 20 feet high. Grevillea is the botanical name. [...]  August 5 1985 I passed a good warm might on the Cork tree leaves bed although it froze a little I felt not cold. I got up at 6.35 am. Chilly morning and pretty warm day. Breakfast at 7.15 am; porridge damper jam and cocoa. [...]  August 6 1895 Passed a sleepless night. Yesterday morning while mending the wheelbarrow I struck a blow on the thumb nail of my left hand. It festered and caused a terrible pain. At 3 o'clock this morning I lit the candle and scraped the nail with the knife. [26] It burst out a good deal of matter flowed out and I had little sleep afterwards. I arose at 6.35 am. Chilly morning and warm day cold last night.  Started at 8.40 am and camped at 5.50 pm on the Wilson Creek about 300 yards from Robert Craig's grave and about 20 yards from the track. We are now 40 miles from Lake Darlot. I passed about two miles of sand and Spinifex and found it a bit hard pushing the wheelbarrow. Passed some quaint basins (with Gum trees) about 15ft to 20ft deep from level to level and eastward I saw a table mountain. Made my bed of Mulga leaves. Done a little writing by firelight and retired at 8. 15 pm. Breakfast 7. 15 am; porridge damper syrup and cocoa. Dinner 1.00 pm; damper boiled mutton and cocoa. Supper 7.00 pm; rice damper bit beef sausages and cocoa. I finished my water at dinnertime. Carmichael gave me some. [...]  August 7 1895 I passed a warm night chilly morning and warm day. After breakfast Samuel Keenan Carmichael's mate went out to look for water as we intended to steer eastward for Pendennie. He returned at 9.30 am. He said "no water". We resolved to go by Doyle's Well.  We started at 9.40 am. We had not a drop of water left. We had had a little this morning. We travelled over 12 miles before we came to a soak in Wilson's Creek. We reached it at 2.35 pm. Pushing the wheelbarrow I got very thirsty and I drank like a horse. I had dinner at 3.00 pm and I drank a billy full of cocoa viz two quart. While we were having dinner three men arrived with a handcart. Just then three stray horses came to the soak to have a drink. They caught one and attached it to the handcart and off they went. They were going to Coolgardie. Two of the men were named Jack and Archie.  We started again at 4.40 pm. We travelled four miles or thereabouts. Camped at 6.10 pm about seven miles from Doyle's Well. We travelled about 16 miles today. We are 56 miles from Lake Darlot. We made a big fire. I baked a damper from 8. 10 pm to 9.00 pm used about 4£bs flour. Retired at 9. 15 pm. Beautiful moonlight night. Did a little writing by moonlight. At 7.20 am; porridge damper syrup and cocoa. At 3.00 pm; damper beef sausages and cocoa. At 7. 10 pm; rice damper cheese and cocoa. [27] [...]  August 8 1895 I passed a pretty warm night. I got up at 7.00 am. Slightly chilly morning and pretty warm day. Breakfast 7.30 am; porridge damper syrup and cocoa.  We started travelling at 8.20 am. We arrived at Doyle's Well 11.55 am. It is also known as Cutmore's Well. It is situated in an open pleasant grassy plain about two miles from the Bawden Range. Roughly about 64 miles from Lake Darlot and 236 miles from Coolgardie.  The well is 70 feet deep and has three feet of water good sweet water. The scale of charge is as follows; camel 1 / 6 per drink horse and bullock 9d per drink horse 5 / per week sheep 2 / 6 per score carting 5 / per 100 gallons travellers 1d per gallon. There is a woman here a Mrs Howie. She lives in a tent about a chain from the Well. She has two little children. I could not discern at a distance whether they are boys or girls. I bought two gallons water paid 2d. We had dinner here 12.45 pm. I ate porridge damper syrup and cocoa. After dinner we travelled about two miles and camped at 3. 15 pm about four miles (or so) from Bawden Range and two miles from Doyle's Well. Supper 5.30 pm; porridge damper bit cheese and cocoa.  P.S. A mile or so after leaving Doyle's Well we passed a kind of hill extending north and south. Formed of iron blow and slate and a lot of little green trees and plenty flowers. It made a beautiful scene. The country about here is flat with Mulga and Sandalwood. [...]  August 9 1895 I passed a fairly warm night. I got up at 7.05 am. Slightly  chilly morning and warm day. 36 years ago today I first breathed this mundane air. For my birthday gift I got a good gruelling. The barrow wobbled most viciously today. The axle dropped off the wheel at 2.00 pm. Took me 35 minutes to put it on. [28]  I started at 9.20 am and the track on both sides of the Bawden Range for nearly nine miles is the worst I've ever encountered so far and the sudden jerks caused pains in the joints of my elbows. The track is very strong indeed.  At 3.45 pm I started to cross the Bawden Ranges. Got over at 5.00 pm.  There are two men named Robin and Stanton. I presume the lease they are working is called the Diorite King. The man at the windlass said that the shaft is 99 feet deep and the gold is looking well. He picked up two pieces of rock mixed with quartz and diorite and showed me the gold. This he said came out of the reef at 90 feet deep.  After this the track has been a little better. I walked at a smart pace. At 6.05 pm when the shades of night were falling fast around me I came to two dray tracks one leading south the other east. I was puzzled which was the right one. I followed the latter. At 6.35 pm I reached the party's camp. None of them said a word. At last Jack McTamaray said "you had a rough road today". I said "yes". I boiled a little rice. After supper I made my bed of Mulga leaves. Did a little writing by firelight and retired at 8.05 pm. I travelled over 15 miles today. I am now two miles or so from the Diorite King and 83 miles from Lake Darlot. I like the country I passed through today. If I had provisions I would do a lot prospecting. I am eating now very sparingly. My provision is getting to the end of its tether. I have only 5 / 8d left and that will not buy much provision. Somewhat through a sudden jerk one of my waterbags burst today and I lost much water. It annoyed me very much. [...]  August 10 1895 I passed a fairly warm night. Got up 6.35 am. A bit chilly windy and warm day. After breakfast I made some wedges for the wheelbarrow.  The party started at 8.15 am and I at 8.30 am. I overtook them at about 9.00 am. At 9.40 am we crossed a beautiful creek like the Wilson Creek.  Lovely scenery and plenty of Flood gums a good indicator for gold about here. At 12.00 pm we halted in a small creek. We had dinner at 12.30 pm seven or eight miles from the last camp.  We started again at 1.30 pm. After travelling about 500 or 600 yards Tom Carmichael picked up a nice specimen showing a good bit of gold. I stayed behind for a while specking found nothing. I wished I had a fair supply of tucker. I would like to do some prospecting about here. At 3.15 pm we crossed the Bawden Range again. From whose summit we saw a track leading northward. The range seems to run north and south a little. At 3.50 pm we came to a soak about three feet deep dug by the hand of man lying in a shady and sandy place. Here we camped. It is about 13 or 14 miles from the last camp. Immediately set to work mending the awful barrow. She is giving me a terrible time. Partook of the evening meal. Baked a little damper; 3£bs flour. [29]  Did a little scribbling by firelight. At 8.30 pm laid down to rest on a bed of Mulga boughs.  P.S. At 7.15 am; porridge a bit damper syrup and tea. Dinner 12.30 pm; a bit damper sausage and cocoa. Supper 6.30 pm; rice bit damper bit cheese and cocoa. The country we passed through is a real good country for prospecting for gold. It has plenty Mulga Sandalwood and Quondongs and other trees and bushes. [...]  Sunday August 11 1895 I passed a pretty cold night. A strong wind blew all night. I got up at 6.40 am. Chilly morning and warm day.  We started at 8.15 am. After travelling three and a half miles we came to the main road from which we branched off yesterday. Here I noticed written upon the ground; Water 3 1/2 miles. With an arrow pointing to it. At 10. 10 am we crossed Station Creek five miles from our last camp. It is a large and beautiful creek about two chains wide. Its banks about six feet high. At 11.25 am we passed at the right hand of the road a beautiful table blow. At 12.15 pm we had dinner. At 4.30 pm we came to a little creek with a good water hole. We camped here for the night. It is about six miles west of Mount Malcolm and about a 114 miles from Lake Darlot. The country we passed through today is good for prospecting. I saw a lot Sandalwood Quondongs and poor Mulga and scrubs. The soil is poor. The water hole on which we are camping is about one chain long and about two yards wide and about one foot deep.  Six Miles West Of Mt. Malcolm - August 12 1895 I passed a cold night. I got up at 6.30 am. I was the first to get up. I lit the fire. Cold morning and warm day. After breakfast Tom Carmichael and the rest of the party decided to halt all day and do a little prospecting. Jack McTamaray and I went out together westward of the camp. When we got a good way out we parted. I went out over three miles prospecting found nothing. Although the country looked very promising. I got back at 12.05 pm. None of the party specked anything. I laid down to have a rest and finished to read Sir Walter Scott's "Lady of the Lake". I baked a little damper; 3£bs of flour. Carmichael gave me about 2£bs oatmeal this morning. I am eating as little as possible now. If I do not get some gold at Pendennie I shall eat very much less. I washed a pair socks and a handkerchief. At 7.30 am; porridge damper syrup and cocoa. At 12.3 0 pm a little porridge a bit damper boiled beef and cocoa. [...]  August 13 1895 I passed a pretty cold night. Got up at 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. [30]   We started at 8.00 am. At 10.00 am I reached Mt. Malcolm. The track lead on northern side of the Mount. Left the wheelbarrow and climbed to the very top of the Mount. Got there at 10.10 am from which I obtained a splendid prospect of the surrounding country. I think this Mount is 300 feet high over two miles circumference at the base. The top is flat (with a cairn) about a mile around. If I am correct Sir John Forrest named this Mt. after Sir Malcolm Fraser. It is situated about 120 miles from Lake Darlot and 10 miles east of Mount Leonora. Quartz and iron are its principal rocks. Mulga Sandalwood Quondongs and scrubs abound about it. At 1 .45 pm I crossed Bummer Creek. It is about five yards wide. Whose banks are about five feet high and whose bed covered with sands. At 5.30 pm we camped on the northern side of a hill about 131 miles from Lake Darlot. The country we traversed today is a bit hilly in place soil pretty poor vegetation - Mulga Sandalwood and Quondongs Salt bush and other scrubs. At 7.30 am; porridge a bit damper syrup and cocoa. At 2.55 pm; damper a bit of tinned boiled beef and cocoa. At 6.15 pm; rice damper syrup and cocoa. Scribbled by firelight. Retired 7. 15 pm. [...]  August 14 1895 I passed a pretty cold night. A strong and cold wind blew all night. I got up at 6.3 5 am. Cold morning and warm day.  We started at 8.00 am. About one mile after leaving the camp we began to go across a watershed dipping south. At 9.45 am we came to a creek and also to the Frenchy Soak. They were both dry. Then we steered due north. After travelling over two miles we noticed that we had lost our way. We turned back at 10.00 am and picked the right track. We halted for dinner at 12. 15 pm and started again at 1.50 pm. We travelled hard to get to the water. At 5.00 pm we thought that we had passed the water. At same time we noticed a cart wheel track and blackfellow's footprints leading due west. We decided to follow it. At same time McTamaray Rowley and Keenan walked ahead at a quick pace to explore. At 5.30 pm we met our three men coming back with the news that they had found two prospectors with two black gins and were informed that the water was three miles from where we had turned off so we turned back and reached the Kilkenny Soak at 7.20 pm which is situated about 148 miles from Lake Darlot. The Kilkenny Soak lies in a sandy creek pretty well flat ground all around it. There are three or four holes from four to five feet deep with a little water in them. We travelled over 17 miles today. All good looking country for prospecting. We passed today vegetation - Mulga Sandalwood Quondongs Cotton and Salt bushes a few Orange trees (not the real ones) some Kurrajong trees. The most stately one was standing by the track and being about 25 feet high and it is the most glorious beautiful and noble one I ever seen. Its beautiful leafy branches they out spread from the main trunk and gracefully droop. It was getting dark and I could not take much notice of it. [31] I have had a very trying day pushing the wheelbarrow over rocky hills and sandy plains. At 7.15 am; porridge damper syrup and tea. At 12. 15 pm; damper bit boiled beef and cocoa. At 8.05 pm; rice bit damper syrup and cocoa. It is over 34 miles since left the last water. Too tired tonight to make a bed only a bag under me to sleep on. [...]  August 15 1895 I passed a middling warm night. I got up at 6.50 am. Chilly morning and warm day. We could not start early today as Carmichael had to fill his tank as the Kilkenny is making water very slowly. When I got up this morning I noticed a party of three men were camped by the soak. At 7.30 am or a little after three black gins (and one buck) arrived. The gins accosted one of the party and he led one of them in the bush. Probably he gave her a piece of damper. This action inspired one of our own crowd named Tom Bentley better known the "Snob" he too led another one in the bush. When he came back we chaffed him about his action. He said the promenade was as good to me as a feed of cabbage. I gave her only a three penny bit.  We started at 12.50 pm and travelled only eight miles. We camped at the Bricky Soak at 5. 10 pm. This so called soak lies in a watercourse running north and south. There are several holes sunk to a depth of five to six feet with not a drop of water in any of them. There are six big Cork trees here. One of them is over 20 high. The trunk is over one diameter. At the northern side is a stripped patch of bark on it is imprinted an "Arrow" under is marked B.82. I had a fairly good road today for the barrow. Mostly level country with day creeks good horse feed. Passed some hills at the left. Passed Mulga Kurrajongs Sandalwood and scrubs. Everytime I had a spell this afternoon I read a stanza or two of Sir Walter Scott's Lady of the Lake. We are about 156 miles from Lake Darlot and about 14 miles from Pendennie. This evening I baked four little Johnny cakes of my last half pound of flour. At 7.45 pm I laid down to rest on a Mulga leaf bed.  P.S. At 7.30 am some soup made of dry vegetables a bit damper syrup and teas. 12.10 pm; rice damper mutton and cocoa. At 6.15 pm; porridge a bit damper a bit boiled mutton (tinned) and cocoa.  The Bricky Soak named after Bill Ebsary and Bob Horetop two bricklayers. [...]  August 16 1895 I passed a fairly warm night. Got up at 6.45 am. Chilly morning and warm day.  I started before the party (8.00 am) and travelled very hard. Save from 1.00 pm to 1.45 pm for dinner. Arrived to Pendennie 4.45 pm. I think I travelled over 15 miles today that makes over 170 miles from Lake Darlot. [32] It has taken me 13 days to span that distance. After leaving Bricky Soak the road led over a great deal of granite country. About seven miles from Pendennie the road runs along a chain of cliffs extending about east and west and are honeycombed with caves and they make a beautiful sight. Scraggy pines and Mulga and scrubs abound in the cliffs. About five miles this side of Bricky Soak I passed two gnamma holes in granite rocks one them is about six or seven feet deep about 10 feet across and about 15 feet around. The other one is about three feet deep and about 10 feet around. The country I passed through today is slightly hilly and poor of horse feed (poor soil). I passed Sandalwood Quondongs Mulga Kurrajongs Salt bush and other scrubs. This is the provision which still I have with me; about four oz of sugar about five oz tea two tins meat about two oz syrup about two oz cocoa one tin Nestles milk two cakes of compressed vegetable (these are very flavourless made by Swallow and Ariel) 1£b rice and 5 / 8d cash.  Here I pitched my tent. I went to the only storekeeper here. He has his goods in a tent. He is French Switzer and a real Jew. I asked him to sell me 2£bs of oatmeal as I cannot afford to buy a full bag. He let me have a burst bag for 2 / 6. It has about 4£bs meal. He gave me half gallon (gratis) water. He is the only one who has flour on this field. He has 10 bags of 100£bs each. He declined to sell it by the lb. He says if there is a rush to the Hawk's Nest he will get £3 per 50£bs or £6 per 100 lb bag. However I got 2£bs flour for two shillings. He said was only obliging me at that price. The old fellow has not a pair of scale but he measured the flour in pannikin. He said his pannikin hold just a lb but through the largeness of his heart he allowed me a couple of spoonful flour over the 2£bs. ..  The party with horses and cart did not overtake me today. At 7. 15 am; a bit damper a boiled mutton and tea. At 1 .00 pm; a bit Johnny cake and cocoa. At 6.40 pm; ditto...  Pendennie - August 20 1895 I do not know how this place was named Pendennie probably it was named from Pendennis the hero of Thackeray's novel or else after the Pendennis Castle at Falmouth England. Anyhow it was discovered by a party of five men about the middle of last month or thereabouts whom it is said they applied for a reward claim and got 10 men's ground. It is said three of the prospectors are named R. Woods and a M. Slater or Slattery another named Lindsay. I am not certain of these names. The ground consists of one main gully. It runs about north and south. Roughly the top end is about 139 yards wide. The bottom end about a 150 yards wide about half a mile long. Its bottom is cement. Very little gold has been found outside the prospectors' claims. At the east side of the gully is a high iron blow. From its top Mt. Margaret can be seen. There are a lot Kurrajongs about Pendennie. There is here also a fair mob of blacks. The poor creatures are hungry and the gins are offering their sable bodies for what they can get. The only dress they wear is castoff dirty shirts barely reaching below the navel. Some base white lotharios have initiated in the vile trade a very young girl. [33] She wears a dirty tattered coat down to her ankles. Most of them are still naked.  I met Tom Carmichael and he told me that Jack McTamaray has gone to the Hawk's Nest Rush. I have decided to try my luck on that field myself. It is 35 miles from here. I only found about four grains of gold since I've been here and I have now only four penny left and there is little prospect of me getting a few Dwts gold. There are still about 100 men whereas last month there were between 500 to 600 men. The water here is the same price as at Lake Darlot 4d a gallon. I am told that the Pendennie Soak is eight miles south of the field. [...]  August 21 1895 I passed a pretty cold night. Got up 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. As soon as I woke up I went to see Jack... who promised me a little flour yesterday. He was just partaking of his breakfast. He said the flour is inside the tent help yourself I said how much shall I take? As much as you want he said. I took 3 or 4£bs. I said I might do such for you some day. He climbed on a big Mulga tree and he indicated to me the direction to Mount Margaret. He also gave me about three pints of water. At 7.05 am I ate a bit porridge 2 or 3ozs damper a little syrup and tea. Kneaded the flour baked the damper from 8.45 am to 9.30 am. Meanwhile I repaired the wheelbarrow.  At 10.55 am I started for Mount Margaret 25 miles from Pendennie. After travelling about two miles west on the same road which I came from Lake Darlot I then steered due north through the thick bushes. I got my hands scratched and the flies flocked on them like a swarm of bees. Been a warm day. They picked at my eyes. At 12.15 pm I had a bite to eat; a bit damper syrup and tea.  Started again at 12.55 pm. After sunset at 5.30 pm I struck the road and camped. I think I have travelled about 13 miles today. I have had a terrible day through the thick bush the heat and the flies worried me very much. Above this the thirst to added to my discomfort. I left Pendennie with about three pints of water. I lit the fire made by bed under a Mulga tree with some Mulga boughs. At 6.45 pm I ate a bit damper bit onion bit tinned beef sausage and about three tablespoonfuls of water. I am very thirsty. I have only a little drop left for the morning. When I left Pendennie this morning I had the damper (baked this morning) about 2£bs oatmeal one tin meat four onions (not lbs) a little syrup a bit sugar and tea and about three pints water. The country I passed through today is level with thick bush Mulga Kurrajongs Quondongs Sandalwood and other bush (scrubs). Done a little scribbling by firelight retired at 8.30 pm. [34] [...]  August 22 1895 Passed a fairly warm night but tormented by the thirst all night. My tongue got so dry it seemed to me like I had a piece of wood in my mouth. Craving for water it kept me awake all night. Had a little sleep towards morning. I got up at 6.40 am. Chilly morning and warm day. At 7.15 am late a little damper with syrup and drank last drop of water about two tablespoonful.  At 7.35 am started travelling as fast as I could. At 8.30 am I began to cross some arms of Lake Carey. At this stage the perspiration was so great that I felt like I had water in my boots. At 9.10 am I reached an Afghan camp there were four of them with 17 camels. They were just starting to load the goods for Mount Margaret. I asked for a drink of water. They pointed out a little bucket. I drank like a horse. I think fully five pints. Meanwhile I felt a little ill so I sat down for a little while they filled my four pints billy can and I thanked the Afghans and walked on. At 10.15 am I met two men on horse back. I had a talk with them. They said that a pool of water is a quarter of mile ahead and they also put me on the short road to Mount Margaret. At 10.25 am I reached the Cement Creek with a beautiful pool of fresh water about three chains long and about 15 feet wide depth unknown. Here I had another drink and filled my two waterbags. Had another drink. Had chat with a chap.  Started again at 12.00 pm. At 12.20 pm had lunch damper bit beef sausage and tea.  Started again at 1.15 pm on the newly surveyed road. From 2.41 pm to 3.30 pm I crossed the northern part of Lake Carey. At about 3.45 pm I came to a very steep piece of the road. They call it the "Jump Up". I had to muster all my strength to push my barrow to the top. I reached the Mt. Margaret Reward Mine at 4.30 pm and immediately I interviewed the manager "Captain J.J. Paul". I explained to him my hard luck. I said "If you will be kind enough to let me have some tucker I will work for it." He said "Alright old man you shall have it. We might be all like you some day." I thanked Mr Paul. I pitched my tent lit the fire had supper at 7.00 pm; porridge damper bit beef sausage and tea. Made my bed of Mulga boughs and retired at 9. 15 pm. I travelled 12 miles today or perhaps more. The Cement Creek is seven miles from the mine by the surveyed road.  P.S. As I am writing 45 years after the event related above I may state that the Mt. Margaret Reward Battery was started on Monday September 21 1896 as soon as the engineer Mr McKay set the machinery in motion. Mrs Paul cracked a bottle of wine on the flywheel. Both residents and the employees of the company by invitation of Mr Paul were present. See the Coolgardie Courier of October 10. 1896. [35]  Mt. Margaret - August 31 1895 From August 23 to August 31 that is today I have been chopping firewood for Mr Paul at rate of £4:: per week. The timekeeper (as well as the storekeeper for the company) made up my time. It comes to £5.6.8. so I got nine shillings and three pence in coins. The rest paid for goods which are as follows; 50£bs flour £1. 16.6 two bags of oatmeal (7£b each) 11 / - 5£bs sugar 5 / - six tins Nestles milk 9 / - 3£bs potatoes 4 / 6- two tins baking powder 3 / - nine tins meat 14 / - 5£bs rice 5 / - 2£bs salt 2 / - half pound tea 1 / 5- two tins jam (of 2£bs tin) 5 / - two lbs onions 3 / - one pound dry vegetables 2 / 6- two boxes matches 6d.  Although I have had a tough job chopping up Mulgas Gidgis and gums on account of the axe being full of gaps I have received much kindness since I have been here. I have been camping near a young man named William Ryan. He is 25 years of age. He is from Taranaki New Zealand and he is an excellent young man indeed. He works at the mine. Tomorrow is Sunday and I will ascend once more the summit of Mount Margaret which is about two miles or so from the mine.  P.S. The mine which Mr Paul is the manager is called "Westralian" that is West Australia which is a Reward claim. It has already four shafts whose depth are 66ft 70ft 80ft and 110 feet. [...]  September 2 1895 I passed a middling warm night a shower of rain fell during the night. I got up at 6.30 am. It looked like rain though kept dry and a little cloudy all day and a light cool wind blew all day from south to north. Breakfast at 7.30 am; porridge damper canned mutton and tea. Baked a damper from 8.30 am to 9. 15 am with about 5£bs flour. Meanwhile repaired the wheelbarrow and loaded it.  At 11.00 am I bid goodbye to Billy Ryan and started for the Red Flag which is 12 miles from Mount Margaret also I have too much on the wheelbarrow. At 12.30 pm I had lunch; damper canned mutton and water. Just then Mr J.J. Paul from the big quartz hill came along on horseback. He stopped to talk to me. I again thanked him for his kindness to me. He said I might want some tucker myself someday. He wished me good luck and passed on. I started again at 1. 15 pm. At 5. 15 pm I came to an alluvial (worked out) patch of ground with two roads one leading south-east the other due west. Got puzzled which one to take. I followed the south-east after I travelled a mile or so I noticed that the sun had gone down and left a clear sky and a streak of golden clouds in the westerly region. I felt very anxious to meet a human being. At 6.05 pm I came to a very high hill of iron boulders. I ascended to the top of it. Saw no sign of camps fire and smoke. Nothing but flat country over which deep silence pervaded and the sombre form of Mount Margaret loomed afar. Returned to the wheelbarrow and camped. [36]  Tommy Windich was 29 years old when he was relieved of his duties as native Constable to join John Forrest in his first expedition in search of Dr Leichhardt. He was John Forrest's constant companion and usually rode with him at the head of the party. He was a first-class bushman and invaluable as a water finder.  In appreciation of his loyal service John Forrest named WINDICH SPRINGS in Tommy's honor. After Tommy Windich's death John Forrest wrote  "This faithful and intelligent native has passed away he was still a young man and for the past 10 years had been closely connected with every exploration in this colony. Twice he crossed from Perth to Adelaide and took a prominent part in the explorations. He has died away from all his old friends but his name is almost a household word.  I will take steps to have his grave marked".  The headstone is in the Esperance Museum and it states  "Erected by John and Alexander Forrest in memory of Tommy Born near Mt. Stirling 1840. Died at Esperance May 1876. He was an aboriginal native of West Australia of great intelligence and fidelity". [37]  At 6.20 pm lit a big fire against a big Mulga made my bed of Mulga boughs. Supper 7.05 pm; damper cooked mutton and tea. Retired at 9.10 pm. The country passed through today is flat poor soil covered with Mulga Quondongs Kurrajongs Sandalwood and scrubs plenty of quartz and ironstone about.  P.S. I am camping about 200 yards below the ironstone blow. It is calm and a fine moonlight night. I travelled fully 14 miles today. [...]  Red Flag - September 3 1895 I passed a fairly warm night. Got up 6.40 am. Chilly morning and warm day. Breakfast 7.10 am; damper canned beef onion and tea.  Puzzled about the whereabouts of the Red Flag started travelling at 8.00 am. Met a man with a horse and cart with a tank of water coming from Windich Brook which is 14 miles from the Red Flag. He informed me that I was upon the wrong track that I had passed it yesterday and I was now seven miles from it. I got a surprise. He gave me some water and I turned back and reached my destination at 1. 10 pm. Feeling tired travelling over rough ground I pitched my tent against a Mulga tree facing east at the north-west of the well which is situated about midway between the Red Flag and the Hawk's Nest.  These mining patches are in line and about three miles apart. Boiled the billy and had dinner at 1.50 pm. Same as per breakfast. Afterwards got the loan of a rope from the man I met on the track and went to the well to fill my waterbags which is 90 feet deep and makes very little water. It took me nearly two hours to get about four gallons. Supper at 6.55; porridge damper apple jelly and tea. Passed the evening by the fire retired at 9.40 pm.  Red Flag - October 2 1895 It will be a month tomorrow since I came to the Red Flag and Hawk's Nest. After working very hard and spent long hours at the well getting water I have managed to get about 14 Dwts of gold. I got mostly outside the other men's claims on the pearling ground. Some days I do not feel well at all. I have decided to go down near Coolgardie and get underground work in one of the mines now that the hot weather is drawing near. I have a very forlorn hope of striking a few ozs gold outside the claims. Today I only got a half grain of gold.  As the memory of most men is both short and defective I will get down a few things about this field that is both the Red Flag and Hawk's Nest as far as I have heard by the camp fire at night in case I might get a fit of curiosity in future years to know aught of the past. [38] [39] [40] [41] [42]   October 4 1895 I passed a warm night. Got up at 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. At 7.30 am; porridge damper boiled tin beef and cocoa. At 8.00 am Armand came to say goodbye. While he was going to work he told me that yesterday he set in to work where I knocked off and that he had not been digging five minutes when found a 5 Dwts piece of gold. So you are leaving gold behind. [43] I said good luck to you Armand if I had struck that piece it might of induced me to do a lot of dead work for many days and we might have had many more talks by the camp fire at night but as I do not feel too well some days so I have decided to go. We parted to meet no more. I went at once to the well. It took me till 9.00 am to draw a half gallon water.  I started at 11.00 am. I have a pretty heavy load on the barrow; tools shaker sieve pick and shovel some tucker waterbags and sundries things. At 12. 10 pm had lunch; damper boiled beef and tea. Started again at 1. 10 pm. Arrived at Mount Margaret Mine at 5.00 pm and camped along side Billy Ryan's tent. Had supper at 5.45 pm. Billy gave me some stew bread and two pannikin tea. I presented him with a little nugget of gold weighing two or three Dwts. He refused to take it so gave me 8 / 6 in silver and some flour. He baked a damper and after took it out I baked a damper too in the same ashes from 8.00 pm to 9.30 pm; 4£bs flour in it. Meanwhile done some scribbling by moonlight. Billy went to bed at 8.45 pm and I at 9.45 pm.  P.S. Today I had several spells on the track for a few minutes at time. I read in each spell a few lines from a book titled Andy by Samuel Lover. I picked up this amusing book on a deserted camp at Pendennie At 1. 50 pm a camel team passed me on the track laden with provisions for the Red Flag. Poor Procter for who they made a collection tin at Red Flag and on September 29 is camping near Billy Ryan and he looks the picture of death. A teamster refused to take him to Coolgardie for fear he might die on the way and get in a fix to have a dead man on his wagon. [...]  October 5 1895 Slept quite well last night. Up 6.00 am. Slightly chilly morning and warm day. Breakfast at 7.00 am. Billy Ryan gave me some stew made of tin meat and potatoes damper and a pannikin of tea. Before breakfast I went to Mr Paul. He gave me a note to take it to the condenser man who filled my two waterbags. Mr Paul let me weigh the gold I got at the Red Flag. Was just 14 Dwts. I gave him a piece of gold nearly two Dwts with a bit quartz on it and again thanked Mr Paul for his kindness to me.  At 8.00 am bid goodbye to Mr Paul and Ryan and off on the track once more. At S.45 am I passed the jump up and thence across Lake Carey. At 9. 10 am I came to a stick about three feet high and a piece board nailed on it inscribed thereon: To the Pride of Mount Margaret half mile  with an arrow on the ground. I rested for a while on a big block of quartz about eight yards around about two feet high. A little further north Stands two more quartz blocks. At 9.50 am I got over the Lake. [44]  At 11.30 am passed Cement Creek (before that the spot where I had dinner on August 22nd).  At 11.50 am I got on the main road to Coolgardie and here I had lunch; damper boiled tin mutton and tea.  Started again at 1.10 pm. At 2.30 pm I passed two men with two camels going up. At 2.35 pm I passed where the Afghans gave me a drink on August 22nd. At 5.00 pm I passed where I camped on August 21. At 5.25 pm I came to a new road leading to the Pendennie Field at least I think so. It branched off south-east and at 5.30 pm I camped three miles or so west of Lake Carey. I think I have travelled 14 miles today. From Cement Creek up to here the road has been too sandy for the barrow and took every ounce of my strength to push it this afternoon. I lit the fire and while the billy was boiling I made my bed under a branchy young Mulga (with boughs and two sheepskins) about eight yards off the road. Supper at 5.50 pm same as per lunch with piece onion. Done a little scribbling by firelight. Retired at 8.45 pm. [...]  Sunday October 6 1895 Passed a good warm night. Got up 6.00 am. Chilly morning and warm day. Breakfast 6.30 am; damper jam and cocoa. [45]  Rolled the things loaded the barrow and started at 7.00 am and arrived at Pendennie at 2. 10 pm. Very bad road for the barrow sandy nearly all the way. I think I have travelled 12 miles today. I camped 52 yards south where I had camped before. Made my bed against a Mulga tree. Bought a gallon water 6d. Had dinner and supper combined at 3.50 pm; porridge damper tinned mutton and tea. After meal took a walk about. I see that there are only about a dozen men left here now. All the blacks have levanted for some other field and Messrs Slater Woods and party the original prospectors of this field are applying for a 12 acres lease below the reward claim. The notice posted on one of their pegs is dated September 5 1895. They are going to sink a shaft where there is cement and quartz below. Pendennie appears to me a dismal place. They have cut down the Kurrajongs where I camped last August. I returned to my camp at 6.45 pm. I read three chapters of the book Andy (by Samuel Lover) six to eight chapters and retired at 8.30 pm. [...]  October 7 1895 I slept well last night warm. I got up 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. Breakfast at 6.50 am; some meat and potato stew damper and tea. After breakfast I went to the store and sold my bit of gold 9 Dwts and 18 grains. I received £1.14.10. I bought the following goods:- two tins meat 3 / - two lbs rice 2 / - two lbs sugar 2 / - one tin milk 1 / 6 1£b candles 1 / 6 half tin cocoa 1 / 5 a tin curry 1 /  small bottle ink 6d 1 lb potatoes 1 / 6 one gallon water 6d. Got cash £1.0.l. This done I left Pendennie at 8.25 am and I arrived at Pyke's Gully 12.15 pm which is seven miles east of Pendennie and one mile and a half from Lake Carey. Had dinner at 100 pm; damper plum jam and tea. After meal I pitched my tent. At 3.00 pm I went out to look around the place. I met two Victorian chaps. They gave me a drink of warm tea. Had a talk with them for about 15 minutes. Got back to my camp 6.45 pm. Supper at 7.30 pm; damper boiled mutton and tea afterwards. Went to get a gallon water 6d - and baked a damper 3£bs flour from 8.55 pm to 9.30 pm. Retired at 9.45 pm.  October 8 1895 Passed a cold night and awake for hours before I fell asleep. Arose 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. Worked all day making a shaker. Finished after tea then read some pages from the book Andy and retired 9.20 pm.  P.S. Boiled mutton and potato stew and cocoa for breakfast (7.00 am). At 12.00 pm; damper plum jam and tea. At 6.15 pm; rice with milk damper and tea. Bought one gallon water 6d.  October 9 1895 I slept well last night. Got up 6.30 am. Slightly chilly morning and warm day. I worked very hard from 8.00 am to 5.00 pm on the large patch at the east of the Bare Hill and I raised two fine colour of gold. [46] There are about 20 men there and I have very poor chance of getting a few Dwts outside their claims and I feel certain if I stay here too long I will get hard up. So I will be on the track again tomorrow while I have the little provision and the few shillings. After I knocked off I made a Johnny cake for supper. Afterwards baked a damper (over 3£bs flour) from 9.00 pm to 9.45 pm and retired at 10.00 pm.  P.S. At 7.15 am; porridge damper boiled mutton and cocoa. At 12.00 pm; damper boiled mutton and tea. At 7.50 pm; potato and meat stew Johnny cake and tea. Bought two gallons water one shilling. [...]  October 10 1895 I was awake for hours last night before I could get any sleep. I got up at 6.30 am. A rather mild morning and very sultry all day. Very warm indeed and the flies Very troublesome all day. Breakfast at 7. 15 am; potato and roast mutton stew damper and cocoa. Loaded up the barrow and started on the track at 8.15 am. At 10.05 am I met two men going to Pyke's Gully with two horses and dray with a tank of water on it. Asked to sell me hall gallon water. They gave it to me gratis. At 11. 50 am I halted for lunch. Bit of roast mutton damper and cocoa. [47]  Started again at 1.05 pm and I arrived to Pendennie Soak at 3.25 pm. As I was approaching the soak huge clouds began to roll up from the west. I hastened to pitch my tent 300 yards west of the soak. At about 3.45 pm the wind arose to such a high pitch in another moment a mighty cloud of dust enveloped the whole place and it seemed like a dark night. You could not see a yard ahead. The storm was accompanied by successive loud thunders and lightning flashes which momentarily illuminated the darkness. At 4.00 pm a few big drops of rain fell and the storm was over. It rolled eastward a few miles south of Pendennie and by 4.30 pm was all clear. Supper 6.30 pm; rice mutton damper and jam and tea. After meal took a walk about the place. I retired at 8.25 pm.  The Pendennie Soak This soak is situated in an open and wide level country extending around the soak for many miles. Nearby to the east I noticed some hills. Nearby to the south-east of them are two high hills. They look like quartz blows. The soak consists of five or six holes five feet to six feet deep and a foot in circumference and each of them has a little water in it. There is a heavy drain. It supplies Pendennie Pyke's Gully the Eucalyptus and prospectors about it. Horses and camels are also watered here. They say that the natives call this soak Lindgi Myah but I am not quite certain that this is the correct spelling. They say that Kurnalpi lies 60 miles south-east from here. There are two stores here in little Calico buildings. The Pendennie Field is eight miles from here and Pyke's Gully 12 miles. [...]  October 11 1895 It was pretty cold last night I got up at 6.30 am and warm day. Breakfast 7.05 am; porridge damper plum jam and cocoa. Started on the track at 8.25 am. After travelling about a mile a young man named Parry Ryan with three horses and dray going to the Southern Cross overtook me offered to carry my heaviest things on the dray and I pushed the barrow behind. At 12.30 pm we halted for dinner. I ate damper boiled beef and tea.  We started again at 3.00 pm. After travelling 11 miles at 5.00 pm we came to the junction of two roads one leading west to Niagara thence to Menzies. Parry said this is my road so took down my things. We shook hands and I thanked him and we parted. [48] The road for over three miles had been bad enough but now it began to get terrible for the wheelbarrow. Nothing but quicksand which it buried the wheel to its axle. After leaving Ryan I went over a sandhill then across a sand plain a portion of an ancient lake then over a sandhill again then down then up again. The sweat was pouring out of me like if I were taking a turkish bath. I found progress almost impossible and had to take a spell every two or three yards. At 6. 15 pm I felt awfully fatigued and as the shade of night was encompassing me I decided to camp for the night.  Just then I beheld a light at a distance. I made up my mind to get there. This time got a rope around my chest the two ends tied to the front of the barrow and dragged it as if it were a sleigh. At 630 pm I reached the firm surface of Lake Rebecca. Got behind the barrow again and travelled at smart pace. At 6.45 pm reached Michael Burke's condenser and done my cooking on the condenser fire. Supper 7.50 pm; rice boiled beef damper jam and cocoa.  After a little chat with Burke and his mate I laid down to rest at 8.25 pm.  P.S. I travelled 17 miles today from the time I parted with Parry Ryan. A westerly wind began to blow and by the time I reached the condenser was blowing hard and when I laid down on my sandy bed the wind was blowing very keen and icy cold and I shivering with cold. [...] [49]  October 12 1895 I passed a middling warm night. A keen westerly wind blew over the lake all night and I could not get any sleep. I got up at 6.30 am cold morning a bit windy and warm day. Breakfast 6.55 am. Mr Burke gave me some fried bacon (and two pannikin tea). I ate it with my damper. He also gave me 1£b and a half of Lake Rebecca salt and also filled my water bags with condensed water all gratis. I thanked him and his mate for their kindness. At 7.30 am I started on the track again. I had a terrible road all the way for the barrow. At 2.00 pm I reached Yerilla (10 miles from Lake Rebecca). I camped about 50 yards on the south of the condenser. There were four young men by the condenser one of them had a bicycle. Here they saw me drawing near pushing the wheelbarrow. They burst out laughing because I looked anything but a picture of beauty. I travelled 10 miles today. After I had a little rest I walked about. I picked up a few scraps of newspapers returned to my camp 5.45 pm and cooked my supper. Partook of it at 6.35 pm; rice and boiled beef (tinned) damper and tea. After supper I read the bits of newspapers and turned in at 9.30 pm.  P.S. My arms had a tough time today pushing the barrow over a rough road. Lunch at 11.30 am; damper boiled beef a potato and cocoa. The wind began to blow when I turned in to sleep.  Yerilla - October 13 1895 (Sunday) I slept pretty well last night. Got up 6.05 am chilly morning and pretty warm day. Breakfast 7.00 am; boiled beef potatoes damper and cocoa. Afterwards I walked about specking.  At 8.50 am I left for Mount Catherine which is five miles south-east of Yerilla and arrived there at 10.25 am. I found at the camp two young men and I refrained from asking their names One gave me permission to go to the top of Mount Catherine and when I came down I had a chat with him. He invited me to have dinner with him "at 12.00 pm". I had for dinner Sydney tripe with sauce damper and two pannikin tea. He gave me also two gold specimens from the Mount Catherine which the buyers of the mine think it will go two ozs to the ton. But the finders of the mine say it will yield over five ozs per ton. At 12.35 pm I thanked the young man for his kindness and left for Yerilla. Arrived 2.35 pm. Rested for a while. Supper at 5. 10 pm; rice boiled beef damper and tea. Baked a damper (used 4£bs flour) from 7.00 pm to 8.00 pm. While the damper was baking a chap named Thompson from the Red Flag came over to my camp to have a chat by the campfire. He went away at 9.00 pm and I retired at 9.15 pm.  P.S. Bought one gallon water 6d. [...] [50]   October 13 1895 I left Yerilla for Mount Catherine at 8.50 am and arrived at base of it at 10.25 am. I reached the top at 10.30 am. It is a huge quartz blow. It runs north and south. It is 250 yards long and 70 feet high. It appears there is gold in all the stones and few can see some stain in some them. [51]  This great outcrop of quartz is something like a Dromedary's back. It has a watershed east and west and a slight depression in the centre. There are a lot blocks on the top of the Mount. The biggest one is on the northern side is about nine feet wide. The vegetation on the Mount is scanty. There is a Kurrajong about eight feet high some of its branches have been cut off. There is a Mulga some black Oaks Cotton bush and other scrubs. Methinks where the Mount now rises in the countless ages of the past was level ground. Nearly to the northern side the ground is quite level. With exception of this flat the rest of the country around the Mount is slightly hilly. The Mount Catherine Lease consists of 56 acres of ground. Below the highest point of the Mount (east side) is the shaft 35 feet deep with a west drive 24 feet long. The shaft is about six feet x three feet. I have been informed that Messrs O'Driscoll and Thompson have bought the Mount Catherine Mine for £15000 cash with an interest in shares worth £1000. The young man who entertained me to dinner today and showed me some of the visible gold on the outcrop and gave me two little gold specimens and allowed me to go up on the top of the Mount is one of the six prospectors and his name is Edward Trothiez. He said that he is expecting O'Driscoll any day. Roughly Mount Catherine is situated 120 miles in a straight line north of Coolgardie about 80 miles (or so) north of White Feather 30 miles south-west of Eucalyptus about 40 miles N.E. of Goongarrie about a 115 miles from Kurnalpi 55 miles nearly north of Peake's Find 24 miles south of Pendennie Soak and five miles south-east of Yerilla.  P.S. Edward Trothiez died on September 10 1896. The prospectors camped on the western side near a little watercourse. [...] [52] [53]  October 14 1895 I slept very well last night. I got up at 6.30 am. Chilly morning and warm day. Breakfast at 7.00 am; stewed potatoes and boiled beef damper and cocoa. [54] Left Yerilla at 8.00 am. After travelling two miles (or more) at 9.20 am I came to a little sandy dry watercourse about five yards wide and three or four feet deep. Here I was compelled to stop. The wheel was just parting in half and the load most intolerable to carry it any further so I threw away most of the outfit. The shaker and upper pick and shovel the sieve two prospecting dishes and other articles. I repaired the wheel and started again at 10.00 am. At 10.50 am (3 1/2 miles or so from Yerilla) I came to a signboard written on it:- To the Ovens and Beechworth the arrow was pointing west At the south of the board (nailed on a Mulga) was written Fletcher and Dalgliesse's Camp. I pushed on and I halted at 12.00 pm and boiled the billy and had lunch; damper green-gage jam and cocoa. Whilst partaking of my lunch three diggers with two horses (one grey) and dray came along. They halted and boiled their billy on my fire and had their lunch. They were coming from the Eucalyptus.  I started again at 1.10 pm and they a little after. One of them walked in advance of the other two horses and dray. We walked together chatting as we marched along. At 3.35 pm we came where two men with horses and two wagons were resting. The man stopped to talk to the wagoners and I pushed on. When I had gone 200 yards one of the wagoners called me back. He said I will give you a lift on my wagon. We will travel in the cool of the night. So I thanked him for it. His name is Alfred Pearman. He has five horses and one hack. So I cooked my meal and had supper at 5.00 pm; rice and tinned beef sausage damper and tea. After supper I read the 18 19 and 20 chapters of the book Andy Andy by Samuel Lover. I am now 10 miles from Yerilla and about 10 miles from the Black Gin Rocks. We started travelling at 8.30 pm. [...]  October 15 1895 Travelling last night was awfully unpleasant cold all night. The sudden jerkings and bumping of the wagon nearly every five minutes was intolerable going along the unformed road. Three times during the night I had to get down and help Pearman to put the horses and wagon on the right track. First at about 1.00 am second at 1.30 am and third at 3.30 am. We had to pull the wagon backward to right it on the track. I nearly lost my hat several times. The branches of the trees brushing over my face and head. This morning we reached the condenser at 6.30 am. I was told it is 28 1/2 miles from Yerilla. This condenser is conducted by Thomas Gibson and is situated in a dry salt lake which is two or three miles in circumference. He has a very shallow shaft only a few feet deep. He kindly supplied me with water gratis. We passed the Donkey Rocks at 9.05 pm last night They say lies 17 miles south of Yerilla. There are some rocks and a little soak with very little water in it. They are sinking a well there now for fresh water. A man named Tassy Yuras is keeping a store in a little canvas building. It is said that these rocks got their name from a man known by nickname as "North Australia" who camped there with some donkeys. [55] The country between Yerilla and the Donkey Rocks is mostly sandy and the vegetation is Mulga Oaks Quondongs Sandalwood and other bushes. 12 miles below the Donkey Rocks is a road bearing to The 90 Mile which is distant about 40 miles. Passed the time sleeping and re-reading some chapters of Andy Andy. We started travelling at 8.00 pm. [...]  October 16 1895 Last night after leaving the condenser at 8.15 pm and the Donkey Rocks at 9.05 pm. After we travelled for a while probably two or three miles both of us fell asleep. It was 12.55 am when I woke up and called Pearman and he started the horses again. After going about a mile at 1. 10 am the wagon came to a sudden stop. The horses had pulled it right against an oak tree. We hooked a horse behind it and pulled it backward to the road and we made another start. After travelling two or three miles the two of us fell asleep and we woke up at about daylight viz about 6.00 am then we made a good start. We travelled till 9.05 am. We halted for breakfast. I ate tinned beef sausage and damper and cocoa. We watered the horses out of the tank and started again at 10.25 am. We reached Wangie Soak 1 1.55 am. Pearman allowed me five minutes or so to have a look at it. The soak is situated on Flat Rocks about 10 chains wide N.S. and about 20 chains long E-W. It lies on a clear patch. There are 12 holes roughly averaging about seven feet deep and only one them had water (it appeared about 10 feet deep). It had only a few gallons. The Wangie Soak lies 20 miles south of the Donkey Rocks and 10 miles from the Wiladdy Soak. We pushed on and we halted at 1.5 5 pm in a spacious flat just about midway between Wangie and Wiladdy soaks. I had dinner at 3.00 pm; rice beef sausage damper and tea. I spent the afternoon reading the 24 and 25 chapters of Andy Andy book by Sam Lover. Supper at 5.45 pm; damper green gage jam and tea. We started to travel again at 800 pm.  P.S.1. Rough travelling and cold last night and warm day. The country we passed through last night and today is pretty well all sand with fairly dense vegetation tall Mulga Sandalwood Oaks trees scraggy Gums trees in patches and scrubs. We passed several belts of Spinifex pretty tall and dense. The last two nights have been very unpleasant indeed. Full of bumping and jerkings. Whenever I chanced to lift my head above the sideboards of the wagon I would get a scratching on my head and face and even so to my legs.  P.S.2. The Skull Rocks lies about 12 miles above the Wangie Soak. [...]  October 17 1895 We travelled all night. We passed the Wiladdiy Soak at about 9.00 pm. We camped 7.24 o'clock this morning four miles south of the Split Rocks about 18 miles from Wiladdy and about 10 miles from Broad Arrow. [56] I was aroused three times during the night at about 1.00 am 2.00 am and at 5.00 am. Each time the horses had left the road and jammed themselves and the wagon among thick bushes and each time Pearman used a fair amount of profane language. He told the horses that they were bastards but as the poor things did not understand even a glossed Billingsgate language they did not contradict him. I got down three times to help him to right both horses and wagon on the track. As this is the very best feeding ground for horses I have seen on the Goldfields so we are going to camp here till tomorrow morning. So I made my bed under a young Oak tree about 12 feet high. During the day baked a little damper. Used the last bit of flour about 2 1/2£bs. Had a good rest after having passed a rough night. I read from the book Andy Andy up to the 34 chapter. The country we passed through last night and this morning abound with Gum trees Mulga Sandalwood Quandongs Oak trees also called Sheoaks and other bushes. In some places the ground is clear. Breakfast 8.20 am; potatoes beef sausage damper and cocoa. Dinner 12.50 pm; rice boiled beef and tea. Supper 6.20 pm; damper green gage jam and tea. I turned in at 7.15 pm.  P.S. During the afternoon I mended my trousers. [...] [57]  October 18 1895 I passed a good warm night. Got up at 5. 15 am. Mild morning and warm day. Breakfast at 6.20 am; damper green-gage jam and cocoa.  We started for Broad Arrow at 8.10 am which is 14 miles from the Split Rocks. At 10.10 am we overtook a man carrying on his back a heavy swag pick and shovel a sieve a tucker bag and a waterbag. Pearman let the man place all these on the wagon and the man walked ahead of us with only the waterbag in his hand. We reached Broad Arrow at 12.20 pm. I thanked Pearman for the ride we shook hands and parted. I camped against a Gum tree about 300 yards south of the township. I picked up some scraps of newspapers and read them. Dinner at 2. 10 pm; boiled tinned beef and cocoa. This done then I took an exploring walk about the field. I returned to my camping place 6.30 pm. I pitched the tent and went to Carlyle's Store. I bought 1£b cheese 1 / 6 and one gallon water 6d. Supper at 7.3 5 pm; damper cheese and tea. Done some scribbling and retired at 10.30 pm. [...] [58] [59]  October 19 1895 (Saturday) I could not get any sleep last night until about 1.00 am. I was pretty warm all night. I got up at 6.00 am. Mild morning and pretty warm all day. After breakfast I mended the wheelbarrow and after I bought off the store a gallon water 6d. a loaf bread 9d.  At 10.30 am started for Bardoc with the intention of going by the Six Mile. After travelling for a while I came to two roads. I got puzzled which one to take. I followed the north-west. At 11. 10 am I came to the St. George mine. There I saw a young woman. She looked rather fresh considering she is feeding on "tinned dogs". I said "Will this road take me to Bardoc" She said "I think so" then I said it is a warm day. Yes it is warm day she replied. Then I saw a man. He said that I was on the road to Bardoc. After travelling about four miles I came almost to the end of the road I met another man. He said that I was on wrong road. He directed me to strike across the bush and get on the right road in a mile. I had a great treat travelling through thick bush and rough ground. When I got half way to my surprise I met a young man who I had met at Mount Margaret. He had at that time a sick mate. We had a talk. We shook hands and parted. I first met him on August 23rd. I struck the road at 2.10 pm and halted for lunch. Started again at 3.15 pm. Reached Bardoc at 5.00 pm and I had quite a job to find a clean spot to camp. Night soil and filth everywhere Camped about 200 yards west of L.J. Dudley's Bardoc Hotel and about 300 yards southwest of Mount Eva which is a high ironblow. I had a look about the place and went to buy a gallon of water 6d. 4£b flour 1 / 9 and 1£b rice 6d. After tea I read some scraps of newspapers. I retired at 10.30 pm.  P.S. The distance between Bardoc and Broad Arrow is 10 miles but by taking the wrong track I pushed the wheelbarrow today no less than 13 miles. For breakfast at 6.30 am for lunch at 2. 15 pm and for supper at 7.35 pm ate bread cheese and tea only. [60]   Sunday October 20 1895 I slept pretty well last night. I got up at 8.00 am. I think this is the latest morning I ever got up since I been in the Goldfields. Mild morning and warm day. After breakfast I started to read a lot scraps of newspapers which I picked up at Broad Arrow and also baked a damper 4£bs flour from 12.30 pm to 1.05 pm. After dinner I took a stroll to the cricket ground. They were busy playing a cricket match thence I went up on the top of Signal Hill. There I sat down and enjoyed a splendid prospect of the Bardoc Field. But here I saw a gathering of men at the north-west corner of the cricket ground. At once I rushed down and joined the crowd. They voted to the chair a Yank named Barnard Leslie. This man he is almost similar to the man that figure in Grants Great Mining Drama.  Leslie explained to the crowd that the meeting had been called for the purposes to establish the hospital which was badly needed. Then a lively discussion took place. Some wanted the hospital to be built at Bardoc. A speaker said we won't be able to support it. An Irish chap yelled Out we won't be able to keep a "rat" whilst others advocated to co-operate with the Broad Arrow people. After a little more discussion the chairman put the vote to the crowd and by the showing of the hands and those who want to establish a hospital jointly with the Broad Arrow were in majority. The meeting lasted from 4.50 pm to 5.30 pm. Of course the meeting (like the tinewald of Isle of Man) was held in open air and there were no seats. There were eight men present including myself There were no women at the meeting. As far as I know there are two of them at Bardoc; Mrs Dudley and Mrs Pond. Of all those on that crowd I only knew the following by name Messrs Paul Webster Mine Manager Barnard Leslie Dudley the Hotel keeper Jack O'Brian Charlie Hansen Samuel Baker Pond and Martin Storekeeper. After the meeting I asked Mr Webster for a job. He told me to go to work to the Mount Eva Lease tomorrow night at 12 o'clock. Wage £4.10 per week. I thanked him very much for the favour. Mr Webster's company has taken three leases on option namely the Mount Eva the Ennaminca and the Austrian. For the latter the prospectors are to get £5000 if the company takes it up. For the other two I don't know what price for other leases. So I returned to my tent had supper at 6.30 pm read some scraps of newspapers and retired at 8.30 pm.  Sunday December 22 1895 I passed night. My left leg was very sore all night. I got up at 9.05 am. Very hot day. Stayed all day in the camp and applied hot wet flannels to my leg without a bit good. I also read the Coolgardie Courier of 18th December. At about 3.00 pm I went to Cross's store (formerly Russell and Cross) bought two gallons water 1 / 8 and 2£bs onions 1/4. [61]  I retired 7.30 pm. For both breakfast 1000 am and supper 6.00 pm had damper and tea and for dinner 2.00 pm; stewed beef sausage potatoes onions and tea.  P.S. As Mr Webster is not certain whether there will be any work on those leases after the exemption so I have decided to leave Bardoc on December 26th and as I have learnt a good deal of history of Bardoc by the camp fire so I will make a note of a few items.  Bardoc also spelled Bardock Bardook and Barduk. Bardoc means in English "Wild Black Fellow" and therefore is not the name of a place. It was learnt by diggers at Broad Arrow from an Aborigine many weeks before Bardoc was discovered. The Bardoc fields contour undulating hilly country for miles around. The hills are mostly Ironblows or at least capped with iron ore. The most prominent of all those hills is Signal Hill covered with Ironstone and roughly it stands about 200 feet above the level ground.  Bardoc is situated about 10 miles north of Broad Arrow about 32 miles north of Kalgoorlie about 50 miles north of Coolgardie about 22 miles north of Black Flag via Broad Arrow about 20 or 25 miles south of the 90 mile 12 miles northwest of the 45 mile about 14 miles nearly west of the 42 mile about 31 miles southwest of Wiladdie Soak about 37 miles north of White Feather (Kanowna) about 28 miles east of Siberia (Waverley) via 54 mile.  The story of the discovery of Bardoc is this:- in the early part of July 1894 the natives looted some of the Digger's camps at Broad Arrow and on Sunday July 15th six young men namely: - Robert Pyni McDonald Conway Connell Bunbidge and Ferguson mounted on horseback went in pursuit of the robbers. They climbed on the summit of Signal Hill. They found that the Blacks had been camping on top of that eminence and on scenting the coming of the whitefellows they lost no time in levanting. The party decided to pass the night on the hill and resume the pursuit of blacks next day. On the morrow so luck willed they specked about 30 oz of gold on the surface of the ground about 200 yards west of Signal Hill. Of course all thoughts of pursuing the Blacks any further was abandoned.  They pegged three leases namely: the Grand Jewel the Mount Pleasant and the Bank of England.  Soon after the Martin Brothers (three them) pegged the Excelsior. This lease was subsequently sold to McDonald and Company for £6000 and they turn floated it in London for a £100000. Besides those mentioned there a lot more leases taken up the same day (July 16 1894) on which they specked the gold pegged out the leases. They decided to call the new find Bardock or Bardoc being the name for the wild black fellows which they had obtained from a native at Broad Arrow. Probably the natives had a name for Signal Hill but no one ever bothered his head to obtain it from them and consequently it is now lost for all time.  A day or two after the discovery of Bardoc McDonald went to the White Feather for provisions and reported the new find and over 600 men rushed to the field After a few weeks the rush subsided. During the influx of so many men McDonald and party kept a little store then Smith and Co. set up a store. [62] Then a young solicitor named Dwar started a store and kept the Post Office as well in the gully between the Mount Pleasant and the Mount Eva leases. One night last April he imbibed rather freely at Dudley Hotel and started to play with the revolver and shot himself in the leg. It is said that 12 men carried him to the White Feather Hospital on a hand cart. Not certain whether Dwar or Dewar his name.  The Martin Brothers opened a store then a Jew named Reuben opened a store about the middle of October and sold out to J. Leyden. Martin Brothers sold out to Cross and he put in a man named All Russell to manage it for him. Dudley's Bardoc Hotel was opened on Saturday April 13 1895 whilst the hotel was being built Mrs May Dudley arrived at Bardoc on March 18 1895. Meanwhile she lived in a tent on the south slope of Signal Hill. On account of being the first white woman on this field (Bardoc) the boys celebrated the occasion with bonfire and songs on the summit of Signal Hill and drank to her health. Amidst this rejoicing they discharged a volley of 30 shots from Winchesters and revolvers. A chap named Charlie Grant who camped on the Nerrin Nerrin lease about two miles away wishing to know what was the hullababoo about. He came along and on nearing the top of the hill a volley was fired somewhat this scared Charlie. He turned back without joining the festive boys.  Charles John Moran first member for the Goldfields visited Bardoc on November 16 1895 and Barnard Leslie bestowed much flattery on him. Sir John Forrest visited Bardoc on November 26 1895. Accompanied by a policeman and two reporters. He arrived at 7.45 am and left at 11.00 am. A petition for requirements of Bardoc was presented to him. [...] [63] [64] [65]  Bardoc - December 26 1895 Ms Paul Webster has told me that it is very doubtful whether the company will do any more work on the leases under option after the exemption is over next month so as I am not encumbered with anything in Bardoc tomorrow I will be on the track again pushing the wheelbarrow. I returned the book titled Eldorado to Mr Barnard Leslie and had a long chat with him. [...]  December 27 1895 Last night I slept well. Got up at 7.00 am. Warm day. Breakfast 7.30 am; a cake fried in dripping and cocoa. Afterwards I went to Cross's Store to get a gallon water. I only got half a gallon. He charged me 1/3 for it. He said the water was very scarce hence the price 2 / 6 per gallon. At 11.45 am I partook of some pea soup and drink tea. At 12.45 am I left Bardoc for good. At 1.40 pm I passed the Government Store. They are putting it down at the Junction of the Bardoc Wiladdi Yerilla Pendennie and Mt. Margaret Roads. There was nobody at the store.  Arrived at Broad Arrow at 4.45 pm. 10 miles from Bardoc. Camped 200 yards south of the old townsite and 18 yards east of the Black Flag Road. Pitched the tent against a withered oak tree. Bought off Flavelle Store one gallon water 7d one lb potatoes it. one lb onions 7d. Partook of supper at 6.55 pm. After supper lit the candle and read the Coolgardie Courier dated December 28th. This paper is always dated ahead of its time.  P.S. This morning when I went to say goodbye to Jack O'Brien (and to Frank the Austrian) he told me that Charlie Jansen got drunk on Xmas day at Dudley's Bardoc Hotel and was robbed of all his money £14. He is now swearing that he will set fire to the pub. [...] [66]  December 28 1895 I got up at 6.00 am. Breakfast at 6.30 am; 3 pieces of cake fried in dripping and cocoa. Afterwards I went to Flavelle's Store bought a gallon water 7d. Had a brief chat with one of the partners named Bill.  At 7.45 am I started for the Black Flag 11 miles south-west of Broad Arrow and reached at 12.45 pm. The road was fairly good for the wheelbarrow and the country I passed through with exception of some rises is pretty well level ground fairly timbered with White Gum trees and Sandalwood Quondongs Kurrajong Cotton and Salt bushes Ironstone quartz and Diorite rocks form the ground. I camped on the east of the brow of the hill under a Kurrajong tree 250 yards off the Black Flag Hotel and about the same distance off the store. The Kurrajong is 15 feet high. The trunk measures 28 1/2 inches around and 65 inches high to the first branch.  At 3.00 pm I left for the Flag End distance two and a half miles off townsite. Arrived 3.45 pm. Here are situated both the Proprietary Mine and the alluvial workings. I had a look at both and passed on to view the Dead Finish which lies one mile north of the Flag End and 3 1/2 miles north of the townsite. Here I met two men; Hansen and Windmill.  Left Dead Finish 5.15 pm. Passed Flag End 5.30 pm. Reached the townsite 6. 15 pm. Bought a tin apricots at Evan's Store 1 / 7. Boiled the billy and had supper at 7.00 pm. Afterwards had a chat with Evans the Storekeeper till 8. 15 pm. Then read the Coolgardie Pioneer of December 25th. At 9.45 pm retired on a bed made up of old bags. It has been a very warm day. It is now (9.45 pm) a lovely cool and moonlit night.  Lunch at 2.30 pm. Supper 7.00 pm; a piece of fried cake a tin of apricots and a drink of tea. I have been told a few bits of history about this field today. I will write them down tomorrow. [...] [67] [68] [69] [70]   Black Flag - December 29 1895 (Sunday) I slept middling well. Got up at 7.00 am. Very hot day. I went to get a bag water 6d. Breakfast 8.00 am; porridge (Avena) and milk a drink Cocoa. Afterwards took a stroll as far as St. David Mine. I called at the St. David Consolidated Mine. Here I met a Swede and a man from Victoria named Thomas. I had a chat with them. The latter said that there is a man at the White Feather named Mort Hare. He knows who committed the Bardoc murder. They gave me a drink water and I came back. The St. David Mine lies one mile south of township. Dinner at 1 .40 pm; a plateful of good soup made of tinned peas onions and minced mutton and a drink Cocoa. Got another gallon water 6d and went for a stroll north and north-west of the township. Bought a loaf bread 10d. one lb cheese 1 / 7 and another gallon water 6d. Supper 6. 10 pm; bread cheese and tea. Read a little of the Coolgardie Pioneer. At 6.50 pm I started down the road with the wheelbarrow. Reached Jack Larkin's condenser 8.00 pm. Two miles south of the Black Flag township. Camped here for the night. Had a chat with Larkin. Wrote this by moonlight and retired at 10. 15 pm.  P.S. Lovely cool and moonlight night. [...]  December 30 1895 I got up at 6.00 am. Rolled up my things and loaded the barrow. Breakfast 6.50 am; bread and cheese and cocoa. At 7.25 am started for Kalgoorlie short cut 18 miles. A young man from New Zealand named Mawson came along with me a half mile to show me the track. I thanked him and we shook hands and parted. Alas for eight or nine miles the track turned out a vile one for the wheelbarrow. It led alternatively across dry lakes and sandhills ups and downs it tried my strength to the utmost. At 12.00 pm halted for a spell and ate at 12.25 pm. Been very hot day. Out of the gallon water I bought this morning at Larkin's condenser 6d I drank very sparingly the most of it evaporated. Everytime I took a mouthful I lost several spoonfuls of it by oozing out through the upper part of the waterbag. I drank the last drop at 1.00 pm and after that the thirst began to worry me the heat very oppressive. Anon I took a rest under the shade of a tree for a few minutes at time. At 4.20 pm I struck the Black Flag - Kalgoorlie Road four miles distance from Kalgoorlie and hereabouts I saw three mining pegs. On one of them there was a notice paper dated October 6 1895 applying for a 24 acres lease and signed P. Matthews and party. In vain I searched the bushes for the prospector's camp. I cooeed twice - got no response. Feeling very tired and thirsty planted the wheelbarrow and everything in the bush. Made a mark across the road with my dried up water bag.  Started for the town at 5. 15 pm. I came to the Mount Eliza Claim. Here I met a chap he had very little water but he very kindly gave me a good drink and I was relieved. [71] He said the town was about three (3) miles distant and that he was waiting for a second mining expert to report on his quartz claim. He had got gold specimens already. After resting for about 10 minutes I went back for my things and wheelbarrow. Reached there 5.45 pm and started again at 5.50 pm. And repassed the good man's camp. If he had water I would passed the night there so I had to push on and arrived at Kalgoorlie 8. 10 pm. Camped 100 yards west of the hospital. I was so knocked up I got a man to go to town for a bag water (one gallon 7d) and a tin of apricots 1 / 6. I let him keep the change 1 / 5 out the 3 / I gave him to buy the water and apricots. I boiled the billy and had supper at 9.00 pm. A tin apricots and cocoa only. The man too had a drink cocoa. He stayed talking to me till 10.00 pm. As soon as he went away I fell on my back asleep.  P.S. The vegetation about the lakes and the sandhills I crossed today are Mulga Oaks and plenty of Salt and Cotton bushes and lake scrubs. This side of the lakes the timber is mostly Gum trees Oaks Quandongs Sandalwood and other bushes. The man told me that the heat today was a 107 degrees in the shade. It is no wonder that I felt it very much pushing the wheelbarrow and being short of water. It is now lovely moonlight and cool night. The breeze is blowing from south to north. The stranger during his talk he related to me his great sufferings he endured when he went to the Mt. Black Rush. [...]  Kalgoorlie Sunday January 5 1896 Somewhat I have an urge to go to the White Feather [Kanowna] instead of looking for work on the Kalgoorlie mines and whilst the exemption is on I have decided to visit the I.O.U. and Kurnalpi before I go to the White Feather. So tomorrow I will write down a few items about this great mining field which I have collected during the last few days. [...]   Well old man I am getting tired of this hard life and I can see nothing for it but hard work till the end of my life if I continue on in the present way. So I am going to stake all and even my life in a big venture. Never venture never win you know. I am off to Coolgardie Gold Fields as soon as the rain starts. I am at present engaged getting three other fellows to join me all men I know to be honest and sober and above all men inured to hardships and bush life and good bushmen. There are dozens of parties which have never been heard of which have gone out prospecting and never having been accustomed to bushing it have got lost. If a man makes one mistake it is his last so one wants to be careful. I think one of my mates has something good already. He went up last year and found a chain of fresh lakes evidently permanent and close by found some specks or colours in a reef. He had no rations and his mate was sick so he had to return. [91]  The intermediate country is utterly devoid of water except at certain times so we must wait for the rain which may come anytime now but most likely about April or May. The man who found this is named Bussell and is from a very old Colonial family who founded one of our principal towns Busselton. His estate is highly mortgaged and he is on his last legs. His brother went up with a chap I know well named Dawson and they have made their fortunes. Dawson's brother J. Bussell A Heppingstone and I are the four if nothing happens. Bussell and Heppingstone are related and Lancey Dawson and I are old chums and might be related someday. All three are good honest gentlemen.   J. Colven and I have been lifting the potatoes this week. The early planted ones the pink eye variety did not turn out very well. They were a splendid seed 5cwt. and we did not lift much over 10cwt. of marketable potatoes. They were planted rather early and got dry weather at first then rain later on which gave them a second growth. The later planted crop were Brown's River'. We had 8 cwt. seed from Mr. Davidson. They were indifferent looking seed. The ground was very dry when planted so there were a good few misses. However they got the little rain that was just in the nick of time and they now turn out a good average crop are very good to eat. We only sold a few of the pink eyes. Mr. Wilson bought half a ton of Brown's River at £3 10s. per ton. Mr. P. Johnson Mr. Simpson (Mr. Johnson's father-in-law) Mr. Sand and Mr. Somerville (Mr. Wilson's new neighbour on the north side) bought a few in cwts. at 4s. per cwt.   Potatoes like everything else is very cheap at present in Victoria "Warnambools" and "Colacs" from 20s. to 22s. 6d. per ton. [202] I saw it stated in the Australian that they had been sold as low in one district on the ground as 10s. per ton. I think Bruthen price is about from 2s. to 2s. 6d. per cwt. but we have the advantage of the extra price paid for carriage from Bruthen to the Crossing for 1s.6d. per cwt. Besides the Bruthen potatoes are not good this year.  J. Colven and I divide the profit after paying for the seed. The house supplied and the small ones for the hens against rent for garden.   We have been burning off the dead wood in the 80 acres for some weeks back. It is slow work. It is our intention to drag the ashes down to the garden and use that as manure for next year's potato crop.   Grass is likely to be scarce during the winter. Often rains have been very light and late in coming. Frosts have been bad a few nights the last fortnight. Splendid weather through the day for working but that does not bring the grass.   Mr. Wilson is away at present at Bairnsdale with 130 old ewes (in lamb most of them) having too little grass to carry all his stock through the winter. He had in all nearly 900 head of sheep. He expects to get about 2s. for the ewes. If I had a paddock at my command I think I would have speculated.   It is my intention at present to make a big effort and stock after next shearing unless I deem it advisable between now and October to change the programme.   I consider the re-ringing of the big paddock in the front block and the burning off the dead wood in the 80 acres will increase the grazing capacity at least 30 per cent.   With a fair season the 800 acres ought to carry 1200 sheep. Of course we could not stock that much but will try one block and letting the other. There are two cows milking at present. The old cow has been again turned out. Grass was getting scarce in the McDougall paddock and the cow had been in about 7 months. There is now 13 head of horned stock counting calves [...]   [...] only she has to have Violet Grace and possibly John Hugh Lupon (which she has decided on as a name for our boy) vaccinated with calf lymph before leaving town. We neither of us believe in vaccination but it is against the law in Victoria not to have it done. Therefore their mother will get it done with calf lymph and may thus avoid many of the diseases consequent on the ordinary vaccine [...]   In the course of 4 or 5 weeks I intend trying to get about 250 four or six tooth cross bred ewes and putting Lincoln rams with them about 3 rams. I got one ram from Mr. P. Johnston. If they should do well on the back block (the only paddock in the district there is green feed at present owing to being lightly stocked lately) it is my present intention to try and sell again about July then stock with wethers for shearing but should prices be dull at that time we will keep the ewes take crop of lambs and shear. I hope to be able to buy the above number out of the money I got as surrender value of my life policy £57 12s. 8d. It went much against my inclination to surrender my policy but there was no help for it and I may be able to assure again some time.   It is a matter of the utmost economy and a big effort to try and get a start with stock. Hitherto James Colven has been boarding with us and we took out the board as far as we could in work (after of course the days were I squared for that I worked on his block) one week's work squaring three of board but as we have no work to do now except extraordinary improvements we would be obliged to charge for board which we offer at 8s. 0d. per week. [203] I think however that he will try baching again and it is likely he will camp at the hut at our garden as being more convenient to possible work. An extra mouth to fill (a man's) in our present pinched circumstances means something and we cannot do it without some remuneration. I will therefore plod along doing what work I can by myself besides looking after stock and what I can't do must stand.   I have been many years together with the other boys scraping and saving what made the place what it is with the help of your loan and I must try hard not to let it slip out of our fingers even if the struggle in hard times be a big one.   Produce with you is very low indeed but hope there may be an improvement in prices soon. Here that is to say in Victoria generally crops both of grain and hay will be very very poor. Prices have gone up wheat 4s. 0d. bushel and so on but the rise in price won't make up for falling off in yield. Wool as you no doubt know is much better in price than last season so that sheep is about as safe a thing as a man can go for.   Flour is more than 50% higher than this time last year an article which of course we have to buy. Unfortunately the rise does not go into the pocket of the producer but the middle man get it. However we cannot growl at the man who invests his money as a speculation in wheat for he keeps up the prices to some extent when they are at low level.   The Bendigo folk are well. The bad season for the farmers of that district has had its effect on the town trade so James has had a pretty stiff pinch lately. However he writes me that it would have been worse in the old shop than in the new as the old was more of a farmer's trade while the new is more of a town trade. I have had to call on him twice for money to which he loyally responded but it went hard with me to ask it from him knowing how things stood. He like myself is hopeful and together with retrenching and frugality hope to pull through till better times come.  It is perhaps not surprising that you have not had many letters from him lately for a fellow has not much heart to write unless he has good news.    [...] the last letter I had from James about Easter he had been then a short time in his new shop and was pleased with the prospects. He had been working hard and worrying about and had knocked himself up a bit having an attack of diarrhoea. Maggie was well.   I am not surprised at Mr. and Mrs. Graham going home. They came out in a very bad time consequently never got a good start. Willie Trotter was equally unfortunate; am pleased that he has got a good situation in America. He was with us about a week and enjoyed himself very much. I recognised him at once thought he looked Johnie. When he left us he intended going to America if he did not drop into a situation of some kind in Melbourne; did not hear from him until he was on his way to America [...]   you cannot take too much fresh fish or fowl; never take salt fish or herrings. Never be tempted to eat potatoes and salt or potatoes and herrings when going to bed. This used to be a favourite dish in Ballygannah enough to give a horse indigestion. [...]  Maggie is just home from Sunday School. I am relieved of that now having the leadership of about 40 young men who meet in class every Friday night at the Church. [207] We are enjoying good health although I suffered a good deal from worry and anxiety after moving into the new shop [...]   January 7 1896 I slept middling well it being a cold night. Got up 6.00 am. Pretty warm day all day. Breakfast 6.35 am; three buns and cocoa. Afterwards went to town to buy some stores from Fimister and Co. a tin Nestles milk 1 / 1 1£b pressed potatoes 1 / 1 a tin apricots 1 / 7 a two gallon water bag 2 / 6 two lb onions 1/2 a loaf bread lid one gallon water 6d. Left half of my things with [...] too heavy to carry it went to the hospital. The secretary supplied me with a list of all those persons who have died in the hospital up to date. Dinner 12.30 pm; bread cheese and tea. At 1.00 pm I started for I.O.U. with the wheelbarrow. I passed the Great Boulder Mine 2.30 pm. I reached the Six Mile Patch here I had a chat with two chaps dry-blowing. At 3.55 pm I reached Lake Gamballie which about 8 miles south Kalgoorlie. Here I camped about 600 yards north of Lakeview Hotel owned by F. Dwyer. Here are a lot condensers probably over a dozen of them. The salt water is very shallow in place 12 feet deep and upwards. They sell water at 4d per gallon. I made some stew of potatoes onions and minced beef. Partook of it with bread and tea at 6.00 pm. After supper had a look over this morning Kalgoorlie Miner. Went to the Hotel for a while. Retired at 9.00 pm. The country between here and Kalgoorlie is pretty well timbered mostly Gum trees. From about the Great Boulder Mine to here the ground gradually runs in to a flat strewn with ironstone salt bushes and other scrubs. [...]  January 8 1896 I slept pretty well last night. Got up at 5.00 am. It being a gloomy morning with sign of rain at 5.30 am. A few drops fell then cleared up and pretty warm all day. About 400 pm began to get cloudy. The wind first started to blow from the north-east then changed gradually to the west. At 5.30 pm a dust storm arose from the west and lifted great clouds of dust and finished up with a few drops of rain. Then remained cloudy. About 7.45 pm another little shower of rain fell lasted about 5 minutes. After I got up went to buy three gallons water off one of the condensers at 4d per gallon. Breakfast at 5.30 am; bread half tin apricots and tea At 5.55 am I think I started for the I.O.U. which is about 22 miles from Kalgoorlie (east). On the road I met a chap going to Kalgoorlie with a water bag only and another one carrying a Swag a waterbag and a billy can going to Kalgoorlie also. At 11.30 am horses With four wagons passed me going to Peake's Find. They stopped for lunch at 1 l.45 am and I stopped too and had dinner at 1200 pm; another half tin apricots bread and tea. I started on the road again at 12.55 pm while the wagoners were still resting. Three of them had six horses each and the other had five horses to his wagon in all 23 horses. Two men in a trap with one horse overtook me about nine miles from the I.O.U. They pulled up to have a little chat and they repassed me on their return journey to Kalgoorlie about three miles from the township. [88] At 1.30 pm I passed the Kurnalpi Road. At 2.30 pm I reached the I.O.U. I halted about north of the new township and about 300 yards from the Bulong Hotel kept by C.H. Reid. I bought one gallon water off Reid 4d and as I started to make some stew presently I saw the chap named Rowley (one of the party we travelled from Lake Darlot to Pendennie) coming towards me. We had a chat. At 5.30 pm a shower of rain came on. We pitched the tent in hurry. The rain put out my fire. I lit it again. I offered Rowley some stew he refused it. He went away at 6.45 pm. After supper I pitched the tent properly sat down on the bed. 7.50 pm wrote the foregoing. Had a look through the Sydney Bulletin. Blew out the candle 9.00 pm.  I.O.U. - January 9 1896 I slept middling well. It has been a pretty warm day. Some flying clouds were hovering today. At 9.00 am I went to Carry's Store in the old township site bought a tin apricots 1 / 9 a tin curry powder 1 / -. At 10.00 am I went to the Bulong Hotel owned by Mr Reid to get water. He told me to get it behind an unoccupied hotel. I got seven gallons free. I washed a pair of trousers and a flannel shirt. Passed the rest of the day at the camp. Done a lot reading. Coolgardie Courier and Bulletins. Also washed a handkerchief. Retired at 10.20 pm. Breakfast 7.30 am; bread tin sardines and cocoa. For lunch ditto (tea) at 1.00 pm. Supper 5.45 pm; stew and tea.  P.S. I got up at 7.00 am.  I.O.U. - January 10 1896 I slept middling well. Up 6.00 am. Very warm day. After breakfast I took a walk to the hospital. I noticed an old chap there sick and another man (also sick) named Bell. I had a long chat with the latter. Thence I strolled to where McIntyre and party won £9000 worth gold out of a Mullockey leader. Thence to my camp. After dinner took a walk over John Mahor's Gully and thence to B.J. Carry's Store. Bought a packet oatmeal 1 / 6 a lb sugar 7d a tin meat 1 / 1 thence went to get a gallon water at Mr Reid. A little girl named Amy filled my water paid 4d. Stayed all the evening in camp reading scraps of newspapers which I picked up during the day. Retired 9.45 pm. Breakfast 7.30 am; half tin apricots bread and cocoa. Dinner at 1.05 pm; stew and tea. Supper 5.00 pm; the same what I had for breakfast.  I.O.U. - January 11 1896 Slept well last night. Got up 7.00 am. It being a gloomy morning overcast it cleared up and turned out a very hot day. At about noon was thundering in the east and looked like raining. On the west black clouds began to rise and at 4.45 pm came on to rain heavy. The shower lasted till 5.00 pm then again from 5.45 pm till 8.30 pm. After breakfast this morning I went prospecting towards Lake Yindarlgooda and as I walked along kept an eye on the ground right and left hoping to pick up a piece of gold but no such luck. I reached the Lake 11 .00 am which is about 4 miles south-east of the township. I had a chat with Samuel Tom Carmichael's mate. He has a condenser here with two other men. I started again for the township 12.00 pm and arrived at 1 .00 pm. In the afternoon I bought off Carry's Store a tin fruit 1 / 9 a tin peas 1 /  a tin honey 1 / 6 and off the baker Otto Vetter a loaf bread 9d and a browney (1£b) 1 / 6. At 4.45 pm came on to rain. [89] I managed to boil the billy in the rain. Read some scraps of newspapers. Retired 8.30 pm. At 8. 10 am; porridge and milk At 2. 10 pm; stew and tea. At 7.00 pm; half browney and tea.  I.O.U. - Sunday January 12 1896 Slept well last night. Got up 7.40 am. It has been a gloomy day threaten to rain but it has kept dry. After breakfast I took a stroll towards the township. From there to Mystery Mine. From thence back I met Rowley by the old township site. Came to my tent. Wrote down notes of what is known about the I.O.U. After dinner we went to Mrs Page. We had a drink Hop Beer. I paid for it 1 / . There I left him. I went to Mr Carry. Supplied me with some notes about the I.O.U. thence went to Mr Paisley. Got some more from him. He is a married man. He has a wife and a little daughter named Ida or Ada aged about nine years or thereabout. From there I went to attend a meeting at the Bulong Hotel. Mr C.H. Reid was voted as chairman.. It being an open air meeting the object of the meeting was to protest against the Mine Department removing the register of the leases from the I.O.U. and transferring it to Perth. There were present between 40 to 50 men. After the meeting I went to have supper. Afterwards I went to the hospital. Stayed there till 900 pm. Had a talk with Mr Jay the hospital orderly and Mr Ramsden and John Walker. I wrote down some notes about this field. Returned to my tent and retired 1000 pm.  P.S. It being a darksome night clouded and wind blowing from north-south. Breakfast 9. 10 am; porridge with milk and cocoa. Dinner at 1 .00 pm; Browney bread honey and tea. Supper 7.00 pm; stew and tea. Bought off Carry a tin milk 1 /  a loaf bread off Otto Vetter 9d. [...] [90] [91]  January 13 1896 Slept middling well. Got up at 5.20 am. Gloomy morning threatening to rain all day. Now and again a few drops of rain fell and cool day. At 5.55 am; partook of breakfast; bread honey and cocoa. At 6.35 am I started for Kurnalpi which is 40 miles from the I.O.U. and 84 miles from Coolgardie. At 9.25 am (and about 6 miles from the I.O.U.) I came to a very beautiful Kurrajong tree standing a yard away at right hand side of track. Is about 18 inches thick and about 20 feet high. It has four main branches. It stands on a flat ground and east of a hill. At 11.45 am 13 miles or so from I.O.U. I halted and boiled the billy and had lunch at 12.00 pm; bread and tinned roast beef and tea. Started again at 12.45 pm. At 1.45 pm I reached Lake Yindarlgooda approximately 17 miles from the I.O.U. This lake has romantic geological scenery. Amongst the sights there are two table top hills near each other. They seem like if they were heaved up from the bottom of the lake but may be more probably that the whole lake at one time was a high land and it subsided at some remote geological period and these hills being hard core were left standing. I am not quite certain. I think the one on the Kurnalpi side is named Mount Yindarlgooda and the other on the I.O.U. side is named Mount Magnet. I have no aneroid to measure their heights. They seem over 200ft high and composed of diorite quartz and iron and covered with scrubs. The lake is four miles wide where I crossed it. for the wheelbarrow I found in places very soft and hard in other places. At 2.00 pm I passed the table top hills. At 4. 10 pm I passed an old shaft about 20 feet deep. On a board nailed on a stick was written this:-  To the Jean [Queen?] Lapage Mine - east hand track 3 miles S.E. Mullis and A.H. Brown.  At 420 pm I reached the opposite side of Lake Yindargooda. At 5.00 pm I reached Lake Lapage. About 3 miles from Lake Yindarlgooda. Good track for the wheelbarrow. At 5.37 pm I got over Lake Lapage. For half a mile or so being awfully soft I nearly bursted myself pushing the barrow. After I crossed the lake I travelled for a while and camped at 6.12 pm about 3 miles east and about one mile north of Lake Lapage and about 29 miles off I.O.U. I felt very tired indeed. I pitched the tent and lit the fire. Made some soup out of a tin Peas and tinned roast beef. Partook of it at 7. 10 pm with a drink tea. At 7.45 pm I laid down to sleep on abed of Mulga boughs and other bushes.  P.S. The country between I.O.U. and Lake Yindarlgooda is broken in a lot of hills and interspersed with long stretches of flats. Pretty well timbered. Salmon Gums Sheoaks Mulga Kurrajongs Quandongs Sandalwood other trees and scrubs such as salt bushes. Between Lake Yindarlgooda and Lake Lapage the country is flat composed of Ironstone and middling timbered (mostly Sheoaks and some gum trees salt bushes and other scrubs). [...] [92]  January 14 1896 Slept middling well. Got up 6.05 am. A very gloomy morning threatening to rain. At 11.30 am a light shower fell. Lasted 15 minutes. After then kept day all the afternoon and no sign of the sun both yesterday and today. Breakfast 6.45 am; bread honey and cocoa. At 7. 10 am I started for Kurnalpi. At 8.30 am I reached the Cane Grass Swamp. Here I had chat with a man (who is condensing water) for half an hour. Started again at 9.00 am. At 10.50 am I came to Success Mine. It has a 4 stampers battery situated on a bit of rise. It started crushing about April 1895. At 11.30 am came on a little shower of rain. I halted and boiled the billy. Had lunch at 1 1.45 am; bread Sydney tinned roast beef and tea. I being only two miles and a half from Kurnalpi at this spot. Started again at 12.20 pm. When within a mile and a half from Kurnalpi came to a condenser run by Cocks or Cox. Here bought two gallons water 4d per gallon. At 1.25 pm I reached Kurnalpi. I camped below the new townsite under the large gum tree and about 200 yards from the Kurnalpi hotel and off the Coolgardie road. After I pitched the tent I went to the old township half a mile away south-east of the new one. There I bought one lb preserved potatoes 1/2 1 1/2£b onions 1 /  one tin meat 1 /  a loaf bread 1 /  returned to my camp. Done cooking. Supper 6. 10 pm; stew and a drink tea. Afterwards read scraps of old newspapers found in abandoned camp site. Retired 9.30 pm.  January 15 1896 I slept middling well. Got up 7.00 am. Gloomy morning. About 2.00 pm began to clear up. The black clouds began to disperse and it came on very hot. About 6.00 pm began thundering and lightning from the east and black clouds began to gather. About 9.00 pm a light shower of rain fell for two or three minutes duration. After breakfast I strolled over the alluvial workings such as Shannan and Mentor Gullies over Social Flat Burgier Gully and Deep Lead. The Reward Claim and many other places. At 100 pm I took a stroll to the Cemetery Gully one and a half miles from the townsite. There are six graves five nameless and the other only has "Mountain" imprinted with black letter on a little board nailed on a stick. Thence went to the store at the old township. Bought a gallon water 5d one lb pressed potatoes 1/2 half lb candles. At the baker Bugleons a loaf bread 1 / and information about Kurnalpi. Got back to my camp 4.00 pm. Done the cooking. After supper went to Reid's Store to get two tins meat 2 / and when I left to come back it was pitch dark and I done a good deal of wandering in the bush before I found my tent. (10 pm looked through some old newspapers and retired 11.30 pm.)  P.S. Breakfast 8.00 am; Avena porridge with milk. Dinner 12.00 pm; half tin apricots bread and tea. Supper 6.00 pm; a plate stew half tin apricots bread and tea. [...] [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99]  January 16 1896 I got up at 4.55 am. It being a gloomy morning threatening to rain. It kept off clouded and dry all day. Breakfast 5.20 am; bread. honey and cocoa. At 5.40 am left Kurnalpi for the White Feather pushing the wheelbarrow. At 6. 10 am I passed Cocks' condenser. At 800 am I came to the Cane Grass Swamp. At 11.30 am I came to the spot where I camped on January 13 on Lake Lapage. Here I halted and boiled the billy. Dinner at 12.05 pm; stew of beef and potatoes bread and tea. Started again at 1.30 pm. At 3.00 pm crossed Lake Lapage. I found it very wet indeed for the wheelbarrow. Here (Lake Lapage) at the condenser of Taylor and Downey I bought a gallon water 4d. At 5.00 pm I started crossing Lake Yindarlgooda. Beautiful scenery on this lake. When I got halfway across I left the I.O.U. and Coolgardie Road to the left and took the road to the right leading to the White Feather. At 6.20 pm I reached the opposite side of the lake. At 6.25 pm I camped for the night. Just at the edge of the lake feeling tired. I travelled about 22 miles today. I lit the fire and cooked the supper. Meanwhile I made my bed of Sheoak boughs. Supper 7.30 pm; stew and cocoa only. I retired at 8. 10 pm.  P.S. Too tired to pitch the tent. The country between Kurnalpi and here is pretty well all level. Gough's condenser is situated at the Cane Grass Swamp. [...]  January 17 1896 A shower of rain fell last night. I got up at 11.45 pm and pitched the tent but it kept dry the rest of the night. I got up at 5.35 am. A gloomy morning threatening to rain but cloudy and dry all day. Breakfast 6. 10 am; Avena porridge and drink cocoa only (milk both in the porridge and cocoa). At 6.55 am left Lake Yindarlgooda. Reached Proctor and company's condenser 8.30 am. Here I bought a gallon water 4d and pushed on. At 9.30 am I passed a swagman going to Kurnalpi. At 1 1.00 am I halted and boiled the billy. Lunch at 1 1.30 am; stew of minced mutton and potatoes bread and tea. Started again at 12. 10 pm and reached Ready's condenser at 5.20 pm which is Situated on the Lake Gwynne 7 miles east of the White Feather and 33 miles from Kurnalpi. Here I camped for the night. Supper at 6.35 pm. The same Stew and cocoa only. After supper I went to Mr John Ready's camp. Got a gallon water for nothing. I asked Mr Ready for some information. How he discovered Kurnalpi and about Mt. Yuille and a little sketch of his life. He Very willingly supplied them. It filled the four pages of sheet of letter paper. I thanked Mr Ready and retired at 9.3 5 pm on a bed of Mulga boughs. Today I travelled about 20 miles or so. [...] [100] [101]  January 18 1896 I slept pretty well last night. I got up at 5.45 am. Cloudy morning though cleared up a little later on and slightly warm all day. Breakfast at 630 am; bread honey and cocoa. Afterwards rolled up my things and loaded the barrow. Waited till Mr Ready got up. Bought a gallon water 4d and asked him for some more information which he kindly supplied. Thanked him. At 8.08 am I started for the White Feather. At 8.20 am passed an ironblow about 25 feet high and about 15 chains around the base and pretty sharp at the top. At 9.15 am I got over Lake Gwynne. At 9.35 am I reached the top of the High Hill [Four Mile hill] which rises with fairly abrupt face fast by at the south of the road. From whose summit I had a good prospect of Lake Gwynne and part of the White Feather field. There is a cairn on top of this hill. Probably a surveying party raised it.  And now Mr Ready told me last night (and pointed out to me this morning) that he thinks this hill is the Mount Yuille which caused the Will-O-Wisp rush and which resulted in the finding of the Kalgoorlie field but some other person located this "phantom mount" 10 miles east of Bardoc. When Ready went to recall his teams and the crowd of men as well they told him that Mount Yuille was situated 25 miles due north of the White Feather. Now whilst standing on this hill (whether to designate it Mount Yuille or Mount Cairn I am not quite clear about it.) I roughly guess it rises 300 feet or 400 feet above Lake Gwynne. Composed of diorite and quartz. Its principal vegetation are Mulga some poor gum trees Quondongs Sandalwood some Kurrajongs some Sheoaks and scrubs. The summit is uniform for about half a mile. [102] The southern portion is broken into hills. The northern side is abrupt. Distant from the White Feather about two miles and from the lake a mile or thereabouts. I returned to my wheelbarrow and resumed the journey and reached White Feather 12.20 pm. I have been longing to come to this field for many long days. I had even to overcome my strong desire to come here straight from Bardoc when the exemption started. I do hope fortune has something good in store for me here. I camped in Black Fellow Gully amidst a clump of Sheoaks about 150 yards north of the cricket ground and roughly about 600 yards or more north-east of township and roughly 500 yards south of Red Hill. 300 yards or so west of Nemesis Lease and roughly 300 yards east of the White Feather Hospital. I went to the township bought the following articles off Messrs Brimage and Church's store in the main street called Isabella Street east side; lib of pressed potatoes 1/3 1 tin meat 1 /  2 loaves bread 1 / 8 1 tin Nestles' milk 1 /  1 tin peas 1 /  1 gallon water 6d 1 tin apricots 1 / 7 1 cake pressed vegetable 8d. They are selling this stuff at 4 / per lb so I got a cake for 8d. Returned to the camp and had dinner at 1.25 pm; half tin apricots bread and tea. Afterwards pitched the tent and whilst resting read the Coolgardie Pioneer dated January 8th. Supper at 5.50 pm; a plateful of stew and tea only. Passed the rest of the evening reading the Pioneer. Retired at 9.30 pm on the bed made of Sheoak boughs.  JOURNAL OF THE CALVERT SCIENTIFIC EXPLORING EXPEDITION 1896-7.  Equipped at the request and expense of Albert F. Calvert Esq. F.R.G.S. London for the purpose of Exploring the remaining blanks of Australia. [...]  May 11 to 22 1896. - Engaged in Adelaide with Mr. A. T. Magarey agent for Mr. Calvert in forming the party and making necessary arrangements for stores equipment etc. so that an immediate start may be made it being already late in the year to take advantage of the cool season.  Saturday May 23. - Messrs. C. F. Wells G. A. Keartland G. L. Jones Bejah and myself left the city for Port Adelaide to take our passages by the s.s. "Waroonga" for Geraldton.  Sunday May 24. - We steamed out of Port Adelaide at daylight.  Thursday May 28. - Arrived at Albany at 1 a.m. and finding I should have but little time at my disposal in Perth if I continued my journey by sea I decided to take rail from there and rejoin the boat at Fremantle.  Friday May 29. - Travelled through the night and arrived at Perth about 11 a.m. During the afternoon the Premier of Western Australia Sir John Forrest granted me an interview and arranged that I should call upon him to-morrow.  Saturday May 30. - Again waited on the Premier who has granted several concessions supplying me with information and advice in connection with his memorable trip across the Continent in 1874.  Mr. Brooking the Deputy Surveyor General also supplied me with plans of all settlements fringing the unexplored country in Western Australia.  Monday June 1. - Mr. Jones and .Mr. Keartland arrived at Fremantle.  Tuesday June 2. - -This morning I called on the Deputy Surveyor General and obtained at his office all plans and information likely to be of service to me. Proceeded by rail to Fremantle and left by s.s. "Waroonga" at 1 p.m. for Geraldton.  Wednesday June 3. - We reached Geraldton at 10 a.m. this morning. Arranged with Messrs. Burns Philp & Co. to act as our agents. Finding there would be delay in getting our goods despatched to Mullewa owing to the block at the goods shed I decided that Mr. C. F. Wells should remain and await Trainer's arrival from Adelaide whilst the remainder of the party accompanied me to Mullewa where I purpose purchasing camels for the Expedition. [4]   Thursday June 4. - Barometer at 9 a.m. at sea-level 29.25.  Proceeded by rail to Mullewa.  During the afternoon I inspected some thirty-five (85) camels of Messrs. Faiz and Taigh Mahome and consider them the most miserable-looking weedy brutes I have ever seen. They are small and very poor and it would take forty (40) of them to carry our loading as far as Cue.  The Afghan in charge informed me that these were a fair sample of the Company's camels and also that there might be another caravan down from Cue in a week's time.  Friday June 5. - Mr. Hoare at present representing Faiz and Taigh Mahomet at Geraldton arrived and informed me that some other camels would probably be down on the 8th inst. and asked me to select some from those now in the yards. He stated that they looked poor because they were "moulting " - a term I never before heard applied to a camel. However I refused to select any unless I could see twenty (20) sufficiently good for my requirements.  Saturday June 6. - Hearing last evening that Mesars. Jules Gascard & Co. had good camels on the Cue road and within 80 miles of Mullewa I interviewed Mr. Gascard and arranged to go up by coach and inspect them on the road. I also received an offer in writing for the choice of twenty (20) from the caravan.  To-day I learned that the larger and better-conditioned of Faiz and Taigh Mahomet's camels had been sent to trade between Cue and Lawlers and I thereby inferred that the culls were kept back for my selection.  Travelled by coach and five horses to Chain Pump. Having inspected the camels on the road and feeling thoroughly satisfied with their appearance I decided to await the return coach for Mullewa.  Sunday June 7. - At Chain Pump awaiting coach.  Monday June 8. - Returned per mail coach to Mullewa. Found C. F. Wells had arrived from Geraldton bringing with him Trainor who had come direct from Adelaide.  Tuesday June 9. - Waiting the arrival of Gascard's camels.  Wednesday June 10. - Formed a camp about one mile East of township to facilitate arrangement of loading etc.  Waiting arrival of camels; they came in at 10 p.m.  Thursday June 11. - Purchased 19 pack-camels and one riding-camel 14 pack saddles and 20 bells and straps. Sent Bejah in charge accompanied by another Afghan.  Friday June 12. - To-day we were all employed preparing and packing loading in equal weights.  It is my intention to make our start for Cue to-morrow.  Saturday June 13. - We loaded our camels for the first time packing 14 of them which are averaging over 500£bs. weight apiece. The six camels we are riding are also each carrying about 100£bs. of goods. We shall have a good road to follow for the first three hundred (300) miles and by the time we reach the Lake Way Goldfield shall have lightened the loading considerably.  Getting off camp at 1 p.m. we travelled for about ten miles to a well on the Cue road.  Sunday June 14. - Travelled about 13 miles camping on poor feed. The country is excessively dry and the feed very scarce.  Monday June 15. - We were stringing out of camp at 9 a.m. this morning and made fairly good headway doing 17 miles for the day. Our camp is on a patch of good saltbush which provides fine feed for our hungry animals. Up to the present we have been travelling over a very poor class of undulating country of generally shallow reddish soil over granulite with quartz outcropping in places on the rises and a little granite. The vegetation consists chiefly of dense thickets of low mulga casuarina dwarf tea-tree heath native poplar and dwarf mallee. Patches of good red soil occur in the flats studded with salmon gum and large mallee.  Tuesday June 16. - Continued our journey at 9 a.m. this morning. Passed a good many mulga (acacia) thickets and a few patches of saltbush along the banks of a creek with some nice pools of fresh water. There are numerous wells of generally fresh water from three to 10 miles apart all along the road. Camped on an open flat with fair pasture after travelling about 18 miles.  Wednesday June 17. - Still following a good road we passed Gabyon Station at eight miles and reached Chain Pump at 3 p.m. having done 18 miles for the day.  The feed is good here; so as some of the camels are low in condition and all are carrying heavy loads I have decided for their benefit to rest here to-morrow.  Thursday June 18. - Messrs. Keartland and Jones left camp early this morning in quest of bird-life and botanical specimens.  Friday June 19. - The camels am looking all the better for their day's rest here the feed being good with abundance of herbage.  Starting at 9 a.m. we followed along the telegraph line passing "Pindathoona Wells" at 13 miles and at 16 miles camping at & nice pool of water on the road. There is excellent bush and herbage here for the camels. The country passed over to-day was of a much better character than any seen hitherto. It showed good brown loam undulations with open mulga (acacia) and was fairly clothed with saltbush and a variety of soft herbage.  Saturday June 20. - Following the road along the telegraph line for the whole day's stage (20 miles) we camped near "Gulearo" well and Pool. [5]   Passed over good mulga pastoral country to-day.  Sunday June 21 . - At 8.45 a.m. we were again on the move passing "Gulearo Pool" a fine long hole of water; Mr. Keartland walking on ahead and carrying his gun on the qui vive for birds or game followed the telegraph line. At 16 miles we passed "White Water Well." As the feed was poor here we went on to "Jupp's Well" (three miles further) where we camped having done 19 miles for the day. The water is excellent but feed is rather scarce.  There is no noticeable change in the country which is gently undulating with granite or granulite out cropping on the rises. The soil is good bat densely clothed with mulga (acacia) of various kinds. There is little herbage or grass. We passed some cork trees to-day.  Monday June 22.---Cloudy morning. A few drops of rain have fallen.  Although all the camels had water last evening they look very hollow this morning evidencing the poor nature of the feed around this spot.  Starting at 8.45 a.m. we followed the electric line for four miles and then took the track to the left passing "Wheelarra Well" at nine miles. As there was fair feed here I decided to camp and allow our poor "ships of the desert" a little more time to fill themselves.  Tuesday June 23. - Starting at 8.50 a.m. and taking the dray track from "Wheelarra" we passed through some nice open flats. Then following the telegraph line we passed "Bullara Spring" at seven miles and at eight miles again cut the dray track. At 14 miles we passed "Woolgerong" public house obtaining there some useful information about the road to Cue and at 15 miles "Old Woolgerong" where there is an enormous granite outcrop or hill. The tracks split here the left hand one going via "Coodardy" to "Nannine" and the right band one to Cue. Following the latter for five miles we cut the telegraph line and a mile and a-half farther on we camped at a well which is at the foot of one of those enormous outcrops of granite before mentioned. There is fair feed here but care must be exercised to avoid the poison plant (Gastrolobium) which grows around the granite. The caravan travelled for day about 15 miles.  Wednesday June 24. - A drizzling rain was falling as we packed this morning but it cleared off during the day.  Started at 8.45 and travelled through some excellent saltbush flats open mulga and other good acacias and currant bushes passing a shallow clay-pan at four miles a well with excellent feed at seven miles two (2) large clay-pans at 11 miles and another well on our left at 15 miles. One mile further on we reached an accommodation house and dairy farm combined. Taking the left-hand track for two miles we camped at a large water-hole which is one mile Westerly from "Cuddingwarra" mining town.  Travelled for day 18 miles.  Thursday June 25. - At 8.50 a.m. we resumed our journey. We passed the township at one mile and reached Cue at eight miles. Failing to find sufficient feed for the camels I travelled for two and a-half miles along the Nannine road and North-Easterly from the township.  Travelled for day 13 miles.  Friday June 26. - Engaged in camp most of the day altering loading to suit the different camels Arranged for the disposal of some unnecessary equipment and atoms.  Mr. Keartland and Mr. Jones went to Cue to take some photographs.  Saturday June 27. - I had anticipated getting an experienced camel-driver at Mullewa but finding this impossible have decided to take a second Afghan instead. This will necessitate some rearrangement of the stores and permit a reduction in weight.  Sunday June 28.- - -In camp.  Monday June 29. - Packed the camels and with Mr. C. P. Wells in charge the caravan and members of the party started for Lake Way which was discovered by me in 1892 and where there is now a township and goldfield. This is known as the "East Murchison District." It is astonishing how quickly the country becomes developed when gold is known to exist. It was on 6th April 1892 that I returned to Nannine after discovering the auriferous country to the Eastward where nothing but vast sand plains were supposed to exist. I was eagerly questioned regarding the country and very shortly after prospectors set out and followed my tracks. At several of my discoveries of that year (notably Mount Sir Samuel Lake Darlot and Lake Way) there are now townships and goldfields.  Leaving Cue at 10 a.m. I overtook the caravan and we reached Jack's well at 2 p.m. Here we were gratified to find a beautiful lake of fresh water a mile or two in extent and abundance of fine herbage. There was from six to eight feet of water in the lake which is fringed with tea-tree. This is not a permanent water but the result of recent exceptionally heavy rains. We camped here to allow the camels the benefit of the good feed.  Travelled for day 12 miles.  Barometer at Cue Post Office at 9 a.m. to-day 28.50 and 1580 feet above sea-level from setting at Geraldton.  Tuesday June 30. - Leaving the lake at 9.15 a.m. and following now a new track for Lake Way generally bearing East and East-North-East we first passed over some open limestone country with fair feed and a few large mallee trees and then some level chocolate soil with thickets of mulga. At ten (10) miles passed a well called "Mungatabubba" with fairly open patches and further on again met with mulga thickets. At 15 miles we came upon a splendid open flat with most luxuriant growth of herbage and everlasting flowers.  There is every evidence of splendid. rains having fallen in this locality. [6]  Wednesday July 1. - The camels looked well this morning and if our good fortune with respect to feed continues I hope to find a great improvement in their condition on arrival at Lake Way.  Getting a start at 9 a.m. we first travelled two and a-half miles over nice open flats with grass and herbage and then entered level country of good chocolate soil clothed with dense mulga and thickets with grassy patches geranium and other herbage in places. Noted some beautiful everlasting flowers of various hues amidst the mulga.  At 16 miles we reached the top of a granulite or sandstone rise thickly clothed with mulga jamwood (acacia) tea-tree mallee grevillia and undergrowth of poor quality but us feed. At 18 miles camped on Eastern side of rise of some fair saltbush and herbage - the first good feed met with since early morning.  Thursday July 2. - Started this morning at 8.45 a.m. passing over some open grassy and mulga flats and at eight and a half miles we saw "Mogul Well." From here the country is open with scattered gums (eucalyptus) mulga saltbush grass and herbage. At 10 miles we passed another well in a large clay-pan which was full of water. From here onward the country is more open with nice saltbush flats patches of samphire mulga thickets tea-tree and low bushes.  Camped on fair pasture at 2.30 p.m. having travelled about 14 miles for day.  I find that it will be necessary owing to heavy loads and condition of the camels to proceed by short stages until our work of exploring commences when a depot will be formed and the poorer animals spelled until their condition improves.  Friday July 3. - Light showers falling at intervals to-day. Leaving at 8-30 a.m. we passed by "Yarrabubba Well" at one mile where there is a hut and man in charge of native shepherds and sheep; then followed mulga thickets open saltbush granulite ridges and outcrops of granite. At 10 miles we reached "Wellbundinun Well" where in 1892 I formed my depot (Elder Expedition) preparatory to exploring the East Murchison country.  Passing "Nanadie Well" (Mr. Townsend's furthest outside water) at 13 miles we camped at 14 miles at a small dam on the track. Some heavy showers fell just before Camping. Here we overtook a rather fine lot of Faiz and Taigh Mahomet's camels ca route for Lake Way township with loading.  Saturday July 4. - Showery all day. There is good feed here and I have decided to spell until Monday morning.  Sunday July 5. - In camp. Light showers failing at intervals but beyond replenishing the feed they can do but little good.  Monday .July 6. - After striking camp and saddling the camels rain came on and it looked so threatening that expecting a wet day I ordered the Afghans to let the camels go. However after a few light showers it all passed off although the wind was still strong from the North-West.  Tuesday July 7. - Resumed our march at 8.50 a.m. and travelled Easterly through country of fairly level chocolate soil with mulga thickets and open flats silver grass and mulga grass occasional quartz outcrops and ridges of granulite. Passed "Ghondamile Soak" (dry) at five miles then came more mulga and excellent herbage and at 11 miles good red sandy soil porcupine and good herbage grevillia a little mallee mulga and wattle-bush (acacia).  At 16 miles sand-ridges appeared. At 18 miles at the Western foot of a low granulite ridge we camped. in a mulga thicket with porcupine and good herbage.  Wednesday July 8. - Showery morning. Starting at 8.30 a.m. and travelling North-East and North through mulga we reached " Bubba-ngundi Creek" at six miles. We found a well had been sunk here in its bed since my previous exploration of 1892 as a member of the Elder Scientific Expedition. From the well we followed up a branch creek bearing about East. The herbage here was most prolific being knee-deep in places. At 10 miles from camp left creek travelling North-East and North over open mulga and grass country and gradually ascending until we reached the summit of a range of sandstone with quartz and ironstone outcrops at 16 miles. The North-East and Easterly over stony country until 20 miles had been traversed. At this point we found the first feed met with since leaving the creek this morning.  There are some large quartz blows or outcrops on the North side of the dray-track which we are following.  Thursday July 9. - A shower of rain fell at 6 a.m. Travelling Easterly for three miles we struck a creek trending in a Northerly direction where a large valley is noticeable. At the crossing are several large kurrajong trees and some shallow stony water-holes. Soakages (though not permanent ones) are to be found in sandy places further down the channel. Continuing on through rather dense mulga and occasional open grassy water-courses we again entered open sandy porcupine country showing some low red sand-ridges and wooded. with wattle-bush a few pines grevillia bloodwood (eucalyptus) mallee banksia and low bushes.  At 2.30 p.m. having travelled 14 miles we camped in a thicket of mulga with little herbage. The view ahead was not promising for camel-feed nothing but porcupine and low scattered bushes being visible.  Tracks of aborigines going Northward were seen to-day in the sandy country.  Friday July 10. - This morning for the first time for a considerable period we have had neither a dew nor rain the camels' hacks being perfectly dry. Following the dray track at 8.15 a.m. we travelled over desert porcupine country with occasional thickets of mulga for six miles to some large granite outcrops covering a big area of ground with a good soakage at foot and shallow rock holes. Taking water from here we crossed several granulite ridges also sandstone and quartzite clothed with mulga jamwood (acacia) and cork trees and grass on the flats. [7] At nine miles we passed a sandy soakage in a creek and at 12 miles a fair saltbush flat. From here on the mulga is dense and large with patches of porcupine and mallee. Soil a red loam and sandy where porcupine is seen.  At 18 miles camped on inferior camel feed having seen nothing good for the last six miles.  Saturday July 11. - Fine morning. Some of the camels did fairly well last night but the poorer ones look hollow the feed being scattered.  The country crossed for the last two or three days is very stony in places consequently some of them are tender-footed.  Beginning the day's journey at 8.10 a.m. and travelling the same class of country we reached a granite knob or bluff at five miles. The porcupine flats about here have some fine large bloodwoods (eucalyptus) scattered over them. We noted. very good green herbage at 11 miles and at 18 miles camped in a mulga water-course with soft herbage.  Sunday July 12. - A heavy frost was experienced last night. Several of the camels are lame this morning owing to the many sharp loose stones on the ground's surface.  Packing some of our riding camels in place of others and walking ourselves we got a start at 8-25 a.m. and are now following the foot of a large range in an Easterly or North-Easterly direction. The track is very stony and not at all suited for camels. Walking in front of the caravan we cleared the stones off as best we could for nine miles to the bluff end of the range which is on my route of 1892 (Elder Expedition). This point was named after myself by the South Australian branch of the Royal Geographical Society. It is about 2100 feet above the sea level 200 feet above its base and 400 feet in elevation from Lake Way which is but four miles Easterly from here. Rounding the point of the range. we bore Northerly until we struck a wide gum (eucalyptus) watercourse with excellent camel feed. We saw nice large gums here also beefwood acacia currant bush willow tea-tree and mulga on either side; also patches of saltbush and splendid grass and herbage.  Owing to the stony nature of the country our progress was greatly retarded and although we travelled till late we only compassed 15 miles for the day.  Monday July 13. - Resuming our journey at 8.40 a.m. and still travelling Northerly we crossed the creek again and at three (3) miles reached a beautiful chain of fresh-water lagoons- - shallow so far as I could ascertain and only filled after exceptional rains.  When overflowing these lagoons empty into Lake Way which is salt. They appear to have been dry for many years at some time or other as there are belts of mulga low bushes and saltbush growing in their beds. We formed a camp on the furthest North-Western shore on a patch of rather poor feed. Travelled for day about 3 1/2 miles.  Tuesday July 14. - -During the morning some natives came to camp bringing a lad with them who could speak broken English. Up to the present time and since leaving Geraldton I have been unable to get a native of any value to us. All the useful ones are employed by prospectors and teamsters. This boy appears anxious to go with us and I will take him. He says his name is "Wyndhain."  Observed for true meridian and latitude. Found latitude 26deg. 38min. 41sec. South at camp and valiation of compass 2deg. 32min. West the true bearing from Mt. Wells to camp being North 8deg. 40min. East.  Wednesday July 15. - -Mr. Jones went to the natives' camp and measured and photographed some of the natives; and Mr. Keartiand was successful in getting some specimens of birds and botanical collections.  Cut up and salted sheep and repaired saddles.  Observed with another sextant and mean of four (4) stars gave latitude 26deg. 58min. 30sec. South.  Thursday July 16. - The camels are not faring well on this camp and I am disappointed at not getting better feed for them. We shall now require all our strength as for the future it will all be cross-country work with probably heavy loads of water to carry.  Giving our last correspondence for some months at least to "Dadu" an Afghan friend of Bejah who is returning from the township to Cue we packed up and left this camp travelling Easterly round the edge of the lagoons for five (5) miles to some really good feed and on country free from stones. Made a camp here und accompanied by Mr. Jones I started out to examine the country on ahead and to ascertain whether there is any water to be found in the vicinity of Mt. Cleaver (Elder Expedition).  Leaving camp at 1.15 p.m. we travelled on a true bearing of North 69deg. East for six (6) miles then altered our course to North 49deg. East for some stony hills showing in the distance with Mt. Cleaver in the background.  Passed for first eight (8) miles over open level loamy soil clothed with mulga (acacia) excellent herbage and patches of saltbush and abundance of grass. Then followed sand ridges and porcupine and a few bloodwoods and bushes. Reaching the stony hills at 11 miles from camp we noted granite outcroppings to the North-East and a small creek about half a-mile distant fringed with gums (E. redunca). This tortuous channel can be traced by the bright green foliage from Mt. Oleaver where it has its source. Mt. Wells bears from here from true meridian North 223deg. East. Going over to the creek we found some nice little water-holes sandy soakages and rocky beds in the channel.  Following up the creek for two (2) miles over rocky country (granulite) with mulga and jam-wood (acacia) we camped for the night on a small patch of herbage for the camels.  Travelled for day 19 miles. [8]  Friday July 17. - We followed up the creek for one mile seeing several small sandy water-holes then branched off for Mt. Oleaver which we reached at about three (3) miles. From the summit the view to the Northward was chiefly sandridges and porcupine with low mulga ridges to the North-East. Bearing from here to Mt. Wells North 222deg. East.  Leaving the hill we proceeded to the North side of the range which is about one (1) mile long with an East and West trend. Finding no water here we travelled round the Eastern end and thence Southerly down a small gum creek where there are several small water-holes at one of which is a tree marked and close by two (2) old pack camel-saddles. Feeling confident we shall find more waters on ahead when we start with the full party I decided to return to our camp of last night and thence to rejoin main party.  Travelled for day 25 miles.  Saturday July 18. - Camels have greatly improved in appearance here.  Packed up and started at 9 a.m. bearing North 64deg. East and at about ten (10) miles reached the small stony hill visited on the 16th inst. Then bearing North 69deg. East for three (3) miles we struck the small gum creek coming from the Eastern end of Mt. Cleaver Bange and trending South-Westerly. Found several small water-holes here and camped having done 13 miles for the day. These small creeks empty their waters into Lake Way.  Sunday July 19. - Continuing on true bearing of North 69deg. East we crossed some more small gum creeks trending South-Westerly reaching a granulite mulga-clothed ridge (very stony travelling) at six miles and a similar one at eight miles. Then followed open porcupine sandy soil and a little mulga and mallee (eucalyptus). At two (2) miles we reached the edge of the mulga and grass the country gently rising for the next three (8) miles when at thirteen (13) miles we camped near two (2) remarkable round-topped hills of flints (Rose Hills). These hills I noted on my exploration trip (Elder Expedition) in 1892 my route passing a few miles to the Southward. Surrounding this spot are some nice open saltbush flats and dry claypans. I camped here deeming it unwise to leave a certainty in the shape of good feed simply to accomplish a few extra miles of travel.  The place is alive with numerous small birds such as finches and shell and cockatoo parrots all making themselves very busy amongst the grass seeds.  Monday July 20. - Still bearing North 69deg. East true. We left camp at 7.45 a.m. and crossing a stony brook bearing Southerly travelled over open saltbush flats for two (2) miles then over low mulga ridges or rises with quartz and ironstone rubble on surface. Met with mulga thickets patches of porcupine a few beefwoods corkwoods and mallee. Watercourses (small) all bearing Southward.  At two (2) miles altered bearing to North 88deg. East and followed this course for two miles to the foot of a low mulga range bearing North and South. Finding a patch of good herbage we camped here having travelled 14 miles. During the evening I walked on for three miles and noted ahead another range which I had crossed in 1892 on my return trip to Nannine.  Tuesday July 21. - Started at 7.40 a.m. still bearing North 88deg. East passing at two (2) miles a quartz or quartzite outcrop about one mile to Southward then got into fairly open mulga (acacia aneura) country with grass in abundance but of a generally inferior quality. At seven and a-half miles came upon a shallow watercourse trending Southerly. Reached the range at nine miles. It is of granulite formation and mulga-clothed in parts.  After some difficulty we found a spot at which to attempt an ascent with a view to crossing and thereby saving a long round. Managing to get to the top we found it very stony there but were fortunate enough to discover a good pad which a long time ago had evidently been cleared of the stones by natives who had piled them up on either side. We followed this across the range which is flat-topped for about half-a-mile when we saw some thousands of finches flying from a gorge. Here we found a large rock-hole with a sandy soakage at the foot of a waterfall which is 30ft. high. A small creek runs out from the gorge to a flat on the Eastern side of the range.  We camped in the gorge about ten (10) chains down from the water having travelled ten (10) miles for the day. I have called this place "Ballimore" after the birthplace of Lady Hawker wife of the late Hon. G. C. Hawker of South Australia. The water is in a difficult spot to find. I passed close by it without observation in 1892. We noted fresh tracks of emus and kangaroos.  Latitude 26deg. 24min. 40sec. South.  Wednesday July 22. - The native "Wyndham" bolted during the night or early morning taking his clothing boots and blanket with him. We were not sorry to lose him as he turned out a useless lazy rascal and would only have proved an encumbrance later on.  We filled three (3) pairs of water-kegs here und watering the camels we left this welcome spot at 8.40 a.m. Bearing North 65deg. East we passed over broken granulite rises for two (2) miles having crossed at one (1) and two (2) miles two (2) fairly large watercourses with a few cork trees and coarse grass trending Southerly. Then followed sandy country open porcupine desert gums (eucalyptus eudesmioides) and some bloodwoods and wattle-bush (acacia). Mulga thickets also occurred. There are small forests of the desert gums which are large and look healthy. The green foliage of these and the bloodwoods are pleasant to look upon. Crossed occasional ridges of sand in parts.  4t sixteen (16) miles we camped in a clump of desert gums with a few wattle bushes only for the camels. Noticed a good many tracks of emus to-day and close to camp are recently-made tracks of natives.  Thursday July 23. - Now bearing North 54deg. East over porcupine and sandridges. Passed many fresh trucks of natives for 3 1/2 miles then the character of the country changed to low limestone ridges with black oak (casuarina) teatree saltbush and herbage. [9] In my opinion water would be found at no great depth hereabouts by sinking. At five miles we reached the top of a ridge of sandstone and slate with East and West strike; and at six (6) miles at foot of same is a dry lagoon the Eastern edge of which we just cleared. It lies between two (2) mulga ridges and is about one (1) mile in extent with good saltbush vetch and herbage on its edges and sandy soil and mulga surrounding it. This lagoon has the appearance of being fresh except that samphire is growing around it; so probably it goes salt before drying. Continuing on we crossed a large watercourse coming into the lagoon from the South-South-East with belts of tea-tree on either side.  At 10 miles reached the top of another slatey mulga-clothed ridge. From here we had a good view of the lagoon just passed. Seeing some green gum-trees ahead and nearly on our course I decided to visit them and look for water. Reaching this spot at 1 p.m. (having travelled 11 miles) we found a beautiful little glen (Lorna Glen) between two (2) of the low mulga ridges a wide shallow watercourse coming in from the North ward. Some magnificent large white gums studded its banks and on either side were mulga jamwood beefwood cork-tree tea-tree prickly acacia and currant bushes. Grass and herbage grow along the watercourse.  Formed a camp and started down the channel in search of water bearing Southerly for half a mile where another shallow watercourse junctions with this one and then gradually trending round to the Westward. Further down the gum-trees many of which are young form a pretty avenue. We came upon large slabs of honeycomb limestone (travertine) in the channel and saw many familiar birds - magpies minahs crows shepherds' companions cockatoos and ring-neck parrots mulga parrots finches mud-larks and butcher birds.  At 1 1/2 miles some blue cranes rose as we approached the end of a narrow lagoon which we found contained perfectly fresh water. This lagoon is two (2) miles from camp and is from four (4) to ten (10) chains wide and about half (1/2) a mile long. We disturbed some black cormorants as we walked along its edge. Probably the surface water dries here during the summer months but from the large quantities of travertine limestone I have no doubt as to the permanency of water at shallow depths. Belts of tea-tree fringe the lagoon which when overflowing empties into the other that we passed by this morning. I have called this water "Lindsay Gordon Lagoon" after Australia's poet.  Highly satisfied with our success. we retraced our steps to camp where I marked a fine gum tree on West side inside a diamond blaze. At this glen there is a very pleasing contrast between the beautiful green of these large gum trees and the sombre tint of the mulga which clothes the adjacent ridges.  Latitude at camp by observation 26deg. 13min. 10sec. South.  Smokes doubtless of natives were seen from camp in a South-Easterly direction.  Friday July 24. - We experienced a cold night and frosty morning.  Sent all camels down to the lagoon to drink and starting from camp at 9.30 a.m. on North 65deg. East course passed for first five (5) miles. over fairly open country with grass saltbush etc.  Noted some nice beefwood trees on low ground and some shallow watercourses trending in a South-Westerly direction towards the lagoon. Then for the rest of the day thickets of mulga alternated with grass country. At nine (9) miles we came upon a small patch of saltbush (giant) and ahead very stony rising country approaching a rough-looking range. Fearing a stony camp without feed beyond this we turned out at 2 p.m. A prominent bluff point or headland at South-East end of a table range lay to the North-West about two (2) miles from camp. My cousin and self walked over to this and ascended it but could not get a good view the range in front of us being much higher.  During the day we crossed many fresh tracks of natives.  Saturday July 25. -- The camels were dissatisfied with the feed and made off during the night but Bejah soon tracked them up and we got a good start at 8 a.m.  Continuing on same course we reached the ranges at two miles; they are of rough sandstone and quartzite caps. Crossed the first top at three (3) miles and struck the head of a watercourse the direction of which was on our bearing; its winding channel was almost hidden by some splendid kangaroo and other grasses. There is a prominent high bluff point about half-a-mile on our right which I have named "Sierra."  Following down the watercourse we were surprised to see some fairly recent cattle tracks evidently those of cattle which had strayed from settlements at the head of the Murchison River during the last rains. At five (5) miles we passed the highest point of a belt of broken hills about one (1) mile to our left; these are in a valley between the ranges. Here we noticed some clay-pans and dry lagoons. Crossed another top at seven (7) miles and found progress difficult. Cleared off some of the stones breaking mulga and following in places old pads of kangaroos. There are several watercourses here bearing to the North. We did not get clear of this range until we had travelled about twelve (12) miles when we descended to grassy plains and mulga with outcrops of sandstones and several shallow watercourses trending Easterly. The ranges just crossed were striking East-South-East and West-North-West and in my opinion divide the water-shed of the Murchison from the country lying to the Eastward of this.  Noticing the green tints of the tops of some gum trees on our left I felt certain there must be water in the creek and I therefore asked my cousin to cross over to the nearest point to ascertain whether it was so whilst I continued on our course with the caravan cutting a large gum creek at sixteen (16) miles. Here I met my cousin following down the channel. He reported plenty of water in holes all along its course. We camped here on a nice water-hole at 4 p.m. elated at our good fortune as we had been hoping to find some good water on this side of the rough range crossed to-day. [10]   There are some splendid gum trees (E. redunca) and red mulga fringing the channel which has the appearance of running strongly in flood time.  Bejah picked up the shell of a small tortoise at this water-hole. This must be an indication of permanent water somewhere not far distant. The channel of this creek is about fifty (50) yards wide with a sandy bed in clay. This I have named "Charles Wells Creek" after Mr. O. F. Wells second in command of the expedition.  Sunday July 26. - Leaving the water-hole at 9 a.m. we crossed the creek continuing our course of the last few days for two (2) miles when the channel took a long sweep to the South-East. From the top of a stony rise I could see it again bending to the North-East some miles down. As the country on the North side consisted of low mulga-clothed ridges of sharp stones I altered our course to North 100deg. East travelling over open mulga and saltbush country with some nice claypans the low ridges of sandstone and slate lying on our left. We saw some old wurlies (natives) as we travelled along. At eight (8) miles we found another gum creek coming into this one from the North-West with rough country on either side. Here we found a splendid long water-hole with ten (10) feet of yellowish water in stiff yellow clay a good clay bottom and steep banks. When full this hole would hold 15 feet of water. Some months must have elapsed since it was filled the grass and herbage along the banks being almost dry. There is an abundance of good saltbush in the creek valley and as last night's camp was a poor one for feed I decided to camp here having travelled but ten (10) miles for the day.  During the afternoon I walked on a bearing of 65deg. magnetic over ridges of exceedingly hard rectangular sharp sandstones and slates all fairly open. At three (3) miles from the top of one of one of these ridges. I could see the creek at camp coming from a considerable distance to North-West. A prominent table-top hill at the Western end of a range or table-land bears North 170 East true. This hill which is about 15 or 20 miles distant I have called "Mount Alexandra" after Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales and the end of the range or table-land "Federation Headland" (this range is probably identical with the "Carglew Range" of the Elder Expedition). The Princess Range is apparently in the same line the prominent table-hill being between the two. The gap formed between these two ranges I have called "Kingston Pass" after the Hon. O. C. Kingston Premier of South Australia who has taken a prominent part in the present Federal Council. I crossed over towards the creek on which we camped yesterday with a view of finding an easier route for the camels to-morrow; having been successful I returned to camp at 5 p.m. after walking seven miles over rough country.  Monday July 27. - Travelled South-Easterly along the creek for half-a-mile when it reaches the valley of the larger one found on the 25th inst. and splits up into several channels. Then skirted the valley along the edge of the rough country I had seen yesterday bearing North 80deg. East for three (3) miles then North 50deg. East for two (2) miles where the creek which junctions with the larger one empties into a salt lagoon about one (1) mile wide here with shallow water and hard rocky sandstone outcrops in its bed. On the North are very rough sandstone and slate ridges and sand ridges on the South. At four (4) miles on this course the lagoon was so close to the rocky stone ridges that we were forced to leave its shore and cross the latter.  Now bearing North 20deg. East and crossing broken ridges. We noted that the lagoon emptied into a salt lake on our right where sand ridges were bordering its shores. At four (4) miles we struck the junction of two more creeks fringed with beautiful gum trees (E. redunca). One of these creeks comes in from the West and the other from the North-West (330deg.). There is capital camel feed here good herbage and saltbush so we camped at eleven (11) miles for the day. During the afternoon my cousin went up the channel to the North-West and at 1 1/2 miles he found a nice clay water-hole in its bed which in his opinion will last for a month or more. Walking Easterly myself for about a mile and a-half to some high sand hills which grow good herbage I came to a large salt lake (Lake Rudall) - the same one we noticed this morning - quite dry. The hearing along its edge was North 50deg. East. I should say it is quite four (4) miles wide and eight (8) or ten (10) miles long. There is a range or table-top on the South-Eastern side and sand hills border its shores.  Returning to camp I noticed fresh footprints of a native and three dogs. In the sandy bed of the creek where it empties its waters into a samphire flat and the gumtrees terminate were several nice soakages of fresh water. [11] A number of crested bronzewing pigeons were flying around here filling the air with the well-known sound of their wiry wings. Mr. Keartland reports having seen a domestic cat yesterday and there are several tracks of these animals here. It would be natural to assume that the whole of these unknown parts of Western Australia is inhabited by them for during the trip of the Elder Expedition across the Victoria Desert in 1891 I myself saw a domestic cat and at Frazer Range we were informed that the outside natives captured and devoured a great many.  Latitude by observation 25deg. 58min. 2sec. South.  Tuesday July 28.- - Cold night frosty morning.  At 8.20 a.m. we continued our travels now bearing North 50deg. East true over open mulga flats and sandstone and slate outcrops. Crossed another gum creek at three (3) miles with a nice waterhole on our left where we saw some ducks and at four (4) miles another channel both coming from the North-West and another a little further on coming from the North all trending towards the salt lake.  From here I could see Mount Hosken (J. Forrest 1874) bearing North 92deg. East. Altered course to North 80deg. East and crossing more rough sandstone slate ridges and gullies met with another gum creek at three (3) miles with a North and South trend and at nine (9) miles another trending South and apparently coming from the North-West.  Continuing on the same course over broken sandstone country and hillocks some very red in appearance a great deal of bare ironstone rubble ground and some clay-pans a little inferior mulga and poor saltbush. Camped at 4 p.m. at thirteen (13) miles on this bearing and seventeen (17) miles for the day. Very poor food here for the camels. I made a mistake in not camping at the last creek crossed but it is easy to be wise now!  Walked to a hill about one (1) mile North-East of the camp which is capped with hard flint Bearings from here to Mount Hosken North 118deg. East and to Mount Moore which is also visible North 6deg. East. I could not see Lake Augusta from this hill.  Wednesday July 29. - The camels made off during the night. Getting them all packed at 8.40 a.m. and attempting a start we noticed one of our best pack camels trembling in the hind quarters und thinking he had hurt himself whilst rising (his load being heavy) we removed his pack to another animal. However shortly after starting he lay down and would not rise again. Almost immediately afterwards another was affected in the same manner. We then knew they had been poisoned. I had all the packs removed and leaving Bejah and the remainder of the party here to attend the sick ones myself my cousin and Mr. Jones started with 18 camels for Luke Augusta or Mt. Moore in the hope of finding food and water in that vicinity as it was my intention to form my first depot hereabouts if practicable.  Getting a fresh start at 10.30 a.m. and bearing North 10deg. East for Mt. Moore we passed over miserable flats of clay with slate rises and quartz crystal and destitute of all vegetation except dead mulga and bushes. At six (6) miles hillocks of decomposed slate with a little mallee occurred. From here are visible the red sandridges surrounding Lake Augusta and the Timperley Range is very conspicuous. Mt. Hosken at it most Southern end is a peculiar hill the summit being a peak of red and white. Reaching the sandridges and ascending one I saw Lake Augusta close by to the East. It resembled a large claypan very shallow and perfectly dry. The sandridges were also very drought-stricken in appearance the only feed being a little wattle-bush. This was very disappointing and we had now but little hope of finding feed or water at Mt. Moore. When Sir John Forrest discovered this lake in 1874 it was teeming with wild fowl (ducks and swans) and presented the appearance of being deep and there was plenty of water near Mt. Moore in holes. Taking the camels to the Northern side of the sandridges we camped at the entrance to the lake of (2) two shallow watercourses where there is but little feed having travelled fourteen (14) miles from the rest of the party.  My cousin and self started at 4 p.m. for Mt. Moore Mr. Jones remaining in charge of the camp and camels. After riding about five (5) miles we found Sir John Forrest's camp and his marked tree also a small pile of stones erected by him on Mt. Moore. The country here was exceedingly dry and parched.  Returned to camp at 7 p.m. and found the camels had made off and we had twice to go after them in the dark. It was 10 p.m. before our day's work was finished. Travelled 24 miles for day.  Thursday July 30. - Feeling anxious about the poisoned camels I made an early start and rejoined the others at noon. I found the poor beasts not much improved being still in pain. Bejah had given them a mixture of warm water and soap without the desired effect. We at once dosed each of them with a bottle of castor-oil and hot water and administered an injection of soup and water with a gun-barrel a course successfully adopted by Colonel Warburton in similar circumstances. The oil and injection together with a good rolling about have had the desired effect; although they are still unable to rise I believe the animals are much improved. One is almost paralysed in the hind quarters whilst the other has lost the use of his fore legs. Where these two camels were found feeding yesterday morning Mr. Keartland has discovered a plant which we believe to have been the cause of the trouble. It is small and almost leafless with several shoots from the main stem and generally about twelve (12) inches high; when broken a sticky milky fluid is seen. In place of leaves it has a small fringe and is very green when all other herbage is dry and consequently inviting in appearance to a hungry camel.  When food is plentiful camels do not usually eat food strange to them.  Friday July 31. - This morning one of the camels managed to rise but is too weak to travel whilst the other is still improving. Messrs. Keartland and Jones with Bejah remained here with the invalids whilst Mr. O. F. Wells Trainor and Said Ameer accompanied me with the caravan. Following our outward pad for four (4) miles we reached the last gum creek (the Brockman) crossed on the 28th inst. and proceeding up the channel for half-a-mile we came upon a splendid water-hole [...].[12] [13] [14]  Mount Bates bears North 278deg. East and is about two (2) miles distant. Another prominent table-top bears North 22deg. East and is about three and a half (3 1/2) miles distant whilst a similar hill at the Northern end of a range bears North 154deg. East. These hills and ranges are chiefly clothed with mulga (acacia aneura). While I was busy marking the tree two of the natives disappeared and an hour later returned with three (3) gins whom they invited us to keep. They then bolted off into some mulga where they sat down and peered at us through the bushes. The gins were small weedy-looking women excessively afraid and trembling from head to foot Their teeth chattered when they attempted to speak. We decorated them with a shirt apiece and giving them some food intimated that they could join their lawful lords and masters. They ran off glad to escape and looking very funny in their new dress. The men however were not so easily put off and quickly stripping the gins of the shirts they brought them back again possibly with a hope of getting further gifts. Giving them some handkerchiefs I cleared them all out of camp for the night. They knew no English and the only word I found useful from memory of the language of the Murchison tribe was "bubba" which means water.  I make the latitude here by sextant and stars (two North and two South) 25deg. 42min. 57sec. South.  Thursday August 13. - -The natives camped close to us last night and two (2) of them came to accompany us this morning but on ascertaining the direction we were taking they became greatly alarmed and wished evidently to explain to us that there was no water in that direction. They tried hard to induce me to alter our course; to go first East and then North-West. After accompanying us for six (6) miles they left us being evidently on the boundary of their country.  Leaving camp at 7.40 a.m. and travelling North 20deg. East we passed the table-top half noted yesterday at three and a half (3 1/2) miles going thence North-East over red sandridges and porcupine and saltbush flats. At eight (8) miles we ascended a high sandridge to obtain a view and were surprised to see a large salt lake on our left and several salt pans on our right extending towards the salt marsh mentioned by Sir John Forrest. Took following bearings from here: Mag. - Mt. Bates North 216deg East. Hill passed at three and a-half (3 1/2) miles North 227deg. East. Two conspicuous hills at North-East end of lake North 40deg. East. These latter I have called The "Keartland Hills" after Mr. G. A. Keartland Naturalist of this Expedition.  Now bearing North 48deg. East. We travelled for five (5) miles along this high sandridge the lake close by being hidden from view. Slightly altering our course to North 40deg. East we crossed the sandridge at a low spot and followed the shore of the hake for three (3) miles to its most North-East point where the Keartland Hills were one (1) mile on our left. From this point I noticed a very remarkable flat-topped hill (Mt. Archie) with sheer face at either end bearing North 94deg. East mag. and about twelve (12) miles distant. On the shores of the lake we saw gypsum mounds and the desert oak (Casuarina decaisneana).  At eighteen (18) miles from camp we crossed a stony flat and at twenty-two (22) miles a low mulga and porcupine-clothed range of clay rock which trends in a North-West direction towards a belt or range of table-top hills about eight (8) miles distant. We camped on the North side of this low range on poor camel feed having seen none other for the last six (6) miles. Near camp I disturbed two (2) lowans but with the exception of one (1) eaglehawk we saw us other sign of bird life after the natives left us this morning. Noted currajongs and native poplars during the day. Latitude at camp 25deg. 28min. 21sec. South.  Friday August 14. - We were up before daybreak this morning thus getting an early start. For the whole distance continued same course (North 40deg. East) over sandridges some of them very steep bearing West-North-West and East-South-East.  These ridges are clothed with a few stunted desert gums (eucalyptus eudesmioides) and bloodwoods some wattle bushes (acacia) native poplars quandongs and a few currajong trees in the flats. There was nothing to prove that natives had ever been in this country; and the only signs of bird life were in the shape of two (2) crows and an eaglehawk.  At 2 p.m. the camels were showing signs of distress owing to the number of sandridges they had to encounter and three (3) of the number were carrying over 600£bs. weight (water and kegs etc.) so I decided to camp on a few quondongs and native poplars for there seemed no prospect of getting anything better. We noted as we travelled along in few low mulga-clothed ridges of sandstone overlying limestone. From the tops of the highest sandridges at camp we had in all directions a most wretched view nothing but red sandridges being visible for many miles.  Travelled for day nineteen (19) miles. Barometer at 4 p.m. 28.62. Latitude at camp 25deg. 16min. 19sec. South.  Saturday August 15. - -We were obliged to tie the camels up last night as they were dissatisfied and soon attempted to make off.  We got off camp at 7.20 a.m. travelling still on same course over the same class of wretched country as we encountered yesterday the ridges generally trending 20deg. North-West but steep and in places irregular making our progress slow. At six (6) miles we crossed a low mulga-clothed ridge of clay rock capped with quartzite and bearing North-West and South-East but we soon entered sandridges again. At fourteen (14) miles passed some more of these mulga ridges close by and here noted in the flats limestone the sandridges becoming lower and less in number. Altered course here to North 30deg. East for a distant smoke seen probably a native's fire which sprang up almost in front of us. A large valley now on her left trending East and West and about two (2) miles wide is conspicuous from here. [15]  At twenty and a half (20.5) miles for the day we camped in the valley in a small belt of desert gum trees a small rocky bluff-like point being about three (3) miles distant and due North of camp This valley is 1450 feet above sea level and there are large quantities of limestone rock on the surface in parts covered with sand the vegetation being chiefly wattle-bush (acacia) and porcupine.  There are two (2) varieties of small wallaby-like animals to be seen about this locality. One species is brown in colour with straight hair and tail; the other lighter in colour larger and with a curled tail.  Barometer at camp at 4 p.m. 28.68.  Latitude at camp 25deg. 2min. 19sec. South.  Until to-day neither tracks nor any sign of natives had been met with since we parted with the Mt. Bates tribe and I believe that the intervening country we have just passed over divides separate tribes.  The valley has the appearance of being a favourable spot for sinking for water supplies.  Sunday August 16. - Resuming our journey and still on the same course we crossed the valley at three (3) miles and here noticed a small narrow salt lagoon close on our right with flats of samphire a small watercourse emptying into it from the East. Continuing on over gradually rising limestone country we reached a high point at six (6) miles; mallee (eucalyptus) porcupine and clay-pans here. A eight (8) miles a dark-looking range (Hutton Range) was visible on our course about twelve (12) or fourteen (14) miles in advance.  Continuing our march over low gravelly ridges with mulga and low sandridges with limestone in the flats porcupine everywhere and scattered wattle-bush (acacia) we reached at twelve (12) miles dense thickets of mulga (acacia aneura) about one (1) mile South-West of the highest point of the range which is of clay-rock capped with quartzite and conglomerate and mulga clothed.  Mr. Jones remained in camp whilst Bejah joined me in a search for water. We found the range flat on top with escarpments on either side. After walking about five (5) miles we returned to camp unsuccessful although we saw fresh tracks of some kangaroos. However we were fortunate in finding a low spot or saddle by means of which we shall be able to get the caravan through the range to-morrow. From the summit another low range or ridge with a bluff end facing East and bearing about North-East is visible and this must be in the vicinity of "Buzzoe's Grave" on Mr. Ernest Giles' route from the Murchison to the Musgrave Range. This range is about 1800 feet above sea level but insignificant in elevation above its own base.  Latitude at camp by observation with sextant 24deg. 46min. 39sec. South.  Monday August 17. - Now bearing North 52deg. East we crossed over the low saddle of the range which trends North-West and South-East and at five (5) miles reached a valley on the North side where the vegetation was very green evidencing some recent rain. There are some nice bloodwoods here also native poplars herbage and the usual grass and porcupine. This valley forms a watercourse along the foot of the range and falls towards the North-West. We saw large numbers of shell parrots and finches all flying in a South-Easterly direction. As it was early in the day I concluded they must be going to water so determined to form a camp here and make a further search. Leaving Bejah in camp Mr. Jones and I travelled on a bearing of North 150deg. East mag. crossing the range in a gap at five (5) miles and thence on to a nice belt of bloodwoods in a flat which we reached at eight (8) miles. Here a mulga creek trending Westerly from the range emptied itself. Birds coming from the direction of camp continued to fly over our heads for the whole distance but the further we travelled the fewer we saw. Following the creek up to the range we saw several places now dry where natives had been getting water and also old encampments but the creek was as dry as a limekiln and split up into various small channels as we entered the range. Concluding that we had been travelling on a "wild-goose chase" we crossed over the range and returned to camp finding on route some excellent green herbage (parakylia and water-bush). Gathering a large quantity we tied it on our camels and took it to camp. In my opinion the water must be somewhere to the North-West and the birds seen this morning were in all probability leaving it and flying out to some favourite feeding-ground.  Bejah reported "Plenty poison plant at camp" and had been busying himself in pulling and burning all he could find. Consequently we tied the camels up and fed them with what Mr. Jones and myself had gathered.  Travelled for day twenty-three (23) miles.  Tuesday August 18. - This morning I walked down the valley in search of water but found none although I saw some doves and a kingfisher. Returning to camp we packed the camels and moved to the spot where we found the green herbage yesterday. This rest on good soft herbage containing a large percentage of moisture will I hope enable us to push on for a considerable time without encroaching on our water supply in the kegs. Three of the camels appear very thirsty being unaccustomed to do without a drink for more than a day or two. Saw a distant smoke bearing North 110deg. East mag. There are a number of finches and some doves flying about among the herbage and I fancy extracting moisture sufficient for their requirements. Some beautiful everlasting flowers - dark purple pea and small thick clusters of white sweet-smelling blossom resembling snowballs - are scattered over this valley.  During the afternoon Bejah and myself walked about the range but returned after a six miles' tramp without finding water. We saw plenty of poison plant which in every instance was on stony or gravelly ground.  This evening we gathered several hundred weight of herbage as I purpose again tying the camels up at night. [16]  Latitude at camp 24deg. 44min. 44sec. South.  Wednesday August 19. - As the days are becoming much warmer towards afternoon I have determined upon getting away earlier in the morning.  Started at six o'clock bearing North 41deg. East over gravelly slopes of mulga and porcupine - good going for camels for the first seven miles. Then on our right we noted a forest of large bloodwoods (eucalyptus) with beautiful green foliage. At eight (8) miles on rising ground the vegetation luxuriant in growth was of herbage such as waterbush parakylia and wildflowers - an indication that there has been a good rain here a few months since. At nine (9) miles the bluff point seen on the 16th inst. was visible with a mulga-clothed hill or ridge on its East. A small creek dividing the two and running Southward empties itself among the bloodwoods and porcupine in the valley we have just crossed. Altered course to North 7deg. East and steering direct for the bluff point we reached it in five (5) miles on this bearing. I make this point the position of Mr. Ernest Giles "Buzzoe's Grave" and of the small creek or watercourse at which he obtained a scanty supply of water. From the summit of the bluff was also noticeable the low dark ridge some miles to the Eastward which is also a feature on his map. From his description of this spot I did not anticipate finding water here unless our arrival should happen a few days after rain; so I was not disappointed.  Continuing our journey and now bearing North 21 deg. East we passed through another gap similar in description to the last - a single low hill on our East and clay-rock escarpments and table-tops capped with quartzite to the West. We then encountered sandridges and lumpy porcupine flats; had travelling until at 4 1/2 miles the escarpments to the West bore oft to the West and South-West. At six miles we reached a prominent hill (Mt. Madley) in the ridge where we found some good green herbage so I decided to camp rather than risk going further.  From the top of the hill which is 1750 feet above sea-level and 200 feet above a valley immediately to the North similar mulga-clothed ridges or low ranges are visible to the Westward about ten (10) miles distant with belts of mulga porcupine and sandridges covering the space intervening. To the North-West nothing is visible for a considerable distance but sandridges and porcupine whilst to the North-North-East is another low range to which I purpose proceeding to-morrow.  Fresh footprints of natives are to be seen here on the sandridges. Smokes were also seen to the North-East and East-South-East.  Travelled for day 20 miles.  Latitude by sextant 24deg. 30min. 59sec. South.  Thursday August 20. - The camels did well last night. Moving oft camp at 6.15 a.m. and bearing North 26deg. East over jumbled sandhills and ridges with dense porcupine in the flats occasional wattlebushes (acacia) dwarf tea-tree a few bloodwoods desert gums and durrajong we travelled for nine miles when we reached the low range seen yesterday which is of clay-rock rubble or conglomerate with low escarpments on its Southern side and extending East and clothed with mulga (acacia). Seeing some fresh footprints of natives we wasted some time entailing a loss of two (2) or three (3) miles in endeavouring unsuccessfully to track them in the hope of finding water. Saw one small rock-hole (dry).  Continued on same course for seven (7) miles further and camped still in a wretched wilderness of sandridges on some half-dozen wattle-bushes for the camels. From the top of a large currajong at camp I could see the same ridge we had crossed at nine (9) miles lying to the South-East and about five (5) miles off.  Travelled for day nineteen (19) miles. Latitude at camp 24deg. 19min. South.  I am feeling anxious over failure with regard to water discoveries and the appearances here are anything but cheering. We are now about a hundred and seventy (170) miles from depot and one hundred and thirty (130) miles from Forrest's water at Mount Bates with a terrible stretch of desert sandhills to face should we attempt a return. However I have no intention of giving up hope yet though it is most disheartening work pushing on day after clay with an anticipation yet unrealised of seeing some likely spot for search.  Friday August 21. - Making a very early start we resumed our journey on same bearing. Low sandridges and dense porcupine everywhere. There is very little timber of any description. A few wattles of a long whipstick variety with very few leaves some stunted desert gum and bloodwoods occasional currajong trees and a species of dwarf tea-tree. The porcupine with seedstalks four (4) and five (5) feet high presents a dazzling whiteness and resembles in the flats fields of ripe corn. I find it most trying to my eyes.  After travelling five (5) miles a smoke rose exactly on our bearing; and as it was between 7 a.m. and 8 a.m. I feel confident that we must be approaching the vicinity of some water. We are all on foot a practice we have adopted since leaving depot. We usually walk the first nine (9) miles of our day's journey at the rate of 2 1/2 miles per hour; this helps to break the monotony of travelling and in addition rests our riding camels.  Ascending a sandridge I was surprised to see not more than sixty (60) yards below me several natives - three (3) men three (3) women and two (2) children. Calling to them I held my hands up and tried to make them understand I meant to be friendly; but they were terror-stricken and a general stampede ensued. One rather bold-looking stopped and picking up a spear shipped it I believe with the intention of throwing it but at that moment Bejah's turbaned head followed by the head of a camel appeared behind me and our warrior bold was soon in advance of his brethren a remarkably fat lubra (gin) bringing up the rear. These aborigines had doubtless never before seen white man or camel and probably the sight of a panama hat and a pair of coloured glasses I was wearing to protect my eyes from the glare of the porcupine helped to dismay them. [17]  Immediately North of their camping place - viz. a few holes in the sand and some smouldering pieces of dead mulga in a slight hollow where there are a few mulga trees - we found under a tall tea-tree 20 feet high a well or hole which has been scraped out in a crude fashion by the natives. It is about ten (10) feet deep wide at the surface and running at the bottom to barely room for a large man to stand in. To prevent the loose sand from running into the shaft the sides were dabbed with decayed vegetation which accumulates in these drift wells. I noticed a small drain on the surface for the purpose of conducting rain water from the natural hollow into the well and of course came to the conclusion that it must be only a soakage supply. We spent two (2) hours in enlarging the holes and found a very hard rock in the bottom on which we could not make any impression. Result - about half a gallon of dirty water There is no landmark in the vicinity and the spot might be passed within two (2) chains without observation. Computed latitude 24deg. 14min. 30sec.  Beyond the first sandridge to the North is a wattle-bush flat half-a-mile wide with limestone outcropping. Again disappointed we continued our march at 10 a.m. still crossing countless sandridges and at nine (9) miles from our last night's camp we reached another of those clay-rock ridges extending East and West with escarpments on the South side. Here we found that the Northern part of this outcrop was buried in obscurity the sandridges having completely hidden it. Others of a similar description but all insignificant are to be seen to the North-West.  About a quarter of a mile West of our course are three (3) small rock-holes (dry) where there is a prominent point. Well-beaten native pads lead from a small thicket of mulga on the South to the rockholes. Still pushing on we reached another similar outcrop at 17 miles escarpments also showing on South side and covered with sandridges on the North. Altered course here; now bearing North 1deg. East over open porcupine plains almost destitute of timber the sandridges being lower and further apart. Travelled seven (7) miles on this course without seeing a vestage in the shape of camel fodder; then we found a small patch of waterbush (pollichia zeylanica) on top of a sandridge. Camped in a small clump of mulga having pushed on for twenty-four (24) miles in spite of our lose of time at the native well.  Whilst I took some observations for latitude at camp Mr. Jones and Bejah went to the locality of the waterbush and collected all they could see (about three (3) cwt.). This they carried to camp for the camels which were tied up as usual for the night.  Latitude 24deg. 0min. 7sec. South.  I saw here in the mulga a pair of most beautiful parrots; and from Mr. Keartland's description I conclude they are "Princess Alexandra" species.  My eyes are very painful to-night as also are Bejah's. This I attribute to the white glare of the porcupine.  The daily strain is telling on the camels and the outlook is anything but pleasant. The country is almost destitute of feed for them and deprived of water as well we cannot hope to sustain the position much longer. However I have exercised the strictest economy with the water with which we started from depot and we still have over five kegs full not having yet used one keg. As long as I consider the camels can do without water I shall push on; but when forced to encroach on the kegs I must go no further and should the worst confront us I believe with the various patches of feed I have noted since starting we can get back again with some if not all of the camels.  Saturday August 22.-- - Rising at 4 a.m. we had a capital start; and taking same course as last evening we found travelling much improved the sandridges being less in number the flats more even and the porcupine less dense. At six (6) miles we reached a high sandridge which we found was covering a ridge or hill of clay rock stony on North side with cap of quartzite. A small watercourse joined others trending North-Westerly for one (1) mile to a valley of bloodwoods wattle (acacia) native plum good herbage and porcupine. This valley extends North-Easterly and is the first good feed we have seen for some days. Continuing our course we crossed the valley in three (3) miles. Then gradually ascending with a few sandridges on either side of us we reached at fifteen (15) miles the top of another clay-rock hill capped with quartzite. This point about fifteen hundred (1500) feet above sea-level and three hundred (300) feet in elevation above the valley noted at six (6) miles is the highest crossed for some distance. It has a flat top and some mulga and a tall species of wattle (acacia) crown its summit. On the North side are low escarpments and a cave with several remarkable blow-holes through its roof. I have named this hill after the faithful Bejah who has proved himself a splendid fellow and an excellent camelman. To the North-West and about three (3) miles distant is another prominent top. The view from here is most discouraging. High red sandridges are visible for miles to the North-West and North-East.  Proceeding to a porcupine flat on the North side of the hill where several small water channels empty themselves we found a little feed for our small number of camels and the weather being decidedly warm I determined to camp at 1 p.m. fearing to go further best the camels should fare poorly.  Travelled for day 16 miles. Noticed during the day several recent tracks of natives going Northerly.  Latitude at camp 23deg. 46min. 11sec. South.  After forming camp we discovered a quantity of poison plant. We gathered and burnt all we could see and shepherded the camels tying them up for the night. Mr. Ernest Giles our well-known and daring explorer in reference to this plant which had previously paralysed several of his camels says in his notes that he dreaded it as the deadly upas tree. I hope we shall see no more of its kind.  My eyes are becoming worse and it is with great difficulty that I am able to observe for latitude. Water is far too precious a commodity to be used for bathing them. [18]  For the last two days the weather during the afternoon has been exceptionally warm for the time of year.  Sunday August 23. - My eyes were so painful last night that I was unable to sleep. Started at 5.55 a.m. still on same course (North 1deg. East) travelling over endless sandridges of porcupine the whole of the day. The scanty vegetation consists of grevillia a few stunted desert gums a coarse variety of acacia (at which camels will not look) and dwarf tea-tree. At five (5) miles we reached the summit of a very high sandridge. In every direction the view was one of high sandridges and distant horizon apparently level. The day is very hot and the patient camels after carrying heavy kegs of water over countless ridges of loose sand and lumpy porcupine flats are showing signs of the severity of the task set them.  Altered course; now bearing North 11deg. East for a black-booking patch. Passing over heavy country for the whole distance we reached at thirteen (13) miles a small black hill of clay conglomerate hidden on the North side by sandridges higher than itself and only conspicuous from the South for four (4) or five (5) miles. Here the exhausted condition of the camels became so apparent that I feared we could not go on much further and indeed the day's adventure had been most trying for us all; but as we had so far not seen a bite of feed I was obliged to push on a little longer. Again altering our course we travelled North 1deg. East over very high and numerous sandridges for three (3) miles. Then bearing North 300deg. East down a valley to look for feed we travelled two (2) miles compelled at last to camp where there were only a few small bushes of a kind the camels will not touch. One camel is very lame to-night and another slightly so and all are badly in need of water. I am feeling very anxious regarding our position as we are now separated from Mt. Bates water by nearly two hundred (200) miles of terrible wildernese. But I shall try one more day's venture further afield and if unsucceesful shall then consider what is best to be done.  Travelled for day 23 miles.  Latitude at camp 23deg. 27min. 29sec. South.  My eyes are most painful and I am afraid they may get so that I cannot use them at all.  Monday August 24. - Bejah shepherded his camels until midnight and then tied them up. This morning he would not eat any breakfast; and said "Camel no eat me no eat." The poor animals look like starved kangaroo dogs this morning.  Turning out at 3.30 a.m. we got off very early; and bearing North 300deg. East we reached at four (4) miles a low conglomerate clay ridge surrounded by and almost covered up with sandridges. Not a vestige of feed was to be seen here and no hills of any height are visible for at least thirty (30) miles. Glaring red sand extends in all directions and the outlook appears most hopeless. Although but 9 a.m. it is intensely hot. The vegetation consists of a few low grevillia and stunted chiefly perished desert gums.  Altered course to North 315deg. East and at 11 a.m. we reached more high red sandridges having done thirteen (13) miles for the day. The camels are quite done up; and as there is a little waterbush here on the tops of the ridges I have determined to camp.  Before the camels will travel further I find I must give them half the water we have in the kegs and this will considerably tighten their loads.  We are now about two hundred and fifty (250) miles from depot and I dread the idea of having to return by the route we have come but I feel that the most direct course is the only one to pursue; besides I noted on our outward tract one or two patches of green herbage and these together with the water we shall have remaining to-morrow will I hope see us through to Mt. Bates travelling by night.  I feel thoroughly disgusted with my trip so far and for the present rather disheartened. Everything seems against us - sandridges porcupine poison plant sore eyes and no water discoveries. On starting from Lake Way last June I had great hope of finding some good country about this latitude but now I am afraid those hopes are "smouldering in the ashes of despair !"  Latitude at camp 23deg. 19min. 9sec. South.  If no water is discovered between here and Mt. Bates we shall most probably return to depot for supplies and make a fresh start in some other direction. It is now getting late in the year and I am afraid under existing circumstances that I shall find great difficulty in getting the whole of my party and equipment through to the Fitzroy River.  Tuesday August 25. - Rising long before daylight after a most restless night we were moving at 5 a.m. Now bearing North 192deg. East over wretched country. Crossed at four (4) miles a low valley with limestone outcropping and tea-tree up to fifteen (15) feet high and trending about East and West. A mile further on while walking a little in advance of the caravan my attention was drawn to the well-known whirr of the crested bronzewing or wirewing pigeon. I saw the bird flying quickly to the Westward. Although so often disappointed in following birds on the chance of finding water this bird on account of the rate at which it was flying gave me fresh hope and I accordingly ascended a high sandridge over which I noticed it dip. Noting therefrom a remarkably green belt of tall tea-tree I called to Mr. Jones who was in charge of the camels to halt and come over. Proceeding to the clump of tea-tree we saw several pigeons about it but no water although we found old camping-places of natives and saw limestone outcropping in the gully. However seeing some good camel feed I determined to camp for the day and institute a careful search. Mr. Jones returned to Bejah to bring the camels over whilst I followed down a small samphire lead to the North-West. About ten (10) chains down from the clump of tall tea-tree I came to a patch of the same species only stunted in growth and about four (4) chains wide. In this was a small hollow at the bottom of which I found a native well filled with sand and debris. The earth was damp on the top and I came to the conclusion that the pigeons had been sucking the water from it. The caravan arriving we set to work at once and found we had discovered a really good well of water slightly saline but good to drink. [19] We sank through sand for six (6) feet and then through rubble sandstone for two (2) feet and the water rose about three (3) feet. during the afternoon. I need hardly say how delighted we all were at our good fortune. I felt very thankful to be relieved from the anxiety of the last four (4) days. This water is almost in the heart of the desert and midway between our depot and Joanna Spring on Colonel Warburton's route. I have called it " Midway Well." We stayed here for the remainder of the day. The camels enjoyed themselves immensely and we indulged in the rare luxury of a bath after fourteen (14) days without a wash of any description.  During the afternoon I fired a shot at a pigeon breaking its legs but it got away. It afterwards appeared to me a cruel return to perhaps the identical bird that led us to this haven of rest. For we should most certainly have passed it by but for the bird. In fact it could easily be passed at a distance of three (3) chains without observation. But "man's hand is ever slow to spare and ever ready to strike."  At the well there is a large mound of earth and debris apparently the accumulation of many years and caused by the natives through the removal of rubbish and silt from the hole. From the hundreds of old camping places on the surrounding sandridges I am of the opinion that this is a permanent water and a summer resort of the aborigines. However the well has not been in use for a long period.  Owing to the weakness of my eyes I had difficulty in using the sextant. I make the latitude 23deg. 23min. South and the computed longitude 123deg. 59min. East.  Wednesday. August 26. - -Having had such excellent good fortune yesterday I decided to begin to-day mapping the country to the South-West thence travelling Southerly to depot. It will be further to return this way but my mission is to map in all blank spaces and not merely to make a bee-line through the country. However owing to our late start from Adelaide no delay must occur and I must get the main party and impedimenta through to this well before the season advances and the heat becomes greater. As it is the heavily-laden camels will find it a stiff task to tackle again the terrible extent of sandridges we have crossed between here and depot.  Watered camels and made a start at 8.30 a.m. bearing North 246deg. East with the intention of travelling about this course to Mr. Ernest Giles' route and thence Southerly for depot. We crossed over a wretched desert country for the whole day the sandridges in places being one hundred (100) feet high. Saw no camel feed but plenty of poison plant until at fourteen (14) miles we camped on a few wattle bushes and native poplars. The day was very hot. Tied camels up for the night.  Thursday August 27. - Started at 5.30 a.m. and still on same course; travelled over a jumble of sandridges for four (4) miles when I noted a valley in front of us with small sabine flats and tea-tree. Half-a-mile further on and half-a-mile to the right appeared another saline flat or claypan to which we proceeded. Seeing two (2) corella parrots and some pigeons we made a search and found a well filled with debris but with water near the surface which was very brackish and bitter. There were flocks of shell parrots flying over us and going from East to West. There must he a good water not far distant but it is impossible to say whether the birds are going to or from water. From a high sandridge I could see a lagoon (apparently salt) a few miles distant and bearing North 305deg. East. There is abundance of limestone here and good camel feed. Numbers of quandong (or native peach trees) abound bearing the most luxuriant fruit I have ever seen. Some of the peaches are as large as egg-plums. From one (1) tree we almost filled a 50£b. flour-bag without by any means stripping it of all its fruit. We are now really crossing a valley of low sandridges and limestone outcrops wooded with mallee wattle bushes grevillia tea-tree and porcupine which appears to grow anywhere. At seven (7) miles we crossed a shallow samphire and saltbush lead trending in the direction of the lagoon. More high red sandridges at nine (9) miles. At twelve (12) miles we found another open flat of samphire and saltbush a half-mile on our right (North-West) with a larger valley in front of us. Finding good camel feed I decided to camp at 11 a.m. in a belt of tea-tree. There is quandong here also and a large species of dark wattle (acacia).  Latitude at camp 23deg. 31min. 20sec. South.  Friday August 28. - Allowed the camels to feed at 3.30 a.m. and breakfasting we again pushed on. Following same course we crossed the valley which shows gypsum and limestone at two (2) miles noticing mallee (eucalyptus) tea-tree quandong with excellent fruit grevillia and a little coarse grass. We then toiled over sandridges and through porcupine for the remainder of the day. For the first ten (10) miles the ridges were very high some over one hundred (100) feet and crowned with loose red drift. We saw no feed for the last fifteen (15) miles and camped at twenty-two (22) miles on a few wattle bushes for the camels.  At fourteen (14) miles I was surprised to see a very remarkable dome or cone-shaped hill (Cromer Cone) of sandstone standing alone a few miles to the North-West; and also a small peak at the end of a low range which is partly covered by sandridges. From camp another low range about fifteen (15) miles distant bears North 305deg. East.  We have seen neither smokes nor tracks of natives for a week - a sure sign that there are not any in the country at present as they are continually burning the country wherever they are located.  Saturday August 29. - Started at &40 a.m.; still on same bearing crossing same arid and desolate-looking country. At five (5) miles from the summit of a high sandridge noticed hills and ranges in front of us. Almost due West was a bluff or headland at the end of a bold-looking hill in a long range (Runton Range) with three (3) conspicuous detached hills to the West-South-West. There is a very distant point bearing North 235deg. East with a smaller range intercepting me.  Altered our course to North 237deg. East and travelling eleven (11) miles on this course we reached a small dry claypan at foot of range before noted. There was some nice young green buckbush around the claypan so we took advantage of it and camped early. [20]   Travelled for day sixteen (16) miles.  The top of the range is of sandstone partly covered with drift-sand and capped with quartzite It was three-quarters (3 / 4) of a mile from camp.  From here we got a capital view of the surrounding country the range bearing East-South-East and West-North-West with a gap half (1/2) a-mile to West. There are several detached hills and many hillocks especially on the Southern side of the range. I took the following bearings and made a sketch showing the most prominent features : - Magnetic North 175deg. East to a remarkable long bare hill two (2) miles off. North 190deg. East Western headland (Constance Headland) of a long and apparently flat-topped range about the same strike as this. North 245deg. East to a prominent headland in same range. North 268deg. East to three (3) conspicuous hills (Lady Victoria Group) noted yesterday. North 800deg. East to the hold headland (Sir Fowell Headland) in range also seen yesterday.  The lagoon in a low valley looks promising. It is apparently surrounded by green trees and shrubs.  Latitude at camp 23deg. 46min. 39sec. South.  We saw the tracks of two (2) natives a few miles from our camping place of to-day.  I made a sketch showing natural features seen from this range and the names given to them are those of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton Lady Victoria Buxton Miss Constance Buxton Mr. J. G. Russell Commissioner of Taxes and Insolvency and Mr. A. F. Calvert promoter of this expedition.  Sunday August 30. - -Leaving the small clay pan at 6 a.m. we passed at one (1) mile through the gap in the range which is half (1/2) a-mile on right of bearing. Then bearing North 246deg. East for the lagoon seen yesterday we crossed at three and four (3 and 4) miles the North end of a gypsum lagoon which was dry and about one (1) mile in extent. Travelling thence over jumpy porcupine and low sandridges we found ourselves at six (6) miles out on an open marshy flat hearing samphire and a little salt bush This extends Southerly towards the headland and apparently right up to the large hold bluff hill in the range to the Northward. It was quite a relief to get clear of the sandridges and porcupine even for a few miles. At nine (9) miles we reached the supposed water but found it to be a small dry salt lake bed with small salt watercourses coming in from the South and North-North-East. Then continuing our journey North 241deg. East for the point seen in range on the 29th inst. we soon found ourselves in sandridges again. At eleven (11) miles another flat of saltbush and samphire occurred extending towards the group of three prominent hills on our right. From here on to fifteen (15) miles we noted good class of wattle-bush in the troughs between the ridges but after that not a vestige that camels would eat. We were now almost hemmed in by enormous drift sandridges very steep and almost insurmountable. They extended very nearby to the foot of the range becoming more and more irregular and jumbled as we approached it. The camels knocked up and we had a difficult task to get them along. [21]  We found no feed until we got right under the range itself which we reached at 4 p.m. Having travelled twenty-four (24) miles for the day. Here we found excellent soft green herbage and formed our camp one (1) mile North-West from the point of observation from yesterday's camp.  This range (Calvert Range) which is about thirteen (13) miles direct from the salt lake visited this morning is five hundred (500) feet higher in elevation although now only one hundred and thirty (130) feet above its visible base. It is of sandstone capped with quartzite rock.  Monday August 31. - Nr. Jones and I walked about two (2) miles on foot last evening following up a rough creek into the range and then climbing to the summit but we found no water. Finding the herbage so luxuriant though small in extent I decided to camp here to-day and give the weary camels a rest. After breakfast Mr. Jones accompanied me to the North-West in search of water. Following the foot of the range we noticed at about one (1) mile some green trees on the cliffs. They turned out to be small white gums growing from the crevices in the cliff rocks without any visible soil. These are the first gum trees of this species (eucalyptus reduizca) seen since we left depot. We were disappointed in finding no water here but noticed some finches and cockatoos ten (10) chains further along the range at the foot of which were two (2) more small gum trees. Here I found a cave and seeing finches fly out as I approached we went in and found a soakage of fresh water resting in shallow basins on slate of sandstone rock some of which are very large and weigh many tons. Whilst Mr. Jones took some photographs and made copies of native rock-drawings I ascended the range and took bearings to fix the positions of several of the prominent points seen on the 29th inst. Also noted from here a range about twenty-five (25) miles to the North-West with another about midway. Along the range to the North-West a very prominent hold headband with sheer face is visible about four (4) miles distant. This I have named " Russell Headland" after Mr. J. G. Russel Commissioner of Taxes and Insolvency for South Australia.  Returning to camp we arranged for Bejah to bring the camels round to the cave for the water of which we found but a limited supply getting only about six (6) gallons apiece for the thirty animals The soakage comes from tine range through the enormous slabs of sandstone and resting in the shallow basins until it overflows disappears in rocky ground at the foot of the range. The supply is small and may not last for longer than two or three (2 or 3) months after rain. I marked one of the two gum trees at the entrance of the cave thus : - 3 inside diamond blaze. The Range which I have named after the promoter of this expedition is partially mulga-clothed and is scarcely visible from the South side being hidden by drift sandridges which extend to its summit.  Bejah returned to camp with the camels whilst Mr. Jones and I walked along the range towards the bold headland to get a photograph of it. At one (1) mile we passed a gap or pass extending through the range to the Southward. Here we noted the "ficus" growing from the rocks and near the entrance found an alternative encampment. We were surprised to find here the skeleton of a human being in a hollow scraped out in the sand with old dry boughs pushed into the ground presumably to form a shade. The bones and skull were bleached the latter being perfect except for one (1) missing tooth which we found afterwards. I suppose this to be the skeleton of an aboriginal but it is the first instance in which I have known natives to leave their dead without burial of some kind. It is possible that the water failing the natives may have been compelled to go away leaving an invalid behind. Mr. Jones took possession of the skull for scientific purposes. We returned to camp having walked eleven (11) miles to-day in spite of the loose sand which makes walking difficult. We saw two (2) kangaroos this afternoon but were unable to get a shot at them.  Found latitude by observation at camp 23deg. 58min. 55sec. South. .  Tuesday Sept. 1 . - The camels having improved vastly in appearance whilst on the good feed we made a start at 8.30 a.m. following North-Westerly along the foot of the range to the gap seen yesterday which I have named "Skeleton Pass" and bearing thence North 246deg. East over sandridges and porcupine with a few sandstone outcrops. We cleared the range at five (5) miles from camp and at eleven (11) miles passed close by another mulga-clothed hill on our right. Then came jumbles of sandridges and lumpy porcupine flats with native poplars a few desert gums and quandong until at seventeen miles we camped on a small patch of fair feed. [22]  Latitude 24deg. 3min. 16sec. South.  Wednesday Sept. 2. - We allowed the camels to go loose all night as they were not in want of water.  Started at 6.20 a.m. still on same course. Plodding along on foot a practice we have pursued throughout this trip for the first nine (9) miles of each day's journey we found the sandridges as difficult to cross as ever. At six (6) miles altered course to North 221deg. East for a low mulga-crowned ridge. From here onward we had limestone in the flats and porcupine in the flats and on the sandridges as usual ; also native poplar mallee quandong tall tea-tree some desert gums and grass trees (xanthorrhoea). The sandridges mounted higher and higher reaching the very summit of the sandstone ridge which we reached at fourteen (14) miles. We were now near Mr. Ernest Giles' route from the Murchison River to the Musgrave Ranges. To the Southward of this ridge were small samphire flats or marshes and dwarf tea-tree. The view was not promising from here. To the South-West were two (2) low flat-topped hills about five and ten (5 and 10) miles distant; I have named these "Trainor Hills" after James Trainor a member of this Expedition.  A low point of another ridge bears North £93deg. East with sandridges intervening. We altered our course to this bearing and continued onward for six (6) miles again nothing limestone outcropping in the flats. Natives had evidently not been in this part of the country for a long period as the signs which usually betoken their presence were entirely absent. Noticed two (2) species of porcupine wallabies to-day and numbers of them started from their lairs as we moved along.  Travelled for day about twenty (20) miles.  Thursday Sept. 3. - Having tied the camels up last night we managed to get off camp at 5.30 a.m. and bearing North 186deg. East we were still crossing steep sandridge country similar to that passed over yesterday. At seven (7) miles reached the low sandstone ridge which has limestone outcropping at foot and is partly covered by sandridges. A long low range is visible to the Westward and apparently extends North- West and South-East. At ten (10) miles travelling became easier the ridges being more broken and the flats wider. At twenty (20) miles we crossed the Western end of very low mulga ridges extending a short distance to the North-East.  Camped at twenty-three (23) miles still in sandridges and porcupine with some fair bush feed for the camels.  Latitude at camp 24deg. 34min. 31sec. South.  Friday Sept. 4. - -Resuming our march at 5.25 a.m. still pursuing same course we had more limestone in the flats and patches of dead bunch grass also mallee (eucalyptus) quandong tall tea-tree poplar wattle-bush (acacia) and porcupine. At nineteen (19) miles we found a patch of good camel feed (prickly acacia) and camped for the day at noon.  Saturday Sept. 5. - Starting on same course at 6 a.m. over country much of the same class but easier of transit than that passed over yesterday we noted several low mulga-crowned ridges of sandstone. At seven (7) miles we found a small dry rock-hole and some old encampments of natives. At eleven (11) miles we cleared the sandridges and crossed. a saddle in a range of low hills and ridges of red sandstone partly bare and partly mulga-clothed. It extended some distance on either side of us and in it are some conspicuous tops. I have named this "Brassey Range" after Lord Brassey the Governor of Victoria. A bloodwood creek or watercourse trending Easterly I have named "Sunbeam Creek." There was excellent kangaroo grass with other grasses growing along its course. At fourteen (14) miles we crossed another saddle and shallow bloodwood watercourse trending Westerly and then passed through a valley with patches of limestone and red sandstone hills and ridges on either side of us. Noted fair pasture along here. Crossing another saddle at 18 miles with a large hill immediately to the East we descended into a large valley of porcupine and a few low sandridges. In this vicinity were native poplars belts of mulga (acacia) and a little grass; also large quantities of travertine limestone. At twenty (20) miles we reached the lowest part of the valley which has the appearance of having been at one time a river bed. There is abundance of limestone rock here belts of mulga in shallow watercourses patches of saltbush grass bushes and porcupine. Camping here Bejah and I walked about one and a-half (11/2) miles from camp along the valley to the Eastward to a low hill of hornblendic rock with kangaroo grass and porcupine growing to its summit. We noted several peculiar hillocks of limestone from twelve (12) to fifteen (15) feet high in the valley with some large beefwood trees growing from their tops. I have the opinion that water would be found here at shallow depths by sinking. Some of the beefwood trees in the vicinity are very luxuriant in growth and I have been informed that in the Murchison country on Coodardy Rum where these trees (" Yarra") are found water can be had at shallow depths. In that district the natives call those waters "Yarra-bubba."  From the top of the hill I took a round of bearings noting several conspicuous hills and a prominent top (Mt. Normanhurst) in the Brassey Range bearing North 72deg. East magnetic. To the South-East is a low hilly range about fifteen (15) miles distant towards which this valley extends. To the North-West is another conspicuous hill (Mt. Bundey) about six (6) miles distant. To-day we saw recent tracks of natives and kangaroos and at camp seven (7) cockatoos which were feeding upon an enormous bunch of seed-pods at the crown of a native poplar. Some of these bunches which make the tree gracefully bend its head weigh when green as much as a hundredweight and as a food for camels are in dry country invaluable being fully fifty (50) per cent. water.  Latitude at camp 25deg. 9min. 20sec. South.  Sunday Sept. 6. - At 5.30 we continued on the same course over gradually rising fairly-grassed country with a little porcupine to a range of low hills - hornblendic clay-rock sandstone and a little limestone. [23] Flats of bloodwoods (eucalyptus) poplar and mulga thickets occurred. At two and a half (21/2) miles I took a round of bearings. A prominent hill lay nearly due East in a range seen last evening. I have called this " Mt. Sir Gerard" after Sir Gerard Smith Governor of Western Australia. At three ( 3) miles we crossed a bloodwood watercourse trending North-Easterly with good kangaroo grass along its course. Passed through a valley for another line of hills ; at six (6) miles met with a watercourse trending North-East. From here the blue-topped hill visible from the vicinity of yesterday's camp lay to the South-South-East; this is probably Mt. Moore on Sir John Forrest's route. Crossed another line of hills at eight (8) miles and altering our course here to North 190deg. East entered a mulga valley of fair pasture extending Westerly and carrying bunch and mulga grasses patches of kangaroo grass a little porcupine bloodwoods beefwoods and a little malee. Noted a few red sandhills on our West. At eleven ( 11) miles we were gently ascending over similar country but with more porcupine which appears to thrive anywhere till at eighteen (18) miles we reached a low range of hills extending towards " Stanley Bluff" in the Parker Ranges of Sir John Forrest. From this point Stanley Bluff lies to the North-West another high prominent hill (Mt. Sir James) bearing South-Westerly. Altered course to North 180deg. East (due South) and passed over a valley with nice flats of good loam well-grassed and timbered with mulga (acacia aneura) and bloodwoods. Camped at 1 p.m. on some dry herbage at the foot of a large low hill having travelled twenty-one (21) miles for the day. Since passing a point at eleven (11) miles on yesterday's traverse the country travelled over may be termed fair pasture with good patches.  Saw numerous tracks of natives and kangaroos throughout the day but no water was found nor were any likely places for search noticed.  Latitude at camp 25deg. 26min. 41sec. South.  Monday Sept. 7. - Started at 5.30 a.m. Continuing the last course of yesterday's traverse we passed on through the valley which notwithstanding some porcupine was well grassed and mulga-clad for three (3) miles. Then came limestone outcroppings and sandy country with porcupine mallee and belts of mulga. At four (4) miles on our East was a fine chump of large bloodwoods. At six (6) miles was a stony ridge with a prominent hill to the Eastward about eight (8) miles distant and another prominent top to the Westward in a range and from ten (10) to twelve (12) miles distant. Then on a course through mulga thickets and patches of grass and porcupine we came to a range (Lee Steere Range) about three hundred (300) feet high trending East and West. We crossed tops at June (9) and ten. (10) miles with a gum creek between the two lines of hills trending Easterly and then North-Easterly and finally emptying itself into a large valley. The range he of clay-rock and we noticed some small quartz outcrops. It is chiefly clad with mulga the most Southern portion being greatest in elevation where we crossed it. Continuing the same course we immediately descended into the large valley which has good stock grass and mulga and from thirteen (13) to fifteen (15) miles open saltbush and samphire flats with a little Mitchell grass. These flats form a watercourse trending towards the East. In this valley we saw quartz ironstone and a little slate; and in my opinion this vicinity is worthy of the notice of prospectors. Travelled next through poor porcupine country sighting. at sixteen (16) miles a hill which I take to be Mt. Moore as it tallies in appearance with the description of that mount. Passed then over rather poor country with very dense thickets of mulga tall wattle (acacia) beefwood a little saltbush grass and porcupine. A few limestone rises are noticeable here. At twenty-one (21) miles a small range occurs one (1) to two (2) miles distant to the Westward. The country then gradually rose as indeed it had done since leaving the large valley till at twenty-two (22) miles we found ourselves baulked for the time by its sudden fall to the South causing cliffs twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet high of decomposed clay (red and white) with a little mallee and mulga on the plateau. Descending to the head of a watercourse which we followed South for two (2) miles we camped at 3 p.m. on poor feed for the camels having travelled twenty-four (24) miles for the day. Experienced a hot North-East wind and cloudy sky. Saw many fresh tracks of natives emus and kangaroos during the day but they all managed to keep out of sight.  To the North-West is a high hill in a range about four miles (4) distant and North-Easterly about six (6) miles off is another prominent hill apparently in the same line of Range. There are numerous small clay pans here a few sandhills porcupine and a little saltbush and mulga.  Tuesday Sept. 8. - The camels fared badly last night and getting off camp very early we continued on same course passing over low slatey ranges with a little quartz ironstone fair flats and watercourses of Mitchell grass saltbush herbage and a little mulga. At six (6) miles we rejoiced to again see the bright green foliage of a gum creek which was coming in on our Western side and trending in the direction of our route. Here we found a large water-hole with about two (2) feet of water in it. The camels drank greedily whilst we washed our tanned and dirty faces and hands. Slightly altering our course here and bearing North 175deg. East we followed down the channel banks and suddenly came upon the thirteen (13) camels that I had heft in my cousin's charge when parting from the main body last month. They were all looking well some quite fat and nearby all signs of mange had gone. Bejah was so delighted at seeing them that he left the poor brutes he was leading and ran off to the others talking to and playing with them in a most excited manner. No doubt to him it was the next best thing to meeting a countryman. Continuing on down the creek we soon saw in the distance two figures approaching us. They were my cousin and Said Ameer coming on their usual morning round to muster their charge. For some time they did not notice our approach mistaking our camels for theirs. My cousin seemed so overcome by our sudden appearance that he completely lost his voice for the time being and giving Mr. Jones and myself a hearty grip he moved on to Bejah to whom he first spoke. Hje afterwards told me when conducting us to his camp that he had never before experienced the same feeling and attributed it to the sudden meeting and his anxiety for our welfare for the past fortnight as he had expected us back within three weeks.  We reached the camp which is on the creek at (8) mules from last night's camp. We were fortunate in striking the identical creek upon which they had formed their Spelling Camp. I had taken a chance shot for it not knowing how far my cousin would return from the Depot everything depending on the quality of the camel feed. [24] There is a nice water-hole here but it is not very deep at present. It should last five (5) or six (6) months when filled. My cousin after parting from us had returned from the Depot along our out-going pad of July 28th for ten (10) miles Westerby and finding an excellent camp for the camels with really good feed either up or down the channel he had determined to make his camp here. I was pleased to know that everything had gone on so well though I felt sure it would with my cousin and those in his care. We related some of our experiences and all were delighted at our good fortune in discovering a permanent water in the heart of the desert and midway between here and Joanna Spring; although the description given of the country was not very gratifying news.  Mr. Keartland had busied himself with birds reptiles etc. and botanical specimens whilst Trainor kept watch at camp when the others were absent.  The latitude of this place is by sextant and theodolite observations mean 25deg. 56min. 30secs. South.  Thursday Sept. 10. - Plotting up work done on flying trip. I find we were absent for thirty (30) days during which time the seven (7) camels packed travelled five hundred and two (502) miles in addition to deviations and work done on foot. They travelled twenty-nine ('29) out of the thirty (30) days we were absent averaging 17 1/2 miles per day. Previous to my start on this trip these animals had travelled heavily packed from Mullewa via Cue to the Depot and had had but one week's spell at the latter place before tackling the desert; and when one considers the nature of the Great Sandy Desert the scarcity of food and the length of time they were without water their endurance must astonish one. On this occasion the longest stage without water was 212 miles all travelling over desert sandridges and heavily packed with full kegs of water provisions etc. One camel carried throughout this stage very nearly seven hundred (700) lbs. without his saddle. Of course they are all low in condition now but I hope a week's spell on this good feed will improve them sufficiently to enable them to go through to the Fitzroy River. Owing to the distressing nature of the desert country and the scarcity of camel food which is only found in very small patches and generally but sufficient for two or three animals at one place I think it advisable to take fewer camels reduce the number of men to two (2) and do less work at each period. During my absence from depot the party has lived almost entirely on game from the several waterholes thus making a considerable saving in the direction of tinned meat. I have decided to bury a quantity here to lighten our loading - a great consideration when one pictures the sandridges and porcupine to be crossed in the future. The weather has become considerably warmer and after perusing Colonel Warburton's book on his travels in a higher latitude we are warned that we must expect something uncommon.  Our loading from here will consist at starting of 3080£bs. of water carried in twelve (12) 25-gallon kegs and two (2) 5-gallon kegs fourteen (14) cases carrying provisions scientific matter equipment etc.. averaging about 450£bs. a pair. Fourteen camels will undertake this lot; but of course when half-way to the well the water will be reduced by more than two-thirds its present weight as the camels will have a drink from the kegs at that distance. I have carefully noted all places where either feed or poison-plant was seen along our outward track last month as this knowledge will greatly assist us on the present occasion.  Friday Sept. 11. - -Preparing water bags making all kegs perfectly water-tight and packing cases in readiness for a start to Midway Well. Buried 170£bs. of tinned meat three (3) feet deep and made a fire on the ground above it to prevent detection by natives who will be certain to visit this spot after we vacate it.  Saturday Sept. 12. - Down the channel of the creek are several fair water-holes; these became brackish as we neared the lake (Lake Rudall) which we reached at two (2) miles. It is apparently about two (2) miles wide here and opens out further on a bearing of North 170deg. East magnetic towards a low range about ten (10) or twelve (12) miles distant South. Around the lake on this side are red sand hills different in character to those of the desert. They are clothed with mulga grass and good stock herbage (waterbush and buckbush). Returned to camp having walked about four (4) or five (5) miles. Dosed all camels with sulphur.  Sunday Sept. 13. - In camp.  Monday Sept. 14. - Packed all camels and made a start at 8 a.m. Travelled along our old pad to depot camp distance ten (10) miles arriving at noon. We found the water-hole had only lost about one (1) foot in depth during the six (6) weeks we had been away from it. It is now about ten (10) chains long by one (1) chain wide with ten (10) feet of water in several places. It he a splendid water and will last over Christmas. When the hole is filled it becomes much longer and in places sixteen (16) feet deep. In my opinion the water will last for nine (9) months or longer.  We found the natives had been here during our absence and on the West side of the water-hole some mystic ceremony or other had evidently taken place. A small hole about eighteen (18) inches deep was sunk in the ground and the bottom was lined with gum leaves. Upon these were placed several curious pieces of conglomerated nodular ironstone with blood upon them; then on top more gum leaves and pieces of stone. A small pad leads for a few yards to the trunk of a gum tree overhanging the creek; on this there was also blood. Another pad leads in the opposite direction from the hole to a distance of one (1) chain where a stone was firmly placed in the ground with smaller ones on either side of it. Perhaps this means a little witchcraft foreboding no ill-luck for having encroached on the preserves of the natives and eaten their game.  Filled all water kegs and hags in all about three hundred and twenty (320) gallons. During the evening we experienced duststorms and violent gusts of wind followed by dry thunderstorms and much lightning. [25]  Tuesday Sept. 15. - A nice cool morning after last night's storm. Packed camels after giving them a drink and left that camping-spot for the desert at 7.40 a.m. We travelled Easterly along my old pad for four (4) miles and then on a bearing of North 75deg. East to avoid going through the Timperley Range the North-Eastern end of which we passed at sixteen (16) miles the route being good. We then entered good mulga and grass country and belts of large bloodwoods where watercourses empty themselves. At twenty-two (22) miles we reached a belt of bloodwoods with a patch of good prickly acacia and salt-bush - -a spot I had passed through on my former trip on August 11th when I made an unsuccessful search for water. We again saw the crested bronzewing pigeon here and I am now of the opinion that they come to feed on the seeds of the Acacia.  Camped at this spot at 4 p.m.  Wednesday Sept. 16. - Continuing on same course at 7 a.m. we struck at seven (7) miles the large brook or watercourse mentioned by Sir John Forrest during his travels. Here it was trending from the South-South- West and slightly bending to the North-East. Following the channel for two (2) miles we found another nice water-hole. It had water sufficient to last about a fortnight and there were thousands of the chestnut-eared finch or diamond sparrows making themselves very busy at the water. At four (4) miles we struck my pad of Aug. 12th then passing the hole which is now dry South of Mt. Bates we continued on to Sir John Forrest's camp and marked tree which we reached after travelling about nine (9) miles along the channel. There is still a little water but it is thick and dirty. Some of the camels however seemed to drink freely of it.  There is a low granulite range along the South-East side of this watercourse and a few miles off with outcrops of similar formation close to it in places. Another watercourse coming in from the South junctions close by this spot. There is good feed along the creek - saltbush mulga and kangaroo grass.  Travelled for day sixteen (16) miles.  Thursday Sept. 17. - Tried all camels at the water; some of them drank a little. Got a start at 7.40 a.m. following the old pad for fifteen (15) miles. Camped on the edge of the salt lake at 1 p.m.  After leaving the Mt. Bates water we were overtaken by three (3) natives two (2) of whom I had previously become acquainted with last mouth. They followed us for six miles and then left after we had given them some handkerchiefs. Mr. Jones bartered with them for a belt and head-dress.  Friday Sept. 18. - --Experienced a cold night. Started at 650 a.m. and followed my pad for thirteen (13) miles camping at 1 p.m. on some good native poplar and wattle-bush. The camels require to become accustomed to eating the former which is very hot resembling mustard but when green with seed-pods as at present it is a capital substitute for water. I purpose dividing the next two days' stages between here and a good wattle-bush flat which I hope will suit the camels. My late experience of the country between here and Midway Well coupled with my knowledge of all the spots where camel feed is to be found will give me an immense advantage this trip. Our loading is very heavy for this wretched sandridge country and to-morrow evening I purpose giving the camels seventy (70) or eighty (80) gallons of the water lessening the loads of those that need it most.  Late in the evening the camels began to string off towards Mount Bates so all were brought back and tied up for the night.  A little dry bunch grass is noticeable here in the flats where fires have taken place.  Saturday Sept. 19. - Started at 550 a.m. A nice breeze which sprang up at 8 a.m. enabled us to get along very well until noon when it became hot and owing to the nature of the sandridges we had difficulty in getting the camels along. It was decidedly hot at 1 p.m. and I determined to camp at fifteen (15) miles.  The necessity of crossing so many of these terrible sandridges has considerably altered the condition of some of the camels in spite of their long spell at Depot.  Gave all camels three (3) gallons of water apiece; this will reduce our loading by six hundred (600) lbs.  Sunday Sept. 20. - At 5.30 a.m. formed in line and our serpentine pad was winding over the sandridges. At eleven (11) miles bore off to the North slightly to avoid some mulga-clad ridges. Entering the valley noted 15th August I found travelling better and at 11 a.m. camped at fifteen (15) miles as it had become very hot. Good wattle-bush and native poplar feed here. Saw smokes apparently of natives due East and not far distant. Crested bronzewing pigeons were seen at four (4) miles this morning flying Eastward.  Monday Sept. 21. - Started at 5.30 a.m. and following my old pad travelled sixteen (16) miles to some fair wattle-bush poplar and abort buckbush which was reached at 11.30 a.m. It became very hot at this time but our journey was accomplished during the cool part of the day. At seven (7) miles pigeons were again seen and also fresh tracks of several natives. To search for water here in such country would be like "hunting for a needle in a hay-stack." Birds such as pigeons cockatoos crows and even finches travel eight (8) ten (10) and even more miles from it at this time of year. And there are no watercourses or conspicuous hills to suggest the likelihood of finding the precious fluid either. The outlook is anything but cheering; in every direction these awful sandridges to encounter with but small hope of finding water in quantities sufficient to be of value to us. Every day lost now seems for our patient life-preservers another day's waiting for water whilst the supply in our kegs is steadily diminishing. In such country as this the only safe course to pursue is to go ahead until water is found without lose of time or encroachment on one's scant supply. Anywhere in this wilderness water may easily be passed unseen within a few chains; and even when discovered it is generally a waste of precious time to work the majority of the wells found in this country as they are more often than not valueless and like the evil "will-o'-the-wisp" luring on to destruction those who look to them for salvation. [26]  Tuesday Sept 22. - Resuming our monotonous journey at 5.15 a.m. ‚ the first half by moonlight with a cool Southerly breeze for a change we cut off a slight angle in my former route again striking the pad at seven (7) miles and following it up until we reached the large bloodwood flat seen on the 19th August. The herbage being still fairly green we camped for the day having travelled nineteen (19) miles. My cousin and self walked the first eleven (11) miles. It is my intention to rest the camels here to-morrow; the green herbage will I hope benefit them.  Two pigeons were bagged by- the Afghans at this camp.  During the afternoon Mr. Keartland accompanied me to the Eastward for some distance through large bloodwoods mulga poplars porcupine everlasting flowers and patches of green grass.  Wednesday Sept. 23. - Resting camels to-day. Plotted up traverse.  I find that the more foot exercise one takes the more water one consumes and boot leather is also a consideration.  My cousin and Mr. Jones spent some hours extracting water from the roots of the bloodwoods which are very luxuriant here in order to find out whether sufficient could be obtained to save a man's life if he were lost and without a drink. Although armed with spade and axe neither of which a lost man would be likely to have they found It hard work the roots being about two (2) feet underground and difficult to find. They were not very successful only procuring altogether about half a wineglassful of fluid whilst they drank a much greater quantity from the kegs to enable them to continue work. On the return of Mr. Keartland and myself from a ramble after birds my cousin said he thought that in reading "The Aborigines Water Quest" they had probably missed some important injunction and that perhaps the tap root should be manipulated. For my own part I am of opinion that beyond the coastal districts in Southern latitudes where a perishing man might be successful with mallee roots there would be little chance elsewhere and the exertion of delving would cause the radiation of more moisture from a man's body than he could pass through his gullet from the root of a tree. Theory is good sometimes but practical knowledge is better.  Thursday Sept. 24. - -Started at 5.45 a.m. Followed my camel-pad for one (1) mile where It angles to the Northward then altered course to North 42deg. East as I hoped to get better travelling in this direction and so avoid some of those terrible sandridges and lumpy porcupine flats crossed on our previous trip. Crossed low gravelly mulga-clad rises of clay-rock formation undulations with some low sandridges intervening a few belts of mulga and large open porcupine flats with scattered grevillia and a few poplars. At thirteen (13) miles we suddenly came upon a native well at the North foot of a sandridge. There was nothing striking in appearance here to indicate the presence of water and we almost missed seeing the well although It was but a chain to the North-West. It is about twelve (12) feet deep wide at surface and about eighteen (18) inches at the bottom. Climbing down J pushed a broken spear through drift sand and found at three (3) feet a hard rock bottom with about eighteen inches of wet drift sand. As the water would rise and moisten the sand for about a foot I considered it would in all probability be but a poor supply and if we lost a day in sinking a workable well - a course necessary in order to cope with the drift - we might after all meet with a disappointment. There was no feed for the camels at this spot and I feel quite confident that Midway Well found on August 25 will prove up to expectations; so I consider it would be unwise to risk the loss of a day under the existing conditions.  Continued on until at eighteen (18) miles we cleared the sandridges which gave place to mulgaclad ridges and open porcupine. At twenty-two (22) miles with still nothing in the shape of feed for the camels encountered a higher gravelly ridge seemingly the same as that crossed by me further to the West last month. As we had travelled for nine (9) hours and the camels had been twenty (20) hours without a bite I determined to camp on the South-West side of this ridge. We found a nice patch of fairly green herbage amongst some grevillia and bloodwoods where an insignificant watercourse empties itself from the ridge and camped here having plodded along for twenty-three (23) miles to-day. One often sees small patches sufficient only for two (2) or three (3) camels but it is very difficult to find enough for twenty (20) hungry ones.  Friday Sept. 25. - - The camels fed well last evening though tied up to insure an early start as usual. At 5.45 a.m. we altered our course bearing now due North and crossed a few sandridges with wattlebush and patches of buckbush. At three (3) miles passed the highest of these mulga-clad ridges trending East and West with some escarpments on its Southern side. Then again came sandridges until at twelve (12) miles we chanced upon a patch of wattle bush and green buckbush (roly-poly). Here the sand underneath the surface was quite damp evidencing a thunderstorm at no distant date. Knowing the nature of the country ahead I would not pass this patch of feed so camped at 10.45 a.m.  Saturday Sept. 26. - Continued same course as yesterday starting at 5.20 a.m. At two (2) miles we crossed a clay-rock ridge with escarpments on South side rubble top and open porcupine. Cutting the old pad at seven (7) miles we followed it for the rest of the day camping in the valley noted by me on 22nd August having travelled from twenty-four (24) to twenty-five (25) miles. The herbage is partly dry but still there is fair feed for the camels.  Mr. Keartland was successful in shooting an Alexandra parrot. The days are getting very warm now but fair Easterly winds have favoured us for the past week.  We gave the camels eighty-four (84) gallons of water this evening and I now hope to reach Midway well on the 28th inst.  Sunday Sept. 27.- - Started out of the valley at 4.15 a.m. Travelling now direct for the well and shall soon get into sand-hills again. Crossed a ridge of clay-rock extending North-West and South East at eight (8) miles and then for the rest of the day numerous sandridges. [27] Country all very open and quite destitute of camel feed.  At 2 p.m. we were compelled at twenty-three (23) miles to halt where there was not a sign of herbage as the heat was great and the camels were tired out having fasted eighteen (18) hours since they were tied up last night.  Latitude at camp 23deg. 32min. 45sec. South.  Monday Sept. 28. - At 5.45 a.m. Mr. C. F. Wells in charge of caravan and party started for Midway Well whilst Mr. Jones accompanied me with our riding-camels and two (2) water-bags bearing North 283deg. East to examine a well and a lagoon both seen by us on our former traverse on August 27th. Travelling same class of wretched country for eighteen (18) miles we struck our old pad leading South-Westerly. Following same for one and a half (1 1/2) miles we reached the well at noon but tasting it I found it very bitter and saline and quite unfit for the camels.  Noting the small samphire flat on the edge of which the well is situated and seeing that water had been running from its surface into the shaft I conjectured that probably this accounted for its present state. Taking a spade I had with me I began to throw out the wet silt sinking the hole seven (7) feet from the surface five (5) feet long and three and a half (31/2) feet wide. Suddenly my spade struck soft sandstone rock. and feeling to see whether It was the same all over I found a hole at one end into which I pushed the spade 2ft. 6in. deep down to its bottom. I again pushed the spade through the silt upon which I had been standing and loosened it a little. Immediately a hissing sound took place accompanied by a jet of water from the bottom. Catching some in a quart-pot we found It fresh. Setting to work again I cleaned out the small hole finding it thirty (30) inches deep eighteen (18) inches long and nine (9) inches wide and smooth like a granite rock-hole. The water clear as crystal though holding a very little finest red drift sand was coming in through a crevice at the bottom; if left alone it filled the rock-hole in a quarter of an hour and it rose eighteen inches in the large hole which before contained the bad water. This is apparently a splendid spring but the water rising over the level of the sandstone rock mixes with the soil and becomes saline and soaks away. We consider this a great find for It gives us a feeling of safety should Midway well not prove up to expectations after my cousin's arrival there with his eighteen (18) camels to water.  Scooping a hole in the sand and placing an oil-sheet therein we watered the camels with a half (1/2) gallon billy-can and then had a wash ourselves the first our faces had been treated to since the 17th inst.  The small samphire flat on the Northern edge of which the well is situated is partly bare circular about two hundred (200) yards across and surrounded by some tea-tree quondong and acacias. High sandridges are close by on the East and gypsum is near the well. On the West is a low sand-bar or ridge and just beyond this a flat or lead of samphire and a dark species of acacia trending on a bearing of North 285deg. East magnetic towards the lagoon before mentioned which we came to inspect. Following on this bearing for three and a half (3 1/2) miles and then bearing North 300 deg. East mag. for two (2) miles we reached the lagoon and found it dry and saline. We camped between the entrance of this lead to the lagoon and another crossed ca August 28th which comes in from the South-East. The lagoon has sandridges on the North shore which extend along the lead up to the well and constitute the best method of finding this water. There were near the well no trees large enough to mark. Another lead comes into the lagoon from the South and all the country to the East and South for some miles is samphire marsh and gypsum mounds with acacia (dark wattle.)  Travelled for day 25 miles.  Latitude at camp 23deg. 26min. 57sec. South.  Tuesday Sept. 29. - Getting off camp at 5.40 a.m. we returned to the well which I have named "Surprise Well." We found four and a half (4 1/2) feet of water in it. Having mixed with the saline earth in its banks the water registered this morning one quarter of an ounce (1/2oz.) of salt per gallon but if taken direct from the spring in the soft sandstone rock it is quite fresh. Yesterday whilst having the well baled out and the rock exposed I noticed two (2) hollows on its surface the size of a man's foot and it appeared to me as though they had been worn there through the natives standing to get the water from the small rock-hole. No doubt this water as also Midway Well has been used by natives for very many years. When at the latter place we noticed hundreds of very old camping spots ca all the sandridges in the vicinity and the accumulation of debris which had been removed from the well from time to time had formed a large mound. Owing to the scarcity of game and other food around these waters of the desert they are never frequented by the natives for a lengthy period - not more than a week or two at most and then by but small numbers unless for some special ceremony when a large number collect but only for a short time as they could not find food for many days. After giving the camels another drink we travelled direct for Midway Well making twenty-three (23) miles for the day. We found my cousin had arrived safely yesterday and formed camp near the well. All the camels had been watered and the supply of water which registers only about half (1/2) an ounce of salt per gallon is good.  A number of crested bronzewing pigeons and shell parrots and a few galahs and corella parrots are now coming to water at this well. It is astonishing how soon all the desert birds discover when a well is in use.  Wednesday Sept. 30. - Spent the day washing and repairing clothing etc.  Marked a tree four (4) chains South from well A high sand-hill is East-North-East from the well and distant a quarter (1/2) of a mile and between the two is a tall clump of green tea-tree. [28]  Just now the mornings are very cold the temperature almost at freezing-point at times whilst the days are exceptionally hot if the wind (generally North-East here) drops. To-day at 3 p.m. the thermometer registered 95deg. in the shade.  The pack camels will spell here on the water and the fair acacia (wattle-bush) and dry herbage around the well until I return.  Thursday Oct. 1. - Preparing for trip to Northward during the morning.  Leaving Mr. C. F. Wells in charge I left camp at 2 p.m. with Bejah and two (2) camels fourteen (14) gallons of water in bags and 5-gallon kegs and eight (8) days' rations. So equipped I was prepared to travel eighty (80) miles North should failure to find water or other causes render it necessary-.  Bearing North 351deg. East passed through fair wattle-bush in valley for first two or three miles then over most wretched country: nothing but sandridges porcupine a few desert gums and dwarf tea-tree. Camped at eight (8) miles on a small patch of water-hush on the top of a high sandridge. From camp is visible a peculiar low round sandstone out-crop (Wunecke Rock) distant four (4) or five (5) miles.  From the time of leaving the well when the heat was 98deg. in the shade crossing the sandridges was very hot and trying work.  Friday Oct. 2. - Started at 4.45 a.m. after letting the camels go to enable them to get a little food during the early morning. Now bearing North 356 deg. East. We travelled on this course for twenty-two (22) miles camping at 12.30 p.m. when it became too hot to face the sandridges. The aspect is most depressing. Wretched rod sandridges stretch in all directions and porcupine interspersed with a few desert gums and dwarf tea-tree shrubs is everywhere. So far we have seen no camel feed since leaving camp this morning. At eighteen (18) miles we passed a low sandstone outcrop about half a mile on our right. In the flats for the whole day we saw sandstone rubble and a few low bars of sandstone running at right angles to and under the sandridges.  The outlook here is most discouraging and I am afraid that this class of country extends for some distance. From here some very high sandridges are visible to the Westward about five (5) miles distant Saw at camp two (2) pigeons and two (2) galahs flying Westward.  Latitude at camp 22deg. 57min. 6sec. South.  We find the necessity for being on an allowance of this brackish water in such weather very trying. We can barely manage to put up with it.  Saturday Oct. 3. - Breakfast at 3.15 a.m. afterwards bearing North 290 deg. East for some high sandridges seen yesterday. Ascended two very high ridges at five (5) miles and six (6) miles respectively but only to meet with the same horrible outlook and no indication of water. Saw low mulga-clothed ridges to the West and North-West two (2) or three (3) miles distant and countless glaring red sandridges in all directions. Altered course now bearing North 55deg. E. over sandridges and porcupine with clumps of tall tea-tree in the flats or troughs between the sandridges. From four (4) to five (5) miles on this course we saw some good wattle-bush (acacia)----the first feed seen since leaving our companions. Then altering course to North 355deg. East we travelled on for four (4) miles again in country destitute of feed. Low mulga-clad sandstone ridges were visible to the Eastward about six (6) miles distant and another crowned with drift sand two (2) miles to North-East. More glaring red sandridges to the North. From this point I noted a gully to the West with tall tea-tree and other green foliage which I took to be wattle-bush. This together with the discovery of some very old native tracks just visible in the sandy flats and going in the direction of the foliage determined me to proceed to the latter and camp. Bearing North 250deg. East we camped at one and a half (1 1/2) miles on the South edge of the gully. We had but little breeze during the morning and It is now oppressively hot. Starting I proceeded South and after going a couple of hundred yards picked up the tracks which were going South-Westerly. Following them with difficulty for half (1/2) a mile we came to a small clump of desert gums (eucalyptus) and noticed that almost every tree had had at some time or other a piece of bark removed from the trunk - no doubt to make a dish or "coolamin" for the purposes of carrying water and food.  To the Westward was a low flat with tea-tree and a very small bare flat was also visible to Bejah who kept this information to himself. I went for the tea-tree regardless of tracks whilst Bejah evidently made straight for the flat which he reached before I did but seeing some finches on its North side he made for that spot whilst I discovered the water on the South side which is one (1) mile W.S.W. of our camping-place. This water is perfectly fresh and soft. It is in a small well (Separation Well) in soft sandstone rock a few feet from the surface. No other stone is visible in the vicinity. There is a nice patch of half-green herbage (roly-poly or buckbush) immediately around the well for a few chains also a quantity of wattle-bush. The growth of the former is no doubt owing to the numbers of old native encampments which can be traced by the charcoal that is lying about in all directions. The discovery of water and feed together seemed to give us real energy and we at once returned to camp and brought our packs and camels over. Watering our thirsty animals we soon had the hole forked as it was but a small one only large enough to allow us to get a billy-can to the bottom of it. The rock was four (4) feet from the surface and the natives have apparently sunk three (3) or four (4) feet through this. I could see the water coming in from or under the rock after removing about three (3) feet of debris consisting of small bones bark sticks and decayed vegetation which is to be found in all these native wells when not in use. I have noted that immediately around this well and also at Midway Well the growth of tea-tree is stunted whilst further off it is tall and greener which might lead one to suppose that the water would be found where the growth is most prolific. But this may be accounted for by the fact that the sand or soil is much shallower at the wells than where the larger timber exists. [29]  Although the water is green at present we each drank a considerable quantity of it as we were very thirsty after being on allowance of the brackish water.  A large number of crested and bronzewing pigeons and a fair number of galaha and flocks of shell parrots are coming here to water; this induces me to believe in its permanency. We bagged sixteen (16) pigeons.  Travelled for day with camels eighteen (18) miles.  I make the latitude of this spot 22deg. 51min. 14sec. South and East longitude about 123deg. 52min. It is now my intention to return to depot at Midway well and bring the caravan and the rest of the party through to this water. We will then continue our course for Joanna Spring and I can see that there must be no delay owing to the lateness of the season. In so terrible a country as this where glaring red sandridges all trending almost at right angles to our course present themselves to the view in every quarter and where camel feed and water are scarce and the heat of the sand is intense it is extremely difficult to proceed at this time of the year. The position of Joanmia Spring is now about one hundred and ninety (190) miles from here and with care and an ordinary run of luck I expect to get all camels and impedimenta through with safety.  Sunday Oct. 4. - Lot camels go to feed until 7 a.m. this morning and starting at 8 a.m. bearing North 170deg. East we crossed our zigzag route of yesterday morning at seven (7) miles. Then bearing South-Easterly we cut our outward pads again and camped at eighteen (18) miles without feed which however we did not expect to find.  To-day was very trying and cloudy and this evening a closeness prevails. Innumerable small insects and ants are swarming around us and giving us a lively time.  Monday Oct. 5. - -Selecting the best route for the caravan to take when it came up we proceeded direct for depot which we reached at twenty (20) miles. Found all well and the camels much improved for the rest they have had.  The well has been freely used and the supply of water appears as at first undiminished.  The variation of the needle here 41min. 20sec. East.  During my absence the seed of the date palm has been planted at and around the well and where the tall tea-tree grows to the East-North-East. I believe these spots are favourable for planting.  Tuesday Oct. 6. - I purpose giving the two (2) camels used by Bejah and self a rest here to-day. Occupied in plotting and preparing for a start to-morrow. Had all kegs fresh filled with water. A large number of pigeons have been shot during the party's stay here and we shall not now require all the tinned meat we have in stock.  Wednesday Oct. 7. - Started at 6.40 a.m. Taking all kegs and bags full of water we travelled eighteen miles and camped at 2.30 p.m. The weather was excessively hot and trying especially whilst crossing the sandridges after 11 a.m.  During the evening walked about a mile East of camp to an outcrop or bar of sandstone with ironstone cap extending North and South the sandridges crossing it.  Found native soakage well (dry) also bank and small drain for conserving the water. Discovered a little herbage beyond this spot walking in all three miles.  Thursday Oct. 8. - This morning we left at 4.20 a.m. following chiefly along my pad till my camping-place of the 2nd inst. was reached then bearing North 327deg. East we reached the well at 1.30 p.m. at twenty (20) miles. The sandridges were steep and numerous and owing to this and the heat of the afternoon the camels kept breaking their nose-lines during the latter part of the stage. The sand becomes so hot after 11 a.m. that the poor brutes can barely endure walking over it.  During the afternoon we cleaned out the well removing all the accumulated rubbish chipping off some of the soft sandstone rock at bottom and enlarging the hole the well being then about ten (10) feet deep. We found we had a well of most delicious fresh water of excellent supply coming in from the sandstone near the bottom; the good quality renders it a great boon to us. The water in the last well (Midway Well) is good for domestic use but contains half an ounce of salt to the gallon and is not therefore desirable for travelling on when one is on a daily allowance.  There are sandstone elevations from four (4) to six (6) miles East and West from this spot which probably dip towards it forming a basin.  If not as I think of a permanent character this well has a large supply for a considerable length of time after rainfall.  Friday Oct. 9. - We have now managed to water all the camels and fill all kegs with fresh supply (300 gallons) and the well still justifies our good opinion of it. It rose to its original height during the night and this morning it showed five (5) feet of water and a holding capacity of two hundred (200) gallons. The feed is good here and as I anticipate some difficulty in this respect when we continue our travels I purpose giving the camels to-day and to-morrow on it.  Marked the only tea-tree growing in this little patch - which is about (2) chains North of the well.  Again observed for latitude (mean) 22deg. 51min. 14sec.  Saturday Oct. 10. - To-day the weather is working up for a thunderstorm. Early this morning I walked Northward for two (2) miles to find the easiest route for the camels when leaving here. [30]   We have been feasting on pigeons at this little oasis. Birds have been flocking here in great numbers for water and shooting is as simple as robbing a hen-roost.  These welcome little spots around the only three (3) wells of value hitherto discovered are in this wretched country truly oases and the only places of rest for man and beast. Herbage and bushes suited for camels surround each of the waters for short distances thus enabling the traveller to refresh his weary " ships of the desert " with water and food ; and it is on such occasions as these that one realises the value of water. In Australia its absence is frequently the only danger of importance that the explorer has to encounter.  The seed of the date-palm has been freely planted around the well to-day and everything made ready for a start to morrow.  My cousin and Mr. Jones will leave us here for a trip to the North-West and we hope to meet eventually somewhere in the vicinity of Joanna Spring. They purpose proceeding along the flats or troughs between the sandridges generally bearing North 290deg. East to North 300deg. East for eighty (80) miles or even one hundred (100) should my cousin consider it advisable to go so far and then in a North-Easterly direction to cut the route I purpose taking a point thirty (30) or forty (40) miles South of Joanna Spring. I anticipate reaching this point in about twelve days whilst my cousin taking into consideration that the first eighty (80) or one hundred (100) miles can be done by him without crossing the sandridges estimates that he will arrive at that point in about fourteen (14) days. In the event of not cutting our tracks where he expects he will continue on for Joanna Spring. Failing to find this they will continue on without loss of time for the Fitzroy in a North-North-Easterly direction. But in the event of finding Joanna Spring or any waters in that vicinity they will wait and signal for us but only so long as their supplies of food will permit. They will take three (3) camels sixty (60) gallons of water in two (2) pairs of kegs and their filled water-bags; also provisions for a month and light equipment with necessary plans etc. We are leaving a pair of ration cases here and have buried 50£bs. of tinned meat near the marked tree at camp.  Sunday Oct. 11. - We experienced thunderstorms all round us last night but only a few drops of rain fell here. I am hoping that some of the showers fell to the Northward.  Each party started from well at 7.15 a.m. Charles on a bearing of North 290deg. East whilst our course was North 356deg. E.  For the first eight (8) miles the sandridges were numerous with loose sandy flats dense porcupine desert gums fair wattlebush and patches of waterbush occurring and travertine limestone outcropping in places. Noted sandstone outcropping three (3) or four (4) miles distant to East and crossed some in the flats. Then followed wider flats until at fourteen (14) miles we reached a higher elevation of sand overlying sandstone the higher points of the latter being one (1) mile to Eastward. (Read bearing North 313deg. East to a remarkable hillock of sandstone (Thring Rock) about four (4) miles distant.) We camped at this point in a mulga belt. To the North is a rather wide porcupine flat which will be of service to-morrow. Very poor feed here.  Monday Oct. 12. - Started at 4.45 a.m. Following same course we crossed the flat at three and a half (31/2) miles then more sandridges and porcupine. At seven (7) miles sighted a small but conspicuous hill to Eastward one (1) mile distant and South of that again another rise. I have named the hill after Mr. Stephen Klug of the South Australian Survey Department who was a member of John McDouall Stuart's Expedition across the Continent. Noticed outcrops of sandstone half a mile to West. Proceeding to them I found some very small rock-holes which were dry. From this elevation I saw a dry salt hake about three (3) miles to the North-West situated in a valley which apparently extended some distance to the Eastward the valley appeared to be dark and low with vegetation. Continuing on over numerous and rather steep sandridges we passed a patch of slate outcropping with a little loose quartz and prickly acacia bushes which are rare in this country. The slate and quartz were also a surprise to me. At ten (10) miles we reached the edge of the valley and here saw good wattle-bush (acacia) teatree mallee quondong and porcupine. Many ridges and blows of travertine limestone were visible here. In the same valley at twelve (12) miles we crossed a shallow watercourse trending towards the lagoons also gypseous soil and outcrops. Enormous clumps of porcupine occurred here and onward.  At fifteen (15) miles we reached the North side of the valley which is about 1150 feet above sea level the sandstone outcrops from which the lake was seen having an elevation of two hundred and fifty (250) feet. In the flats on either side of this valley are large ant-hills up to eight (8) feet high. Being afraid to pass this feed I determined to camp here at 11.15 a.m.  I am of opinion that water would be found in this valley at moderate depths. Saw some crows here and just before entering the valley tracks of natives were seen. High drift sandridges are visible to the North of camp and from the summit of one of these a mile from camp the lake was plainly visible bearing North 245deg. East and about two (2) miles distant. I have named it after Mr. W. P. Auld of Adelaide who was a member of Stuart's famous Expedition. At two (2) miles from camp whither I had walked in search of water I could see high red sandridges in all directions for a considerable distance and about two (2) miles west some sandstone outcrops. Travertine limestone exists also on this side of the valley.  Latitude by observation 20deg. 24min. 48sec. South at camp.  The same disheartening outlook everywhere! Although there is no doubt that something fairer to look upon existed here before this terrible sand hid it from view.  Tuesday Oct. 13. - We turned out at 2.30 a.m. and were crossing the first sandridge in the dark at 4.15 a.m. The whole of to-day a journey was over high abrupt sandridges. At three (8) miles we passed some small hillocks of sandstone and another outcrop visible at (8) miles about a mile to Eastward. [31] At fourteen (14) miles at the summit of a very high sandridge we chanced upon a few patches of herbage (half-green waterbush) und fearing to go beyond this I camped at 11 a.m.  During the afternoon I found the track of an emu going in an E.N.E. direction and as it war recent I followed it. It kept a direct line and I tracked it for seven (7) miles crossing a good number of sandridges until I began to feel the heat ; it being just beyond noon when I left camp. Seeing no indication of water and noting that the track was still making the same course I gave up the search ant returned to camp feeling excessively dry and thoroughly disgusted as I had cherished great hope of finding water. I am told however that these birds will travel great distances without a drink and this one may have been on a record-breaking expedition. It was 5 p.m. when I got back and I felt thoroughly exhausted after that fourteen (14) miles' walk in such climate and country. Bejah had also found the track of this bird and had run it in the opposite direction for some distance without success. He says - " I think this fellow all the same camel; us see water no want."  A sandstone outcrop is visible from camp three (3) miles Easterly.  Wednesday Oct. 14. - Rose and started at the same hour as yesterday on same course. At two (2) miles we encountered sandridges overlying sandstone and rubble ironstone. After that the flats were wider and the sandridges lower though high to the Eastward with outcrops of sandstone visible. At (9) miles a bare ridge of sandstone was visible about two (2) miles to Eastward and from it some small shallow watercourses proceeded emptying into tea-tree flats which we crossed. At ten (10) miles we met with travertine limestone wattle-bush and cork trees. As the opportunity was thus offered me of camping on this feed and making a search for water the locality appearing favourable I decided to take it. At noon saw smokes visible to the North-West the first we have seen for the last hundred and fifty (150) miles although old footprints and burnt country have been seen frequently. As we are now within 140 miles of Joanna Spring I am hoping that these natives belong to that country and that we may make friends with them. It became excessively hot at noon to-day and the camels sought shelter immediately on our arrival here at 9.15 a.m. preferring to go hungry until the evening although they were as usual tied up last night. I find that our only hope of getting our loading through this wretched wilderness is by very early starts and by Camping before noon.  Latitude by "Pavonis" 22deg. 4min. 27sec. South.  Bejah and self walked ten (10) miles this afternoon in various directions in search of water. We saw some very old footprints of natives and places where bark dishes had been cut from trees. Found one (1) dry well in some tea-tree South-East of camp and although we were unsuccessfull I feel confident water exists at present not far distant. We saw several finches whilst out and this evening a galah parrot flew over the camp to the Westward returning again from whence it came within a quarter of an hour. It was getting late and we were too tired out to go in further search to the West where I believe the water is and all our search work must be done if possible without interfering with our progress Northwards so I cannot afford to wait here after daylight to-morrow.  Thursday Oct. 15. - Leaving camp in the dark at 4.10 a.m. we still pursued the same course over rather abrupt sandridges at first then over wider flats and lese elevated ridges. Noted numerous outcrops of sandstone and ironstone rubble and nodular limestone in the lower gullies und at fifteen (15) miles sandstone and hillocks immediately on our West with a conspicuous belt of tea-tree down a valley to the Eastward. We saw some pigeons as we passed here and after getting a mile further on galahs were seen flying in the direction of the tea-tree belt which I regret I did not visit overtaking the caravan later. Smokes were visible to the West and East-South-East.  At fifteen (15) miles we camped at 10-20 a.m. it being then too hot to take the camels further. The feed here is very poor. A small sandstone ridge lies one (1) mile to the Eastward with a mulga thicket at foot. We camped at a few desert gum trees after clearing the porcupine as we so frequently have to do. One cannot move without coming into contact with this aggravating grass predominating and flourishing alike on flat or ridge of stone or sand. One may wonder why such an enormous area should be covered with so useless a growth but on reflection it can be seen that this vast and dreary wilderness would be a most barren desert bat for the porcupine; for it impedes the drifts of sands and affords the only shelter for the game or vermin which are the source of supply for the heathens who inhabit this inhospitable region and without which they could not possibly subsist.  At nightfall the solitude of the surroundings is broken by the chirping of myriads of crickets which find shelter from an over-powering sun under these wiry bunches.  We divided eighty (80) gallons of water amongst the camels this evening: they look very miserable and could not possibly carry their loads of water much further.  Latitude 21deg. 51min. 51sec. South by observation.  Friday Oct. 16. - Last evening we experienced great difficulty with the camels whilst dividing the water. I allowed seven (7) of them one and a half (1 1/2) buckets apiece and the remaining ten (10) one bucket each. They fairly rushed the camp for it becoming almost unmanageable.  We were up at 2 a.m. getting away on the same course at 4 a.m. We are now crossing gravelly undulations with green bloodwoods in the gullies or shallow watercourses which immediately empty themselves into sandy porcupine flats. Every few miles high sandridges divide or rather cover this class of country.  At 8 a.m. the weather became very close and sultry but a North wind sprang up at 10 a.m. and caused a slight improvement although at times and always when crossing the sandridges it was very trying; the camels refused to travel and gave us end of trouble. At thirteen (13) miles I noted in front of us a low valley and decided to push on to it in the hope of finding some feed for the poor brutes. We passed a low bare sandstone hill half a mile on our West with sandridges almost to its summit at fifteen (15) miles. [32] Reached the edge of the valley at 17 miles ‚ and here found some wattle bush (acacia) and a little native poplar the seeds of which were dry.  We are still over one hundred (100) miles from Joanna Spring and at present dazzling red sandridges are all we can see to the Northward. At sixteen (16) miles we passed an old encampment of natives and a native well in a tea-tree flat ten (10) feet deep in sand and apparently dry. Saw here some pigeons and crows but am at a loss to know where they get a drink.  Walking about on foot to look for these waters is most exhausting and only serves to increase one's thirst and during the heat of the day it would be an utter impossibility to induce camels even if they were fit for the extra work entailed in search to face the hot sand.  Some thunderstorms are working up this evening.  Saturday Oct. 17 - None of the camels did at all well last evening owing to the excessive heat and the small quantity of water we gave them on the 15th seems to have been of little help to them. The days are now so frightfully hot that during the early morning they refuse to pass a shade of any kind and when the caravan halts they all huddle up together trying to stand in one another's shade. I feel I must give up day-travelling and endeavour to push on by moonlight.  Our position has now become most serious owing to the intense heat the sandridges and need of both food and water.  Arranging to start to-night I decided to walk back to the well (about a mile) which we passed yesterday and try with Bejah's help to deepen it. We worked hard for an hour or more but found it dry though with damp sand on very hard rock bottom. Whilst engaged in this I saw a very dark volume of smoke apparently not far distant rising to the North-West. We started at noon intending to push on at night after our return ; but soon found ourselves amongst very high and steep sandridges on the tops of which desert gum-trees were growing. At nine (9) miles we found a freshly burnt patch of porcupine and tracks of natives. While running these I had to walk many times up and down a single sandridge - the natives had evidently been tracking wallabies and rata. The natives' tracks were going Easterly and consequently brought us a little nearer our camp than where we first found them. By this time it was nearly dark and having run the tracks for about four (4) miles I decided at 6 p.m. to start for camp. It took us from that time until midnight to reach the camp a distance of seven (7) miles. Staggering over hot sand parched with thirst I became exhausted and only able to manage u quarter to a half mile at a time sinking down at the top of each sandridge in a half stupor and falling into a sleep each time only to jump up again with a start and urge Bejah to rouse himself. The tops of the ridges becoming cooler as the night advanced we repeatedly pulled our clothes off and poured the cool sand over our burning skins. On approaching the signal fires from camp we were forced to lie down again and Bejah seemed to collapse. We called for relief and the others were soon around us tending us both and doing everything to relieve our suffering. Mr. Keartland is kindness itself and Trainer seems unable to do enough for us. As we were unable to move for some hours our start was delayed until morning. We walked quite twenty (20) miles since noon on this exploit.  Sunday Oct. 18. - At 8 a.m. started for the spot where I left off tracking hast evening and having the benefit of a South-Easterly breeze continued the journey until 11 a.m. reaching the position at seven (7) miles. Travelling on a bearing of North 330deg. East for two (2) miles we avoided steep sandridges getting through some samphire marshes. Then working round on to our former line of traverse camped under some desert gum trees which are fairly large here.  Resting until 3 p.m. Bejah and I again set out with two (2) camels one of us riding whilst the other led the poor animals in order to get them along over the sand. Picking up the natives' track we followed it with difficulty owing to the manner in which it twisted and turned about and crossed and re-crossed other tracks. Tracking him to camp in a porcupine and tea-tree flat between the ridges we saw several of the natives who had not perceived us. Putting the camels down I called to them but they all made off over the first sandridges to the North of their camp although I tried all my powers of persuasion to prevail on them to stay. There were about a dozen in all men women and children.  Searching about we found a well in drift sand about twelve (12) feet deep. I pushed the cleaning red of my Winchester over two (2) feet into the wet drift below water level. We were unable to get our camels a drink having no appliances so returned to camp with the news of our discovery. Our last hope of getting out of this horrible fix depended on the discovery of water and I bud felt very doubtful whether any of us would be alive u week hence. For the last three (3) days the camels had refused to eat a morsel and the terrible heat was gradually becoming worse.  Monday Oct. 19. - We started at daylight and moved over to the well about one and u half (1 1/2) miles North-East and about half (1/2) a mile East of the line of traverse pursued by me since leaving the well on the 11th inst.  We at once set to work finding the well difficult to cope with owing to the drift sand and loose sides. Removing several tons of sand from around the top and digging it out first as far as safety would permit we lowered into the bottom a box made from two (2) ration cases and at the same time secured the sides of the well above with spare of desert gum and tea-tree brush. At neon we had it finished but the drift was still coming in at the bottom where there was also soft sandstone rock. Spending the rest of the day at baling we secured about thirty (30) buckets of water which we gave to the camels at 7 p.m. We were then obliged to tie them down to keep them from the well. I purpose to continue taking the water as long as it comes in or until we get sufficient for the camels.  To help us with the drift Mr. Keartland made a second box on which he nailed a bag to form the bottom; this box is now fitted inside the larger one.  With the exception of their spears the natives left all their belongings at camp when they bolted yesterday morning. I noticed amongst their implements a piece of sharpened steel or iron fixed up as an axe a large quantity of different varieties of acacia seeds and a preparation of these made into a paste and ready for cooking. [33] There was also a dish of berries resembling small melons with hairy rind; these I notice grow on small bushes around here. This species was eaten by Colonel Warburton's party during their hardships in 1878.  Latitude at this spot 21deg. 29min. 40sec. South.  Tuesday Oct. 20. - We were at the well at daylight having first sent the camels beyond the first sandridge and out of sight of the well on the chance of finding feed.  We found the supply of water decreasing considerably and by noon had only obtained eighteen (18) buckets bringing the total during the afternoon to twenty-five (25) buckets; the well then refused to yield more than three (3) gallons an hour.  During the morning Said Ameer who was looking after the camels came over and gave a description of the movements of two (2) native spies who had watched us and had taken a general survey. Said Ameer was within fifty (50) yards of them and whilst one was craning his neck to see over the sandridge and occasionally turning and making gestures to his companion he perceived Said and leaving his spears bolted for his life although Said called to them and held up his hands.  Giving the camels all the water we had collected from this well which I have named "Sahara" I decided to resume our journey at 8 p.m. travelling by moonlight. I find it will be utterly impossible to get the camels along during the time the sun is in view.  I have marked a tea-tree "L.A.W. / 6" about five (5) chains East of the well. There are several large ant-hills up to ten (10) and twelve (12) foot high near by and the well is on the South side of a sandridge with a small tea-tree close by it. Other small scattered tea-tree and coarse species of acacia are also in the flat. The dry seed-stalks of the porcupine are as much as seven (7) feet high here allowing that a good rainfall occurs in this latitude sometimes; when - to quote Lindsay Gordon - Broken up fountain heads dash on Dry deserts with long pent up passion.  Wednesday Oct. 21. - The small allowance of water to which we were forced to limit the camels last evening was like a drop in the ocean to the half-starved looking famishing brutes. They rushed the kegs and gave us an hour's work in dividing the spoil fairly. We have sufficient water in the kegs for our own use for ten (10) days but if we find it impossible to get the camels along without water I must give a little of it to these most exhausted. When they have no feed they cannot go so long without water.  We left the well which had given us false hopes in a sweltering heat at 8 p.m. Slightly altering our course and bearing due North we passed over tho same desolate sand-ridge and porcupine country for the first eight (8) miles then over wider flats and lower ridges. Then came even gravelly undulations very dense porcupine and occasional sandridges for the remainder of the journey.  Camped at 4 a.m. having travelled twenty-one (21) miles during the night. The air became much cooler towards midnight thunderstorms occurring to the North and North-East.  No feed here for camels except inferior dry acacia and coarse herbage.  Thursday. Oct. 22. - The camels were still in the same wretched plight as we moved off last evening at 6.45 p.m. on the same bearing. We crossed three (3) small sandridges in the first four (4) miles the country following consisting entirely of gravelly undulations with sandstone outcrops dense porcupine everywhere and in tho flats and gullies desert gums low broad-loaf wattle-bush (a new species to me) tall tea-tree and a tree about thirty (30) feet high which I take to he the Leichardt tree. At six (6) and nine (9) miles we crossed. two (2) small shallow watercourses trending North-West and West respectively; and at fifteen (15) miles sandstone ridges (low) half a mile to the East. At sixteen (16) miles we again entered high sandridge country and camped at seventeen (17) miles after our moonlight walk at 140 a.m. Finding a little broad-loaf wattle here which the camels were biting at as we went along I did not like passing it.  Latitude by observation 20deg. 56min. 46sec. South.  A number of smokes are visible from camp to-day to the West-West and North.  We have still sixty (60) miles to travel before reaching the latitude of Joanna Spring and I am afraid it is sandhill country from here as we are now in close proximity to Colonel Warburton's route.  The weather continues very hot and trying and it is ever a fortnight since we experienced a cool day.  Friday Oct. 23. - We started at 7 p.m. last evening on the same course. It is still moonlight. We crossed innumerable sandridges dense porcupine a little broad-leaf wattle and another very coarse species which the camels will not eat and which is of course most abundant.  At eight (8) miles we chanced upon a patch of half-green herbage (water-bush) on sandridges and I decided to camp at 11 p.m. having found a fresh native foot-print.  The camels feeding only for a short time then made off to the North-East. They are really unable to eat and look most wretched. We are now again in a most critical position. My cousin's riding camel (Mahdi) has become so weak from want of nourishment and water that I am giving him a bucket of water from our scanty supply now about thirty (30) gallons. This camel also had an extra bucket on the 18th inst. [34]  This morning finding the fresh tracks of two (2) natives I started with Bejah to run them . We found it most difficult work owing to the number of times the tracks went up and down and backwards and forwards over the ridges; this combined with the stifling heat greatly fatigued us and after two and a half (2 1/2) hours we found ourselves almost back at camp having by some means or other made a mistake. After a short rest we went out again this time taking Said Ameer with us and after two (2) hours tracking we came upon a native camp. Seeing a blackfellow I ran for him but found be was a cripple left in charge of five (5) children. He could not understand English and I did not know his language although the words "Wibarra" (moon) and "Burma" (sand) were familiar to me resembling the language of the Murchison tribe at Morarie Station. I also gathered that the word "Napa" meant water.  At this spot in a miserable drift-sand gully or trough between red sandridges we found a soakage well about ten (10) feet deep with water showing in the bottom but the drift only allowed about an inch of water over its surface. Pushing a stick into the sand I found the bottom at eight (8) inches in one place and eighteen inches in another.  To the North-East of the well distant about four (4) miles is a sandstone outcrop and there is no other feature to indicate the position of this spot. We returned to camp at 2.30 p.m. having walked eight (8) miles in search.  Gathering some of the greenest parts of the herbage (water-bush) we carried it to the famishing camels some of which were in groups under the desert gum trees while the others too exhausted to follow the shade were exposed to the broiling sun. Only two (2) of them would make any attempt at eating the others apparently being unable to swallow. The sand is frightfully hot to-day.  Saturday Oct. 24. - Last evening at 8 p.m. we continued on the same course which took us West and within fifteen (15) chains of the well at one and a half (1 1/2) miles. We had difficulty in getting two (2) of the camels this distance; they lay down repeatedly so as a last resource I decided to camp and test the well.  We all turned in and camped close together thinking it possible that natives might be about At 10 o'clock Mm. Keartland roused me with the intimation that he could hear to the Eastward natives talking. Shortly afterwards we heard them coming towards us and jumping up I went to my saddle getting in place of my Winchester a revolver which I secreted within my shirt. I also got ready some shirts and coloured handkerchiefs and then waited. Coming to the top of the sand ridge nearest to us they all appeared to call in one voice "Yarra !" I replied likewise when they repeated the call which I believe means "Come." Thinking they meant to be friendly I went over in the moonlight and met eleven of the ugliest looking savages imaginable. They each carried two (2) waddies whilst the elder of the group had in addition a shield; his forehead was painted white and he wore on has head a plume of white feathers. I commenced to pat the shoulders of the natives while they examined me and made a most horrible noise with their tongues and lips (an exclamation of astonishment). Mr. Keartland joined me bringing his trusty gun at which the natives looked askance. Trainor brought up some tinned meat and Bejah and Said Ameer also put in an appearance. "Napa" being the only useful word of their language with which I was acquainted I endeavoured. to explain our need of water and the direction in which we were going. Two of the younger men pointing North-West and North said something about water and touching their feet I think were willing to go with us when suddenly the chief spoke to them in an authoritative voice and we could not persuade them to say any more on the subject. We did everything in our power to cultivate a friendly relationship with them assuming fictitious names and indulging in a general laugh.  Giving the chief a sign that we were sleepy I pointed to our camp whereupon on a sign from him they all threw down their waddies and he his shield and walked off towards the well. We returning to camp were soon asleep.  At daylight we went over to the well where lying under a tea-tree I counted thirty (30) spears which were not here yesterday. The old men women and children were all gone and as we approached last night there was no fire visible. There is no doubt that these warriors were lying in ambush and waiting to defend their water. The natives then evidently decided to come over and make friends with us. Yesterday I presented the lame man with a handkerchief and a knife.  Seeing two (2) of the natives on top of a distant sandridge I called to them holding up my hands and they ware all soon around us again.  We immediately set to work at the well digging it out afresh and securing the sides with logs and porcupine next making a "paddock" in the bottom with stakes and brush and an abundance of porcupine placed at the back. A bottomless bucket was then sank in the centre of the paddock and porcupine forced in all around its sides until we had a bed of this grass of the same depth as the bucket. This effectually coped with the drift sand and when the bucket became full of water three buckets were filled and the water was then again allowed to accumulate.  The well made at the rate of two (2) buckets per hour and by 10 p.m. we had secured twenty-five (25) buckets which were given to the famishing brutes. Two of them could not swallow the water which we poured down their throats with a quart-pot.  Sunday Oct. 25. - We continued at the well the whole of last night then again to-day until 10.30 p.m. when we had secured altogether sixty-five (65) buckets of water sixty of which we gave to the camels having worked the well for thirty-six (36) consecutive hours to obtain this quantity. Owing to the country being destitute of feed and the terrible heat-wave we are experiencing the poor animals have not benefited to the extent they otherwise should and I am afraid two or three of them will not travel much further; the relief has come to late for them. [35]  So far I have managed to get all camels and equipment within fifty (50) miles of Joanna Springs latitude but as so much depends on our flight now a considerable quantity of our goods must be abandoned.  Yesterday the natives all disappeared returning whilst we were at the camp having tea. They drank a considerable quantity of the water we had collected and taking all the spears cleared out without our knowledge. I had hoped they would come on with us and take us to a good water.  I have named this water "Adverse Well"; the computed latitude is 20deg. 48min. South longitude 123deg. 49min. East.  Monday Oct. 26. - We left all the tents most of the tools provision boxes one (1) pair of waterkegs Mr. Keartland's collecting boxes and small firearms and other articles which we can do without for the present also all personal property taking only bare necessaries. All these things we have stacked together and covered with a tarpaulin about fifteen (15) chains South-West of the well. I felt this step to be absolutely necessary as otherwise we should get nothing through this fiery furnace. Mr. Keartland has still his collection and that of Mr. Jones with the exception of stones which are very heavy and I think not very valuable.  We continued our fight last night at 11.30 p.m. pursuing the same course and encountering most terrible high and abrupt sandridges crowned with loose drift. After going up one hundred (100) feet we were often unable to get over them and were forced to follow along for a better crossing-place. Travelling as we were by night the best places were not discernible and at one time I thought we should be unable to get the camels over them. Mr. Keartland counted sixty-five (65) of these ridges in eight (8) miles; they covered a wide area and the troughs between them were very narrow.  Camped at 5 a.m. at nine (9) miles with little or no feed.  Ants are very troublesome here. One of our best pack camels fell dead on the summit of a sandridge as we came along last night. He was one of the two we poured the water into; I attribute his death to urinic poisoning or inflammation.  Tuesday Oct. 27. - Last evening Bejah informed me that six (6) of the camels were very bad and would neither eat nor chew the cud. This combined with the increasing number of frowning abrupt sandridges presented to our view made our position more critical than ever and our present prospects with only the remaining animals to carry us along are anything but alluring. The finding of Joanna Spring I also consider uncertain in such country. I feel the present position most acutely for after crossing so many miles of such terrible country safely and getting all equipment and camels so far it is a cruel blow to me to be obliged to abandon outfit and collections now. Mr. Keartland who has displayed so much energy in attending to his duties must also feel it hard to part with all his treasures but Lindsay Gordon says : - With adverse fate we best can cope  When all we prize has fled;  And where there's little left to hope  There's little left to dread.  Leaving everything at camp stacked in a heap and covered with a tarpaulin we packed six (6) camels lightly with water-kegs provisions and absolute necessaries the sick camels carrying nothing and got away at midnight travelling for the most part on foot. Without any change in the character of the country we moved slowly along until 5.40 a.m. when we reached a small patch of wattle-bush the first of this species seen for a considerable distance and the best feed met with for the last one hundred (100) miles. We therefore camped at 10 miles to allow any camels that would do so to feed before it became too hot.  The sick camels all came along and if I could now find good water and feed their lives might yet be saved.  I felt confident when parting from my cousin on the 11th inst. of getting all through safely. Now since my own experience I am in doubt as to his welfare and that of Mr. Jones.  Latitude at camp 20deg. 30min. 15sec. South.  Wednesday Oct. 28. - We made an 11.30 p.m. start. On the same bearing we got better travelling at from three (3) to six (6) miles with rubble rises and porcupine wider flats with desert gums Leichardt trees coarse acacia and porcupine everywhere. In some of the flats there were a few small patches of dry grass.  At 5.30 a.m. we camped at fourteen (14) miles on low broad-leaf wattle bush and a little inferior herbage. The camels have all come along so far.  Thursday Oct. 29. - Waiting for the moon to rise last night we managed to get away at 1 a.m. The sandridges did not improve but were broken in places and the flats towards the latter end of the journey were wider though progress still continued to be slow owing to the density of the porcupine and the coarse acacia scrub. We saw a little mallee and at 8 a.m. having done fourteen (14) miles camped on a flat of broad-leaf wattle and Leichardt trees the leaves of which the camels eat if fairly green. [36]  Riding camel (Mahdi) continually broke his nose-line and lay down delaying us so finally had to be abandoned. He managed three (3) miles travelling. Two others went down several times but we managed to get them along.  We are now within two (2) miles of the computed latitude of Joanna Spring but there is nothing hereabouts to indicate its position - no birds such as galas pigeons or finches though small flocks of shell parrots have been seen flying in various directions.  As soon as day broke we set alight to the flats as we travelled along as a signal to my cousin should he be in the neighbourhood.  Friday Oct. 30. - At 10 a.m. yesterday I noticed a smoke bearing about due East from camp and thinking it might be from my cousin's signals I gave Mr. Keartland instructions to keep signals going from a high sandridge half a mile North of camp and at once started off towards it taking no firearms and only half a pint of cold tea in a small bottle. Firing the country as I proceeded I noticed several other smokes apparently in the same neighbourhood and then concluded that they must be from natives' fires. I walked for four (4) hours quite twelve (12) miles and at 2 p.m. I felt I should not be able to get back if I went further. The heat was terrific and the fires some miles in advance. Even if I reached them I should find but the tracks of natives; these it would be necessary to run to water which most probably would be some miles off again. I felt quite exhausted with scarcely energy enough to make the effort of returning. Retracing my steps as best I could I hardly remember how I got back to camp. Many times at the semblance of a shade I sank to the ground with a singing sensation in the ears going off into a stupid doze only to jump up with a start and push on again. In the flats of dense porcupine and coarse acacia scrub the atmosphere was like the heat from an oven. On one occasion when rising from the ground I noticed my own boot tracks and found I was going the wrong way. Pulling my shirt hat and compass off I carried them rolled up under my arm and on reaching the last high sandridge at 7 p.m. I saw Mr. Keartland's signal fire. Getting on top of the ridge at another spot I could see the camp fire and hear voices but was unable through weakness to call for assistance. After lying on top of the ridge for some time I set alight to some porcupine to attract attention and afterwards got within a quarter of a mile of the camp where I was met by Mr. Keartland and Said Ameer with relief. Poor Bejah who was not well and was resting when I started had attempted to follow me up but had returned very ill. I saw his tracks seven (7) miles out as I was returning. After almost a whole night's travelling a twenty-four (24) miles walk in such a country and climate is sufficient to kill a salamander.  We are in a most awful position now our camels dying for want of water of which we have about thirty-five (35) gallons left and we about 125 miles from the Fitzroy River. I have talked our position over with Mr. Keartland and Trainor and they agree that it would. be better to give two (2) of the best camels a bucket of water apiece to assist them in carrying the kegs and try to push through to the river on a shorter allowance ourselves rather than waste time in further search for Joanna Spring which may be ten (10) or twenty (20) miles on either side of us. There are no camels fit to ride a mile by day and even if there were it would be impossible to get them to travel on account of the heat and burning sand.  Colonel Warburton with reference to his exploration through this desert mentions cool days at the end of October and the beginning of November whilst we have been weeks without a change. He also makes the following reference to his black-boy who did a similar walk to mine in search of water on 5th November 1873 : - "The lad ('Charley') had actually walked about twenty (20) miles after all the fatigue of the previous night's travelling. He had run up a large party of natives and gone to their water."  To show the difficulties to be contended with at this period of the year I quote the following extracts from Colonel Warburton's journal : - "1873.  "Oct. 1. CAMP 93. Our great disadvantage lies in being unable to make extensive search in our front for want of camels or to travel by day on account of the heat which utterly prostrates them. When we move we cannot see; when we stop we cannot search.  "Oct 10. If the camels were equal to travelling in the day we might get on and then there would be the hope of water but nothing can be seen at night.  "Oct. 22. The heat is now so fierce that neither we nor our camels could live long without an abundant supply of water.  "Nov. 12. CAMP 110. We find no appearance of change in the country and either we suppose ourselves more to the Westward than we are or else the head of the Oakover is laid down more to the Eastward than it is. The error is most probably mine as it is difficult to keep the longitude quite correct after travelling so many months on a general Westerly course."  Postponed starting until to-night.  Latitude at Camp 20deg. 6min. 30sec. South.  Another camel is just dying close by; this is the third we have lost.  Saturday October 31. - Leaving a pair of empty kegs a fifty (50) lb. bag of flour and some meat extract we started at 8.15 p.m. now without a moon and bearing North 23deg. East.  The sand ridges are showing gaps and becoming lower and more irregular while the flats are firmer. Travelled about fifteen (15) miles and camped on poor feed as usual. [37]  The time now is a most anxious one for me ; I cannot rest by day and feel the night-travelling in the dark very trying. Walking ahead stumbling over bushes and porcupine and climbing over loose sand ridges when feeling weak is quite enough without mental worry.  Sunday Nov. 1. - Slightly altering our course and now bearing North 38deg. East we resumed our nightly march at 6.45 p.m. and found the sand ridges more jumbled increasing in numbers and with drift tope. Some of the flats were wide but carried dense lumpy porcupine also Leichardt trees desert gums coarse acacia and scrub of various kinds. Having no moon we experienced much difficulty throughout the night as we were unable to see the ascent or descent of the sand ridges travelling was dangerous. The camels were continually breaking their nose-lines and so impeding our progress.  Camped at 2.15 a.m. having travelled fifteen (15) miles. Saw several smokes but all apparently far off. At the present time we have but a five day's supply of water in the kegs and all the camels are very bad. Indeed I may have to abandon any one of them at any moment as we travel along at night. If we could only get out of these dreadful sand rollers there would be hope of getting along but otherwise even water is of little value to us now.  Monday Nov. 2. - Altering our course again to North 23deg. East at 7 p.m. we were fairly under way travelling over the same dreadful country. Towards midnight we found the burnt flats well cleared of the porcupine; this greatly assisted our progress.  Travelled sixteen (16) miles Camping at 2.30 a.m. on a little wattle-bush and some Leichardt trees for the camels. Some of the camels began to feed in the early morning which happened to be unusually cool.  Latitude by "Canopus" 19deg. 30min. 17sec. South.  We are now within eighty (80) miles of the river and should push through in four or five nights if the camels will hold out. Our water supply is very short and the heat increases daily to-day being most trying. One cannot sleep after 7 a.m. owing to the heat and the small yellow bees which crawl over one's face and arms and into one's nose and ears. Ante are also very busy.  My eyes are painfully sore and Mr. Keartland is troubled in the same way. I attribute this to our restricted diet - tea without sugar or milk and damper with occasionally a little meat extract mixed in our tea.  Tuesday Nov. 3. - On the same line we continued our weary plodding at 6.45 p.m. last evening after a wretchedly hot and trying day followed by one even more unbearable which has completely prostrated us all. We crossed over a little gravel undulation and then again over sandridges which continued up to 1 a.m. when at fifteen (15) miles I rode my camel into a shallow native well which I did not see in the dark. Thinking we might find water by daylight I camped. There is a low sandstone depression here and a few wattle bushes.  We dropped two (2) more camels as we came along being unable to induce them to come any further.  We were all astir at daybreak but found nothing but several dry holes. Some pigeons and finches visited us during the morning - an evidence that water is not far off but in what direction and where? None of us can walk far now by day and even if any one of us could go in search water from our scanty stock would be required for his use. For my own part at present I cannot walk one hundred yards in the heat without feeling exhausted.  Wednesday Nov. 4. - Six p.m. again found us moving off still over sandridges some very abrupt but towards the latter end of the journey they became lower and the flats wider. Leichardt trees acacia scrub and a few ant-hills occurred. I had great difficulty in keeping awake all night and felt very weak and ill; my throat too was horribly parched.  We camped at 2.30 a.m. on a wide porcupine flat with some Leichardt trees and dwarf broad-leaf wattle-bush.  We travelled during the night 16 miles.  Looking Northward the ridges in the distance appear very low and the flats much wider. A hill with a small knob at its West end bears North 8deg. East and is about five (5) miles distant. I hope to get a more encouraging view to-morrow if our camels are allowed to carry us on another day.  Since leaving the latitude of Joanna Spring myself and Bejah have ridden through each night until 2 a.m. without shirts or hats. We got many scratches on the body from the acacia scrub which with the leaves burnt off we could not see at night.  Thursday Nov. 5. - With a 7 p.m. start and a great improvement in the travelling we passed outcrops at either side of us at four (4) miles and small hillocks of sandstone amongst the sandridges throughout the night. The flats being wide and burnt assisted us greatly as did also a strong North-West wind. We continued on until 4.30 a.m. Camping just at daylight in a large swampy tea-tree flat resembling a watercourse. It extends some distance to the Eastward and is half-a-mile wide. The feed is very poor here. After lying down for two (2) hours I walked Northward to the first sandridge and was greeted with the sight of several Conspicuous hills. A remarkable-looking hill with apparently a double top bears West-South-Westerly but it is not shown on Mr. Alex. Forrest's map. A high peak with a flat-topped hill I take to be "Mount Tuckfield" in the St. (George Range of Mr. Alex. Forrest bearing North 78deg. East whilst a hill I take to be "Mount Fenton" bears North 94deg. East and is distant about five (5) or six (6) miles. If this be correct I should pass on my present bearing about four (4) miles to the West of this hill instead of one (1) mile West as was my intention when shaping my course from Lake Way. That this is the hill there is but little doubt and I feel thoroughly satisfied that from my previous fixing whilst on the Elder Expedition of a hill near Lake Way I should have been only three (3) miles out of my reckoning in a seven hundred (700) miles traverse. [38]  We travelled for nine and a half (9.5) hours last night and covered twenty-two (22) miles.  The camels are very bad many of them making a peculiar noise in the throat and all of them have their tails matted with a gluey urinic matter. I managed after seeing six (6) cockatoos to walk two (2) miles up the flat in search of water but found it as much as I could do to get back again after a fruitless search. We are about twenty-seven (27) miles from the river now and have not sufficient water left to last out to-morrow. I have hope of clearing the desert country early to-night and of getting better travelling.  Friday Nov. 6. - I detained the caravan last evening before starting while endeavouring to observe for latitude to ascertain our exact distance from the river but was unable to get an altitude owing to the cloudy sky.  We got away at 7.15 p.m. slightly altering our course to strike the nearest bend in the Fitzroy River and are now bearing North 35deg. East. We crossed loose sandridges and wide flats of acacia scrub tall tea-tree and samphire flats and marshes. At four (4) miles we cleared the last sandridge when the cooler atmosphere was at once noticeable and we could smell the long tropical grass although it was too dark to see it. I noticed a species of eucalyptus resembling a bastard bloodwood also the bauhinia or bean-tree. The country was undulating with patches of fair pasture but a great deal of porcupine through which we had to travel for almost a whole night.  Selecting a star about the required bearing I instructed Bejah to steer in that direction for an hour and then call me for another bearing while I rode in the rear and had a sleep.  About midnight I again went in advance. At 3.30 a.m. a duck flew from the dry grass but it was still too dark to see anything. At 4 a.m. I noticed some dark-looking objects on our right and thought they were cattle; then we heard a bellow from a bullock and I could then see a mob stringing slowly along and feeling certain they must be coming from water I called to those in the rear of our party.  We continued on now following cattle-pads and at 5 a.m. it became light and on either side of our course we saw lagoons abundantly supplied with water. Taking the one on our right we camped on its banks after ten (10) hours travelling having taken the poor camels over twenty-five (25) miles of country.  The camels have now had a bucket of water apiece and Said Ameer is shepherding them about half-a-mile to the Northward on some bushes.  The lagoon is a pleasant sight and teems with wildfowl.  This evening we moved on for two-and-a-half (2.5) miles North and crossed the river camping before dark on its North side. There is a little fair feed here for the camels.  After our experiences of the last two (2) months the Fitzroy River was a pleasing sight. Great was our delight on seeing such a body of crystal-clear water in a wide channel of sand and shingle shaded with a fringe of magnificent paper-bark trees (Cajeput) gum-trees palms bamboos and other tropical vegetation. [39] The river teems with fish and wildfowl of many varieties and hundreds of kangaroos come to water from the well-grassed plains. This beautiful sheet of water affords a striking contrast to the dreary five hundred (500) miles of wilderness with its burning sands scanty shade and precarious waters through which we have just passed the borders of which are but twenty (20) miles distant.  My only anxiety now is for my cousin Charles and Mr. Jones.  Although unsuccessful in getting the whole of my equipment through and losing Messre. Keartland and Jones' collections and five (5) camels now that I know the nature of the country and climate I feel that we did well to get through at all; and had the start from Adelaide been in February or March as I wished instead of May I believe we could have brought all through safely; and even under prevailing conditions if we had found feed for our patient animals we should not have suffered such reverses. I have always held and expressed the opinion that February would be the most suitable month to leave Adelaide on such an undertaking.  Saturday Nov. 7. - The feed is pretty good here and the camels are now allowed to drink as they please. They are very weak; two are very bad indeed. This morning I walked North-Westerly getting clear of the river flats in about three (3) miles where I reached some low ironstone rises and knobs at foot of which is a nice lagoon of water with numerous wild-fowl. "Mount Tuckfield" is Conspicuous to the South-East "Mount James" to the South-West and "Mount Abbott" to the North-West.  Mr. Keartland shot a kangaroo - a peculiar species which has a nail resembling a toe-nail at the end of its tail.  Sunday Nov. 8. - Packing the camels we started for the lagoon seen by me yesterday. The flats of flooded ground were hard and uneven and we had difficulty in getting the weaker camels along. After going half-a-mile one of the camels lay down; after repeated efforts we got him on his legs again but only for a few minutes so were compelled to leave him for a while. I noticed that several of them since drinking water have some affection of the loins. Probably the kidneys are affected; they eat little and do not chew the cud.  On account of the state of the camels we camped on reaching the lagoon. During the evening Bejah returned bringing in the sick one.  We saw here native companions cranes ibis ducks spoonbills turkeys pelicans waders and other water-birds. I managed to bag another kangaroo as we came along this morning.  Monday Nov. 9. - Leaving the lagoon at 7 a.m. we travelled North for one (1) mile to a creek and crossing this we struck the track leading from Derby to the Crossing. It was quite a treat to find a road after so much rough cross-country travelling. We managed to get all the camels along for ten (10) miles to another large deep lagoon on the side of the road which is practically permanent. Here we found the mail contractor (Mr. Flinders) camping during the heat of the day. He was on his way to the Telegraph Station beyond the Crossing. I scribbled a telegraph message on to the President of the South Australian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society (Mr. Simpson Newland) informing him of my arrival on the Fitzroy River and intimating my intention of telegraphing detail through Mr. A. T. Magarey (agent for Mr. Calvert) in a few days. I also sent a message to Mr. Scott in charge of the Fitzroy Telegraph Station asking him to send me word by natives whether my cousin and Mr. Jones had arrived there or if not any news he might have of them or their whereabouts.  Tuesday Nov. 10. - Leaving camp at 6 a.m. we left the main track taking one to the right which leads to Noonkanbah Station on the banks of the river which we reached at four (4) miles. Mr. Judd who was in charge received us kindly. We were unable to get any rations here. Owing to the heat and the weak state of the camels I purpose resuming travel to-night.  Wednesday. Nov. 11. - We left Noonkanbah at 7 p.m.; following a faint track by moonlight for six (6) miles again cut the main track which we followed four (4) miles reaching Poison Camp Waterhole in a billabong along the side of the road. We managed to get the camels along fairly well Bejah walking behind led the worst two.  Should my cousin not be in the Fitzroy or at the Telegraph Station he may have found Joanna Spring and in that case would camp there for a week or ten days awaiting our arrival. I told him if successful in finding water there not in any case to stay longer than has provisions would permit but to continue on to the Fitzroy as we might not find the Spring or something else might happen to prevent us turning up.  Thursday Nov. 12. - Left Poison Camp at 6 p.m. following the track. There were hundreds of whistling ducks feeding out on the dry grass flats.  We reached Quanbun at 2 a.m. Mr. Rose one of the proprietors was up to meet us and showed us a camping-place where we turned in until 8 a.m.  This morning I plotted my traverse from Lake Way to Joanna Spring latitude and began a full report of proceedings to Mr. A. T. Magarey which I finished after tea.  Mr. Rose has kindly volunteered to send a black-boy on horseback to the Fitzroy Telegraph Station to catch the mail which is waiting for me until the 14th inst. and goes back to Derby by another route.  I am glad of the chance of rest and indeed it would be as much as I could accomplish to get there in time to send my report by mail.  Friday Nov. 13. - I sent my report by Mr. Rose's boy this morning and a short telegraph message to Mr. Magarey. One of the camels is still very ill and does not chew the cud - a bad sign after so long. The other sick one is improving but none of them are doing very well the feed being poor the herbage all dry and top feed scarce. [40] No rain has fallen here since March last and the season is considered a bad one.  Saturday Nov 14. - The worst of the sick camels died this morning ; he has had everything possible done for him by Bejah but was too far gone to recover.  To-night we must continue our journey for the Telegraph Station so that I can telegraph Mr. Magarey. 6. p.m. - The boy has returned with letters and telegraphs and I regret to learn that no tidings of my cousin are to hand also that telegraphs have been despatched to Perth and elsewhere announcing the fact that two (2) of my party have been lost. I feel annoyed that this should have been done as it will perhaps create unnecessary alarm.  Sunday Nov. 15. - At 9 p.m. last evening a native messenger arrived from the Telegraph Station with telegrams from Mr. Magarey concerning the non-arrival of our friends and also a message of congratulation and sympathy in one from Sir John Forrest Premier of Western Australia.  I feel my cousin's absence most acutely and cannot think what has happened unless he has found water at or near Joanna Spring and spelled some time. It is also probable that they may be on the Southern side of the river ; the flats are several miles wide and numerous creeks and billabongs exist all along its course. The road on the Northern side is in places some miles from the main channel. At the present time I feel I can do nothing towards finding them. These camels are almost useless now for day-travelling in the desert and even if I had strong ones little could be done at this time of the year especially beyond a distance of eighty (80) miles out from here except at night and then we could see nothing.  Mr. Magarey telegraphs to take water back along my track. Bejah is of opinion that one of these animals could carry full kegs and another half-full kegs of water by night-travelling but doubts if without water and feed they will do four days viz. : - two out from the river and two back. I believe we can find feed twenty (20) miles out from the river on the grass country and could go further from there.  I am starting Mr. Keartland with Trainor and Said Ameer for the Telegraph Station with the worst five (5) of the camels and instructions to find feed for them and to reply as well as possible to telegraph messages from Adelaide.  This morning I left Quanbun with Bejah and Said taking six (6) of the best camels and a fortnight's rations. We travelled back along the track for three (3) hours when it became too hot to proceed further till evening when we reached Poison Camp having travelled twenty (20) miles.  Monday Nov. 16. - Reached Noonkanbah at 10 a.m. We let the camels go on the river bank until 3 p.m. then crossed the river and followed along the flats for seven (7) miles camping on a large water hole in a billabong where there were some beautiful flowering water-lilies. We found a patch of fair camel-feed here.  A hut (" Kallaida") lies to the South-East about one and a half (1 1/2) miles distant; and a few miles beyond is the St. George Range which appears very rocky and rough.  Tuesday Nov. 17. - Having filled our kegs we travelled W.S.W. to my halting-place of the 6th inst. and thence along our incoming route losing time in endeavouring to run the old tracks. This we found most difficult owing to the long grass hard clayey nature of the soil and recent slight thunderstorms which have occurred for the past six (6) weeks in various directions. At 5 p.m. I found a small Pool of water which I must have passed close by on the morning of the 6th inst. as it was too dark at that time to see anything. Camped here having travelled about ten (10) miles. Owing to the uneven nature of the country and the loads of water the camels can only travel at a snail's pace.  Wednesday Nov. 18. - Following as near as possible the incoming route we saw our old tracks several times in the porcupine.  Camped at 2 p.m. on some fair bushes for the camels which were completely done up being weak and only able with their heavy loads to travel slowly over the porcupine.  Thursday Nov. 19. - Getting away very early we reached the edge of the sandridges or desert proper at nine (9) miles and continued on until 1.20 p.m. eventually finding my camping-place of the 5th inst. which we first passed by losing nearly two (2) hours in looking for the tracks until I found a spot where we had crossed a sandridge. There would be little chance of finding the water here even if we left some so as the camels were completely done and totally unfit to travel further back over the sandridges I decided to return to our camping-place of the 5th inst. - a spot at the Western end of a dense belt of tea-tree.  Travelled fifteen (15) miles and let the camels lie under some shade until the evening. We placed logs wider the kegs to protect them from white ants and shaded them from the rays of the sun with tea-tree boughs. We put a Pole between the kegs to which we tied some provisions leaving a note for my cousin in case he should ever reach the spot. The track is so obliterated by drift sand and thunderstorms that it is almost certain they could not follow it. I am afraid that bringing this water back was only interfering with the recovery of the beet of the camels.  At 5 p.m. having got rid of the water we travelled on the return journey five miles to a patch of feed seen coming out as there was not a bite where the water was left.  Friday Nov. 20. - Starting early we travelled until noon then resting went on during the evening to the lagoon where I previously halted on the morning of the 6th inst.  Travelled in all eighteen (18) miles. [41]  Saturday Nov. 21. - Travelled to Noonkanbah Station 12 miles. Here I met Trooper Pilmer of the Fitzroy Police Camp who informed me of his unsuccessful examination with trackers of the Southern side of the River.  Hearing of a native who is reported to know the country to the Southward (" Pinndann " country) for a considerable distance I arranged to camp here to-night and accompany Trooper Pilmer who intends trying to reach Joanna Spring with horses and natives to aid in the search.  Sunday Nov. 22. - Awaiting the arrival of the native who is at present engaged somewhere on this run.  Instructed Bejah with Said Ameer to travel slowly with the camels camping on the best feed for them and return to the Telegraph Station.  Monday Nov. 23.- - The native arrived at 1 p.m. With four (4) picked horses from the police mob and the native we started during the afternoon and crossing the river travelled thirteen (13) miles to my camping place of the 17th just.  Tuesday Nov. 24. - We started at 5.40 a.m. and found that the native was unable to discover my old tracks. He took us to a Spring "Kammamarra" (Pihner Spring) which we reached at fifteen (15) miles. It is about one and a half (1 1/2) miles East of my route of the night of Nov. 5th and is a permanent water in limestone rock on a slight elevation of very dark soil clothed with a perfect mat of soft springy grass.  We rested here until the cool of the evening and then travelled South-Easterly to a soakage well here we found fresh tracks of natives but little water. Unable to get a drink for the horses the native then spoke of another to the North-North-West which we reached at two (2) miles. It is in a belt of dense wattle and tea-tree with a samphire marsh on its Western side. It resembles" Kammamarra" and is called by the native "Kullajoda" (Nicholson Spring). The water is slightly brackish charged with soda and about six (6) feet from the surface with nodular limestone in the holes at bottom.  Travelled for day twenty-one (21) miles.  The native states that he does not know the country South of this but the country East and North-East is his country.  Wednesday Nov. 25.- - Returning to the soakage well seen last evening which is about due West of Mt. Fenton distant about one and a half (1 1/2) miles we picked up the tracks of natives and followed them. Bearing South-Easterly for four (4) miles we found their camp of last night at a spot where there was no water. The fire was still burning and in the distance up a flat between sandridges we saw a lubra and child and gave chase suddenly losing sight of them however.  Having passed the spot where they were last seen we returned the boy then running their tracks and finding them in a chump of porcupine completely hidden from view by loose tussocks which the old lady had pulled up and pushed over her back. She was almost blind so the trooper decided to take the child who was only about nine (9) years of age. She walked in advance of us in a South-Westerly direction for four (4) miles to a poor soakage well without supply for our horses. The boy could understand her and said he belonged to his tribe and did not know the country any further South. However still keeping her prisoner we travelled West-North-West to a well called" Karraga" where Trooper Pilmer had arrested a number of natives last year for cattle-killing reaching it at four (4) miles.  Camping at this spot we commenced to dig the well out with a native "coolamin" and a bucket It was a trying job in the heat and Trooper Pilmer and the boy did most of the work as I was too weak to keep at it long. The water was reached at twelve (12) feet but owing to the drift which came up from the bottom with the water we were unable although we worked till dark to get more than half a bucket for each horse. We had no implements with which to cope with the drift otherwise I believe we should have got a good supply as I am of the opinion this is a spring covered up by the sandridges.  Travelled for day about sixteen (16) miles.  Thursday Nov. 26. - We got about a bucket of water apiece for the horses this morning and letting the native child go we left "Karraga" travelling due South for a smoke seen last evening. At live (5) miles from a low stony ridge a conspicuous pyramid hill was visible to the East-South-East about four (4) miles distant. Continuing on through dense porcupine and scrub of coarse acacia we found it difficult work for the horses; the going was very loose for them and they became greatly distressed. At nine (9) miles we found some shallow dry clay-pans and a quarter of a mile Eastwards a small native catchment holding in all only about fifty (50) gallons of dirty water. We camped here till noon. One of the horses rolled in the hole and made the water very thick. Although we tried boiling it and mixing ashes with it we were unable to clear it. From here smokes were visible to the South-South-West and a conspicuous bluff point or headland (Scott Headland) of some table hills lies to the South-West. Travelling to the latter we reached the highest point where we climbed to the summit and could see that the smokes were a considerable distance off - fully fifteen (15) miles from the bluff. Mr. Pilmer thought it would be too risky to attempt finding a water in that direction the horses being in low condition and about done up. I was of the opinion when we left the river that without the assistance of natives to show us water in easy stages we should not get very far. In such country and under each climatic conditions it is sufficient for an animal to travel direct from water to water without having to go miles in search of a drink. We returned to the clay-pan where there is enough water or rather clay and water to last the horses and ourselves to-night and to-morrow morning.  Friday Nov. 27. - Trooper Pilmer has decided that his horses are not fit to ride in further search of water and intends to retreat to the river. [42]  Travelled direct to "Kullajoda" Spring which we reached at fifteen (15) miles. Two of the horses knocked up before we got clear of the sand ridges.  We experienced a thunderstorm and about fifteen (15) points of rain fell giving us a wet bed for the night. I brought no rug sharing one with the Trooper so we had a steamy night.  Saturday Nov. 28. - Pursuing a course of North 37deg. East we travelled direct for Kallaida Cattle Station reaching same at twenty-two (22) miles. We found Mr. Mills who was in charge at the hut and he received us very kindly. Trooper Nicholson and black-trackers also arrived during the evening from an inspection down the river.  Mr. John Collins of the Oscar Range Station was camped about two miles from here and came over to see me. He informed me that he had been in the district since 1882 and from his experience October and November were the hottest and most trying months for stock. In December thunderstorms frequently occur and the rainy season generally sets in about the end of the year.  Sunday Nov. 29. - As the horses were knocked up we were unable to travel further than Noonkanbah to-day which we reached at nine (9) miles.  Monday Nov. 30. - Travelled on route for the Crossing to "Seven-mile Billabong" seventeen (17) miles.  A thunderstorm occurred at 8 p.m. and lasted over an hour but not much rain fell. We spent a miserable night having but one rug between us the steam from which was more than I could tolerate after 3 a.m. so I turned out and lit a fire.  Tuesday Dec. 1. - Travelled to Quanbun Station seven (7) miles and thence to a waterhole in the river twelve (12) miles further making (19) miles for the day.  Wednesday Dec. 2. - Travelled to Crossing ten (10) miles and thence to Telegraph Station eight (8) miles which we reached at 1 p.m.  Telegraphed result of search to Mr. A. T. Magarey. Mr. Keartland informed me of Mr. N. Buchanan's arrival from Kimberley for the purpose of further search. Sent messenger after Mr. Buchanan informing him of my return.  Mr. Buchanan arrived from Gogo Cattle Station during the afternoon.  Thursday Dec. 3. - Received telegraphic message from Mr. Magarey intimating a wish that I should join Mr. Buchanan. As requested I waited for further messages from Mr. Magarey whilst Mr. Buchanan returned to Gogo to prepare for a start. [43]  [...] 1896.  Friday Dec. 4.- - Left Telegraph Station near crossing on Upper Fitzroy River and travelled to "Gogo" Cattle Station to rejoin Mr. Buchanan. Travelled seven (7) miles.  Saturday Dec. 5. - Inspected camels selecting four (4) of the fittest of my animals which are not much improved yet as there is no herbage here and the feed is inferior.  Preparing for a start to-morrow. Mr. Livingstone manager of this run has been most kind to my men during their stay here for the purpose of spelling the camels whilst I was absent.  Instructed Trainor and Said Ameer to return with the seven (7) remaining camels to Mr. Keartland who is at the Telegraph Station and whom I have empowered to act during my absence.  Sunday Dec. 6. - Leaving "Gogo" at 11.30 a.m. we travelled to the crossing which we reached at three (3) miles. Here we found the river in flood. Heavy thunderstorms no doubt have taken place in the King Leopold Ranges as it was running at the rate of six (6) miles an hour. We spent some time attempting to cross. I got my riding camel into five (5) feet of water and he refused to go another yard the current being too strong. Mr. Buchanan then sent his black boy in with a pole to some teatree in the channel and he found deep water there just beyond where I attempted to force my camel. Finding that the water was falling Mr. Buchanan thought it advisable to camp on the banks of the river until morning in the hope that it may be possible to cross to-morrow as the river rises and falls very quickly.  Monday Dec. 7. - The water having fallen but one (1) foot during the night we decided not to wait longer but to follow along the South side as best we could. Owing to a big sweep of the channel to Southward and numerous creeks and billabongs the distance is further and the progress more difficult than following the track on the Northern side.  Camped at twenty (20) miles after a halt of two (2) hours during the middle of the day.  Tuesday Dec. 8. - Followed along flats adjacent to the Fitzroy halting for three (3) hours during the middle of the day and Camping at twenty-four (24) miles. We experienced some difficulty with the camels belonging to me as they are still weak. Mr. Buchanan's riding camels on the other hand are fresh.  Wednesday Dec. 9. - Travelled to crossing opposite "Noonkanbah Station" Camping at 19 miles. The camels owing to the heat gave more trouble to-day and we find it will be impossible for the future during the hottest days to travel them after 10 a.m.  Thursday Dec. 10. - We walked across the stream here to the station and although the water was but four (4) feet deep the current was strong.  The mail arrived shortly after we crossed and my correspondence the first I have received since leaving the South included letters from Mr. A. T. Magarey agent for Mr. Calvert; also letters from friends.  Sent on to Mr. Keartland mail-bag containing letters for other members of the Expedition.  Friday Dec. 11. - Travelled to "Kallaida" Cattle Station eleven (11) miles. Camped with Mr. Mills from whom we obtained a few supplies.  Saturday Dec. 12. - Starting for "Kullajoda" Spring near Mt. Fenton we travelled twelve (12) miles Camping at 11.40 a.m. when it became very hot and quite unfit for the camels to travel.  Sunday Dec. 13. - Continuing our journey at 6.20 a.m. we travelled to the spring reaching it at ten (10) miles.  Made a well to fill water kegs and sent the camels to water at "Kammamarra Spring" about two (2) miles distant the supply here being limited as we have not opened up the spring to a greater depth.  Monday Dec. 14. - We experienced a heavy thunderstorm last evening about one-third of an inch of rain falling. It is still showery this morning and the ground is slippery. We were compelled to deepen the well to get sufficient water for our kegs. [44]  Tuesday Dec. 15. - Another heavy thunderstorm this morning and three-quarters (3/4) of an inch of rain fell delaying our start until 7.40 a.m.  Travelling in a South-South-West direction for fourteen (14) miles we reached the small claypan found by myself and Trooper Pilmer last month. The camels felt the heat from the sand very much during the last three miles.  The rain had extended thus far filling the small native catchment which however will last only a few days on account of the intense heat.  We noted this afternoon a smoke bearing North 189deg. East. It is apparently about the same locality as one seen whilst myself and Trooper Pilmer were here with horses.  Wednesday Dec. 16. - Getting a start at 54A) a.m. and travelling in the direction of the smoke seen yesterday we passed a dome-shaped hill at two (2) miles about fifty (50) feet high - a rather remarkable feature of sandstone formation - and at four (4) miles a bluff point on our left. This is part of a range of broken sandstone flat on top.  At thirteen (13) miles we saw some recent footprints of three (3) natives. Camped a little further in advance at 3.30 a.m. the heat being too severe to admit of proceeding further to-day.  About 4 p.m. Mr. Buchanan's native boy George saw two (2) dingoes (native dogs) on the last sandridge crossed. Going with him along our camel pad to the other side of the ridge we found the tracks of two (2) natives who had followed our path. They had crawled on hands and feet almost to the summit of the ridge and evidently seeing us had bolted off into some coarse acacia scrub. We tracked them for some distance finding some green leaves they had dropped from their girdles as they ran.  Returning to camp arranged with Mr. Buchanan to run the tracks to-morrow in the hope of finding good water for us to fall back on in case of need.  Thursday Dec. 17. - -At 5.40 a.m. having packed the camels commenced running the tracks of the two (2) natives. Generally bearing South-Easterly and after travelling about one and-a-half (1.5) miles we found their deserted camp and a rock-hole containing sufficient water to enable us to give the camels a small drink apiece. Finding a considerable quantity of sand or silt in the hole we decided to let the camels go on a little feed around the spot and to dig the rock-hole out. Sinking about seven (7) feet we found a rock bottom twelve (12) feet from the surface. When full this hole will hold 1600 gallons of water. It is in hard sandstone the surface of the rock only being visible in the flat which is between low sandridges. Its position is latitude South 19deg. 8min. (approximate) and East longitude 124deg. 26min. (approximate).  To-day is oppressively hot.  Just after sunset the native boy "George" noticed a native making slowly towards the well under cover of some bushes in the flat. He was evidently endeavouring to reach the rock-hole without our knowledge. George induced him to stay whilst I went and met him. He appeared exhausted and suffering from thirst having evidently come some distance expecting to find his friends here but seeing us was afraid to come to the water. Unable to endure further travelling he had waited until dusk in hope of getting a drink unperceived. Taking him to the rock-hole I showed him that it was empty. At camp he drank a very considerable quantity of water from the kegs; we also fed him. George did not understand a word of his language but knowing that the word "Napa" meant water I ascertained that he could take us to the South-West from here. Mr. Buchanan was anxious to handcuff him and chain him up in case he should bolt during the night but I was afraid that if we did so he would tell the next natives we came in contact with and perhaps scare them away so interfering with our chance of getting information from the tribe further South.  Friday Dec. 18. - The native slept close by me last night and seemed pleased at the prospect of accompanying us.  Leaving the rock-hole (" Tallingurr") at 6 a.m. the native now acting as guide we travelled on a general bearing of North 252deg. East for ten (10) miles reaching a soakage well in drift sand fifteen (15) feet deep with but little water in the bottom. The shaft is small running to almost nothing at the bottom. Even if there is a supply here it would take two (2) days' hard work to make the well serviceable.  Camped under a Leichardt tree close by at 10.30 a.m. The sun is now almost overpowering and the camels directly they are let loose try to find shade for which they fight.  The native points in a Southerly direction and says there is another water called "Ngowallarra" not far distant and one closer still called "Diilawuddi." This well he calls "Tanndulla" the approximate latitude of which is 19deg. 10min. 30sec. South and East longitude 124deg. 15min.  There is nothing here for the camels except a few Leichardt trees the leaves of which they will eat if very hungry.  Saturday Dec. 19. - The camels were in line at 6 a.m. our guide first pointing on a bearing of North 160deg. East and afterwards North 202deg. East for four (4) miles to a rock-hole which we found dry. This he informed us was "Dillawuddi." He then altered his course to North 160deg. East and at seven (7) miles on this bearing he gave me a sign to keep quiet. We were then a quarter of a mile in advance of the rest of our party who were making progress as best they could over the sandridges one of Buchanan's camels repeatedly lying down owing to the heat. Crossing a rather high sandridge we surprised a native boy about fifteen (15) years of age; he was alone and asleep in a wurley almost on the highest point of the sandridge. He had with him some dingo pups - the only species of dog these desert natives possess. Undoubtedly the boy was at this time isolated from his friends or tribe for reason of one of their tribal customs. Seeing the other fellow with us he appeared not the least afraid and was highly amused at the camels and our appearance in general. [45]  This water "Ngowallarra" is apparently a strong soakage or a spring in a small natural depression on the South side of the sandridge. There are some tail broad-leaved wattle trees growing here similar to numbers which grow at "Kammamarra" and "Kullajoda" Springs as before described. I have named this "Welcome Water." As the well was in drift sand we were unable to dig it out and make a good job of it without the loss of another day so we baled out the water with a quart pot as it came into the hole and managed to obtain three (3) buckets apiece for the camels by midnight. Found very little feed here for the camels except some creeping weeds growing around the well which we gathered and gave them.  I make the latitude of this water 19deg. 13min. 26sec. S. and longitude 124deg. 15min. E.  Sunday Dec. 20. - Made our start again at 6 o'clock taking with us both natives and bearing generally North 160deg. East. The weather was excessively trying from quite early morning and one of Buchanan's camels threw himself down fully a dozen times. After crossing a rather wide cork-bark flat we reached another native well called "Waddru" (Escape Well) at twelve (12) miles. Little or no feed here.  During the afternoon Bejah and soil dug out the well which is twelve (12) feet deep with clay on one side and a drift sand bottom. We found it most exhausting work at this time of day the heat being most unbearable and we only secured two (2) buckets of dirty water the drift sand being unworkable without timber of which there was none suitable in the vicinity. It would take two (2) days to obtain sufficient water for camels and kegs although I believe there is a good supply at bottom.  I make the latitude of this place 19deg. 31min. 5sec. South and approximate longitude 124deg.  19min. East.  Monday Dec. 21. - Mr. Buchanan's camels made off during the night and as they were not brought back until 9 a.m. when it was too hot to attempt travelling we were obliged to postpone our start for another water spoken of by the natives until evening. I took the elder of the two (2) natives to point out from here the direction of other waters. Re points for two (2) waters called "Kunnditch" and "Punana" about South-East and North 220deg. East for another called "Kuilga-ngunn-ngunu" or "Kullgana" but I could not ascertain the probable distances being as yet unable to make myself understood by him. Before noon I saw the elder of the natives walk from camp towards some bushes and as he appeared to be hunting for lizards among the porcupine I did not pay much heed to his doings. The younger boy shortly afterwards also walked leisurely out of camp in the same direction and then noticing that the other was nowhere in sight I walked after him and found that his mate had decamped. I was fortunately just in time and getting up to him by pretext I took possession of him and brought him back to camp. Mr. Buchanan was very anxious to chain him up at once which we did securing him by the leg to a camel-saddle. Unless we have with us a native acquainted with the country who can take us to waters we are at this time of year almost powerless. Water for the camels is now absolutely necessary every two (2) or three (3) days more especially with the scanty and dry feed to be found in such wretched country.  At 6.20 p.m. we started on a bearing of North 220deg. East the native being chained and riding with Bejah on his camel. Travelled about five (5) miles when the boy said the water was close on our left. Accordingly turned down a flat for a few chains and came to two (2) large circular holes about thirty (30) feet in diameter with water only a few inches down in the sand at the bottom. At one of these a few rushes were growing and at and in the other some more of the tall broad-leaved wattle trees. The holes are but a few paces apart. As it was too dark to do anything until morning we camped at 11 p.m. The native name of this water is "Kullga-ngunn-ngunn."   Tuesday Dec. 22. - Early this morning when the camels were brought to camp we found that two (2) of mine were poisoned the symptoms being similar to those affecting the two (2) that were poisoned near Lake Augusta. Mixing seven (7) packets of Epsom salts for each animal we drenched them. One of them was apparently too far gone as although the salts had effect he died in great agony at noon. The other is able to rise but it is effected in the hind quarters and will be unable to travel for a day or two. This is a most serious loss as we can ill-afford it. For the hast week all the animals have been necessarily lightly packed owing to the heat and the nature of the country.  The water here is situated on the North-West side of a high point of sandridge on which is growing a small young Leichardt tree. There are several large specimens of this tree to the South-West of the water a few chains distance and beyond a low sandridge. The foliage of these trees is the best that I have seen in the desert; probably their roots find their way to the water.  This is a very good water; in one hole it appears quite fresh whilst in the other only slightly brackish. The supply seems very good but difficult to get at owing to the drift sand. The natives appear to have used these wells for very many years. The sand has been removed from time to time leaving these two large holes thirty (30) feet across at the top but sloping down to a few feet at the bottom which is about ten (10) feet from the surface. Having scooped out the bottom we soon had a good Pool of water and after giving the camels all they could drink and filling our kegs it maintained its original level.  The native points North 230deg. East for a water called "Yernich" or "Yerniakka" and North 280deg. East for another which he calls "Nanntho" and which is he says not far distant. To the Southward however he points in several directions and repeats the word "Kamrnara."  The native has been allowed to walk about the camp to-day with a handcuff to which is attached about three (3) feet of loose chain fastened round his leg. Just before dark he made a pretext for going out of camp and when I told him he must not go over a sandridge he stooped quickly and picking up the end of the chain made a hole for it. Being half-way up the ridge before I started in pursuit he had a good advantage and seemed to be in no way inconvenienced by the chain. [46] Finding myself about done without gaining upon him I was just giving up the chase as hopeless when a dead bush catching the chain brought him to the ground with considerable force and I had captured him before he could get another start. Taking him back to camp he first threw himself on Buchanan's boy "George" and then clung to Bejah being evidently of opinion that his last hour had come. However after chaining him up we surprised him by giving him his supper.  Wednesday Dec. 23. - Yesterday we kept the camels in an opposite direction to that in which the two were poisoned but this morning one of Buchanan's is also affected and we are therefore compelled to stay here to-day.  Moved camp to the Leichardt trees Southward of the well where we drenched the camel and did all possible to effect a recovery.  6 p.m. - Buchanan's camel has been in great agony all day and the salts have had no effect neither has an injection of hot water and soap. My own camel is slowly recovering.  Thursday Dec. 24. - About a quarter of an inch fell during the night and early this morning the weather was cool and it was windy. Mr. Buchanan's camel died at 4 p.m. to-day. When the animal ceased breathing the native said to me "Purrunng" meaning I suppose that it was dead.  Friday Dec. 25. - Leaving two (2) pack saddles and one pair of water kegs here we departed from this unfortunate spot at 7 a.m. with our six (6) remaining camels twenty (20) gallons of water and as light equipment as possible. Travelled on a bearing of North 220deg. East for the water pointed out by the native. Crossed innumerable sandridges some very high and the usual desolate-looking country until 10.15 a.m. when it became too hot to travel further. We camped on a flat of Leichardt trees partly destroyed by fire.  Distance travelled seven (7) miles.  Amongst these desert sands the heat is almost unbearable by day at this time of the year.  The native boy chained by the arm and tied to my riding camel tried to alter our course very considerably after we had travelled five (5) miles. He now points North-Easterly for the water called "Yerniakka."  Saturday Dec. 26. - We were delayed this morning by a thunderstorm but very little rain fell. Getting a start at 8 a.m. now bearing North 230deg. East we travelled for seven (7) miles and by accident came to a native bough shade (" Bungur") on a sandridge at seven (7) miles with a dry soakage at foot. The native boy then said that place was "Yerniakka" and when I questioned him as to why he pointed elsewhere last evening he got out of the difficulty by explaining that there were two (2) (" Kutharra ") waters of that name.  Continuing on until we had made ten (10) miles we decided to camp until the cooler part of the afternoon. The native walked the whole distance and we have kept him without a drink in the hope that he will take us to water. He tried all manner of devices to get loose pulling back on his chain and staggering for most of the morning. He now declares he knows the country no further and pointing any direction in the South he cries the one word "Kammarra."  Resuming our march at 4.20 p.m. again bearing North 220deg. East for five (5) miles we struck my pad of the 1st November followed during our fight for the Fitzroy River.  The boy pointing Southerly along the old pad asked me if there was not water in that direction I feel sure now that he does not know this country and that we are beyond his boundary. He was famishing for water so we decided to give him a drink and camp for the night at 7 p.m. Nothing but Leichardt trees for the camels. The boy fairly broke down this evening crying and repeating the word "Kammarra" and pointing Southerly. This word in my opinion means the name of another tribe of natives.  Up to the present we have been unsuccessful in gaining any information of the whereabout of our friends. The two (2) natives whom we have had with us know nothing of them although they both knew that I had passed through their country last month.  Sunday Dec. 27. - We are now about twenty-two (22) miles from the last water "Kullga-ngunn-ngunn" and have barely two (2) gallons of water remaining in our kegs. The distance is not great but with the heat and the character of the country to be crossed it will be as much as we can accomplish. Leaving camp at 7.45 a.m. we at first tried to follow my old camel pad to the camping place of 1st November but even with Buchanan's native boy "George" tracking we were forced to abandon the idea and start direct for the water. We managed to keep the camels going until 1 p.m. and at eleven (11) miles were forced to camp until evening.  Finishing the last of the water (about half (1/2) a pint apiece) we started again at 5.15 p.m. and followed our out-going tracks until dark then by bearings continuing on in painful monotony until within about four (4) miles of " KuIlga-ngunn-ngunn" when my riding camel dropped on his fore-knees on the summit of a sandridge. The poor animal was completely exhausted. Bejah assisting me we managed to get him on his legs again after half-an-hour's perseverance; but after going a hundred yards he again lay down so I left him there with his saddle and walked myself leading the native on the chain. We got along stumbling over porcupine for two (2) miles further then I felt that I could not go another yard. The boy also continually implored me to stop and sleep ( " Lummbo"). As there was so much similarity in the natural features of the country it was probable that we might pass the water in the dark. We therefore hobbled the camels and let them go at 10 p.m. and lay down ourselves amongst the porcupine thoroughly exhausted and all very parched and much in need of water.  Shortly after we lay down I noticed a small dark cloud rising to the Eastward and hearing thunder I fancied there might be a chance of rain but Mr. Buchanan said he had been too often deceived in the tropics by dry thunderstorms. [47] However making a hole in the sand I arranged my waterproof sheet so as to be ready. The cloud approached very quickly heavy drops falling and passing over us in a few seconds leaving sufficient water in my sheet for a small drink apiece - the sweetest I ever tasted in my life.  Monday Dec. 28. - As soon as it became daylight we were astir and after the camels which being short-hobbled were soon tracked up by Bejah and George. They were making direct for the water and had travelled about one (1) mile.  Packing up we reached the well at two (2) miles. Watering two (2) of the camels Bejah at once left for the spot where my riding camel was left last night taking water for him in the kegs; whilst Mr. Buchanan and myself stayed to water the others and cook something to eat.  Owing to the drift sand we are unable to sink the well more than a few inches below water level and must content ourselves by emptying the Pool as it fills making three (3) buckets per hour. I feel confident that by spending a day or two in harbour over the well we should find a large supply.  Bejah returned at 2 p.m. with the camel. He is very weak and. will be unable to travel for a day or two. One of Buchanan's is also very bad and unfit to pack and the remaining four (4) are unfit to attempt another trip out from here. At this time of year together with many other disadvantages the most serious of which is the almost total absence of food for the poor brutes it is almost impossible to do anything with camels by day. We find we are in a condition. too crippled to do more than retreat to the river; in fact it would be madness to attempt anything else.  By dark we had given the six (6) camels as much water as they could drink.  Tuesday Dec. 29. - We are obliged to stay here to-day to rest the camels although there is but little for them to eat.  Watered them all again during the evening. The longer we stay here the more danger there is of getting them poisoned.  The latitude by observation I make 19deg. 32min. 48sec. South; approximate longitude 124deg. 17min East.  Wednesday Dec. 30. - Packed camels and started on return journey to river Bejah and myself walking and leading our animals over the sandridges afraid as yet to attempt riding them.  Travelled via "Waddru" Camping on pad to "Ngowallarra" making eight (8) miles for day.  Thursday Dec. 31. - Starting at 6 a.m. we pushed on to "Ngowallarra" Well. The day was exceptionally hot from early morning. We attempted riding but found our camels would not reach the well unless we dismounted the sandridges being too steep and trying for the famine-stricken brutes.  Beached the well at 10.30 a.m. where we found sufficient water in a small claypan close by to satisfy the camels. The well has fallen in during our absence and is now filled with sand.  I am laying out my plans to be able cease work when I am 50 years of age but man proposes and God disposes and none of us knows what the future has in store for us. However we can only do our best.   Today I am 33 years of age being born on the 5th April 1863 so that in 17 years more I intend to return home for good that is if God wills it so. No doubt 17 years is a long time to look forward to but it is a short time to look back [...]   We have been here now close on 7 months and have had no luck as yet. When I say no luck I mean we have not made a pile but as for finding reefs we or at least I have had no trouble whatever. I found one the third day and we thought ourselves made men but Geoff wouldn't stick to it when the gold cut out and another party with more perseverance have struck it rich. It has been the same all through and I am so sick of it that I intend leaving him to pick up with someone else and I will take a job at £4 10s. 0d. per week which are the current wages up here. I can save £3 5s. 0d. or £3 10s. 0d. of that and the work is interesting and besides I would like to get a little more insight into it. I can save a little and wait a chance to join some decent party looking out for a mate [...] [92]  It is such a game of chance this reef hunting and when you find one and test it to 50 or 60 feet and it is a good strong payable reef at that depth you have a job to dispose of it without interest among the buyers and bribing judiciously in certain quarters (chiefly the experts). Still I don't know of any better way of making a rise or a better place to do it than Western Australia miserable as it is to live in. There are thousands on these fields now and many have made enough to give them a good start in life but few have made more. It is not a bad life plenty of excitement and risk and plenty of decent fellows always about. I never was in such a place in my life for books and papers so that a fellow has amusement as well as hard work besides always knowing how the world wags.   The reason I threw up the survey job was because I had saved up sufficient to give me a start on the fields and good accounts as to rain and feed being to hand thought it best to go up at once. I have spent 7 months prospecting and it has cost me all out over £10 per month. The country is so hard that dynamite has to be used besides you must have a portable forge to point your tools shoe your horses etc. I got into the knack of blacksmithing immediately and was smith to the camp as I am here.   Well my money being nearly exhausted I thought it best to take a job till I can save up a bit more. So here I am saving £3 a week (getting £4). The price of things has come down so much that I can live on £1 or nearly so a week. Water of course is thrown in. I rank as a practical miner now and am getting the highest wages £3 10s. 0d. being the lowest [...]   Re Lewis: I have given this as you say my best consideration which means about 40 pipes of tobacco and the following:   At present I can do nothing but if I was down South I feel sure I could get him apprenticed as it were to a station. I am nearly certain of this as the owner is a friend. He would be treated as one of the family but would have to work for 6 months for nothing but his board in lieu of a premium not being paid. After that he might get 30s. 0d. a month or even a bit better and so on up to £4 a month but after he had the new chumminess knocked out of him I would take him with me if he were so disposed and we could knock around and battle together.   There is no mistake the gold fields are the place to make money and spend it too. As for the Wrights you have no idea how poor they are and altogether without influence. They could do nothing for Lewis and I wouldn't ask them. I consider myself as being in their debt now morally speaking and mean to pay it off too when I strike it rich.   By jove old man I killed a big snake under my bunk last night. He skeared 6 months growth out of me.   I would advise Lewis to work at different things that would be use out here. Let him learn to milk. That is the first question he would be asked on a West Australian station and he can learn at Clogher. [93] Next let him learn to ride and saddle and groom his own nag etc. also to plough. If possible he might rub up his figures a bit and book-keeping also as he would have to keep the station books (a simple matter). I can only repeat I can do nothing up here. Wait a while and if he learns the above he can command wages as soon as he lands.   I am very glad Lewis is satisfactorily disposed of. He is going to a better country than this can ever be. Geoff has gone home for Christmas and a few month's [sic] rest he says but I don't think he will show his nose up here again. It is truly a God-forsaken hole. I have been laid on my back in a boiling tent with my old enemy dysentery since the 23rd inst. and so have not spent a very enjoyable Christmas but I suppose I'll get over it all right. It is frightfully hot night and day and a tent is like an oven. There is no natural shade at all owing to the almost total absence of timber. When I leave here I think I'll take a run over and see you all once again. I'll reckon up the cost and see. A fellow should do the trip there and back for £100 comfortably third class return of course. After being out here for 5 and a half years pretty well one wants a spell [...] I suppose Lewis goes out to New Zealand as a cadet. Let me know his terms and future prospects and send me his address I might be on the Thames diggings this time next year. But I've found that there is no good laying plans for the future in this kind of life one being entirely guided by circumstances. The market is very dull now at home and the outlook for prospectors bad. If we had public batteries on the out fields like these a man could do well enough during a slump and we won't have those for another 5 or 10 years there being no alluvial to speak of the poor man has no show. The middleman i.e. the development companies make all the beans. and the prospector getting next to nothing. I found the mine I am at present on and showed it to the present owners and I think they will be pretty decent if they dispose of her all right. At any rate I'll have a spell down south when she's floated whether or not I shot some pigeons at a water hole last week. They were a treat too. With March we get cool weather again 3 months and the two coming are the hottest of the year. It seems funny to be boiling here at Christmas while you are freezing over there. I must have lost over half a stone in the last 4 or 5 days. It's a terrible place to be the least bit sick. You can get nothing to eat that you'd like and when you do by chance get it the cooking of it yourself takes away your appetite. Every camp round here has gone to the pub to spend Christmas and all their spare cash. I got a present of a bottle of whiskey some days before Christmas and the seal isn't broken yet.    [...] You will be pleased to learn that we bought 200 four tooth merino ewes from about 10 miles above Ensay. They cost 6s. 0d. and as sheep are not dear at present you may conclude they are a fairly good class. There are two Lincoln rams with them at present. I hope the lambing may turn out well for we will need it much. It was a struggle to keep money enough together to pay for them but they are paid for at any rate. The Lands Department noticed for two years rent in February but did not get it; they must wait and the store keeper is also a bit troublesome for his account. However I can give him some soon for I expect the half year's rent for front paddock soon. Had I squared off these I could not have bought the sheep. But the sheep will increase and I may be able to bridge the grocer and the Lands over for a little bit but it is uphill very uphill.   Now we have the sheep I feel that we have something. If I can manage to finance the other things for a little the sheep with good luck will steadily grow into a larger flock. [204] They will have plenty of feed as the paddock (back block) is much under stocked with that number and the few head of cattle. Besides the severest drought (for the time it lasted) that has been for a long time broke up in February and now the hills are green where every blade was bleached or trodden out of the ground. There is now the prospect of a good autumn and winter. I am also careful to keep them constantly supplied with salt so they seem to be doing very well so far.   I have not heard from Bendigo for about 4 or 5 weeks. Maggie has not been very well and had gone to Melbourne. Of course James would be busy stocktaking lately.   The wheat harvest was very poor in Victoria averaging only about or slightly over 4 bushels. The price is at present about 5s. 1d. per bushel. Flour is more than double what it was a year ago being now in Bruthen 27s. 6d. a bag. This is stiff when one has to buy. Many farmers and storers are holding but if they are not careful they will hold too long. Should the season keep good there will be I think a fall about October to much lower prices. By the way wool is expected to be a good price next season. About nine millions of sheep died during the late drought in New South Wales.   The garden potato crop is next thing to a failure being merely a small potato fit only for the fowls and those are very second growth. In this district potatoes are worth about 8s. 0d. We won't have to buy but don't expect to be able to sell. Warrnambools are quoted about 70s. 0d. to 80s. 0d. per ton.   The fruit was fairly good but owing to the dry season vermin was more destructive than usual. I poisoned many opposums but still they came so we got very little fruit as our share. [205] Grasshoppers were also very bad eating the parsnips and carrots and cabbage as soon as they were fairly above ground so we have had little vegetables this summer but we have now a few turnips carrots parsnips cabbage sown since the rain which are coming on grand.   Since writing last I bought 84 cross bred two tooth wethers from Wilson (having obtained a small loan £12 from a friend of Fannie's) as we were plenty of grass which will add to our little clip.   As Wilson was likely to be scarce of feed he proposed sending over 59 cross bred two tooth ewes to graze till shearing agreeing to give us half the wool. As this was a good bargain for us I agreed. Unfortunately during the last week the dogs (tame ones I believe) got amongst them with the result we have lost 3 viz. one merino ewe and 2 cross bred wethers. Wilson has also lost 3 of his cross bred ewes. After poisoning the carcases we interviewed neighbours who keep dogs for wallaby hunting and talked very plain as to consequences in case they were seen hunting in that quarter.   Simpson Hamilton's man and myself had around the back well poisoned for dingoes but hunters and tame dogs are mostly inside not outside'. I think however there is not much likelihood of a recurrence of this sort of thing for sometime to come.   The sheep look splendid otherwise and I expect lambing to begin first week in August. We have had heavy rains last month and the Tambo was in flood for a week. Since the weather has been more or less leaky the ground has had a thorough soaking and a good and early spring is looked forward to. The potato crop turned out very poor but with such a season as we have passed through it is not to be wondered at. Mr. Somerville Mr. Davidson and Mr. Wilson planted also and only Wilson dug a very few. The rest of seed I never germinated. Mr S Mr. D had not a single spud. So we are the only people on the Crossing eating our own potatoes now. We won't have any to sell but expect to have a few to spare for seed. I consider I can beat anybody around here in potato culture and I bar none.   Mr. Somerville is the man who has started cheese and butter making in P. Johnston's old place. He makes a fairly good article in cheese but the butter is not A1. Mr. Johnston has removed to the block north of ours and has taken that paddock into his own hands again (Hamilton had it) and intends going into sheep once more after shearing. Hamilton now holds only 970 acres on the Crossing so I would not be surprised should he throw this lot up also as it is less than half he had a year ago while he has still a man's wages to pay all the same. Should he not require ours I intend having a big try at fattening the lambs and putting them on the market and get a few more ewes to stock - the front block also.  I have not had any word from Bendigo for over a month. They were well then but trade was terribly bad and prices have been greatly cut [...] -   PS I have to again recommend you to try the leghorn fowls. Ours are white. - They are a big improvement on commons birds; even the first cross is much better than barndoors. I can assure you it means the difference between profit and loss. We have proved it beyond doubt. They are also hardy and good foragers. Kill off the common rubbish keep a few leghorns or at least - first cross; feed them well in winter with oats and wheat for the evening-meal potatoes with or without pollard or wheatmeal for mornings - warm and they will give it back again every penny. Common birds won't. [206]  Entally 5 March 1896  My Dear Wallop and Lottie  Ever since you drove away yesterday you have been hardly out of my mind and it was a grief to say "Goodbye" & when I saw Harrie with her companions meet you & cheer as you passed the gate I had to swallow a lump. Your visit has been very pleasant & grateful to us. We miss you! I don't like to look at your room as I pass. I can hardly believe that you have been with us & gone. It's all so like a dreand Bless you both - I hope you had a quiet passage over last night. It was very peaceful here hardly any wind. What is your address in Sydney? Harrie & I hope to meet you on the 16th... I can't write any more. the house is dull. but we all miss you & wish you back with our very fond love to you both.  I am affectionately yours  Tho. Reibey.  DEAR MISS DYNON  I suppose it would do poor justice to the reputation my countrymen bear for courage - though in this case it may be called audacity - if I did not risk as so many others in other cases have with better or worse fortune done the inevitable question. The world is made up of incompatibles or rather contradictions; without the Union of opposites there would be no possibility of the average that makes progress. I am in most of the qualities that build a character at one pole you at the other; but your sex is born to redeem and Goodness Knows there is a big field for redemption in my case. Well you can well think that I am for once at all events in my life in a bit of a muddle. I have written pamphlets leading articles essays etc. by the mile but never before put in writing the impertinence of a proposal of marriage. And this has to be done at the table of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales with the Federal Convention sitting and Mr. Lyne within a yard of me pouring on the too-thinly-protected top of my head a niagra of figures. However I must attempt it.  Well Dear Miss Dynon to be candid which indeed is my dearest desire. I heard of you six or seven years ago and from what a lady who knew you well said of you then I know if on meeting you I did not feel it instinctively that you are as deserving of the reputation you bear as I am under the Estimate many or rather some of my generous friends in Kindness form of me. [121] I say this because it will tell you at once that I cannot possibly misunderstand you. You unfortunately - or rather perhaps fortunately for myself - know little of me; that is outside my reputation as a public man. But as far as I can say it I feel I am a Bohemian in temperament fond of the softer - I don't like to say poetic - side of life; liable like many of my too romantic country men to extremes of spirit by no means correct as the world goes but at all events capable of discerning if not following the Right. The girl that takes me will deserve an indulgence - a dispensation from purgatory so that I may have at least a negative recommendation.  But I find with my usual want of pluck in matters outside my line I am becoming all preface. The Sum of it all is this if you consent to marry me Miss Dynon you will for the sacrifice deserve Heaven and probably save me from somewhere else. May I ask you to do so. I am by no means well off - but why should I say that to you - but I can and do work and though if I may use the term for the Sake of its expressiveness devil-may-care in most matters will try under the great responsibility to become financially orthodox I don't care the proverbial rap for the Ceremonial side of life.  If you consent to become my wife - a great word - why should we not be married at once. It will have the advantage for me that the matter will be inevitably settled before you know too much of me. It is a great occasion here. I have plenty of friends here now and though a bit of a reprobate in Religion an aunt Superioress of the Sisters of St Joseph who would back me up if necessary. And she reminds me of one who gives a relative merit to her son. I have a Mother that apart from prejudice I can from the bottom of my heart say is as my aunt said on Sunday a saint if ever a woman who is no narrow puritan can be one. I never yet met a man or woman that did not respect her disposition; an able self-sacrificing as well as thoroughly human and feminine woman.  If you have me I can honestly promise you to give you no divided heart and to live no double life. You will know me for good or bad as I am.  Well if you will bless me I will with your consent go for you on Friday marry on Saturday and return same day. If you will come - anyhow I wish you would - over at once so much the better. We can be married on the arrival of the train. My friend Mr. O'Malley will give me away; I hope he has not done so already. This is a lot to ask but the occasion is my great excuse. I am not my own master now - we are the servants of the Nation and its destinies. Besides as I said I know you thoroughly - and after we can call one another wife and husband; well what does the unorthodox way of settling the bond matter.  In Hopes of a reply that will enable me to really begin to live I am Dear Miss Dynon  YOUR ADMIRER AND FRIEND UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES / P. MCM. GLYNN  Friday Jan. 1. - There being no feed. at "Ngowallarra" we were obliged to continue on to-day although the camels in their present condition would have benefited by a day's rest. Now travelling direct for "Tallingurr" rock-hole we made a start at 6 a.m. My camel is still unfit to be ridden; I found difficulty in getting him along even by leading him. From sunrise we experienced a suffocating heat and I found the eight (8) miles walk over the sand as much as I could stand. Camped at 10 a.m. as usual on poor feed - a species of stunted broad-leaved wattle bush (acacia) and a few Leichardt trees.  Saturday Jan. 2. - Continuing on same course Bejah and self riding and walking in turn and still leading the weakest camel we reached "Taffingurr" at 10 a.m. and found that since we were last here there had been a good thunderstorm. The rock-hole we had cleansed out was full of delicious water and there was abundance of young green grass on the flat which the camels eat eagerly.  Making the native boy a few presents I liberated him and told him he might go if be wished Bejah is under the impression that he will stay with us and accompany us to the river but I am doubtful of this for we are now on the boundary of his country.  Sunday Jan. 3. - The native boy slept by the fire last night but this morning he had fled.  Leaving "Tallingurr" at sunrise we travelled direct for the claypan found in November by myself and Trooper Pilmer reaching it at twelve (12) miles. We found sufficient water for the camels and also a little feed.  Monday Jan. 4. - Now bearing North 10deg. East we travelled direct to the spot where I left water in a pair of kegs on the 19th November. We reached it at nine (9) miles. Taking the kegs we then travelled four and a-half miles further reaching "Kammamarra Spring" at noon. Here we got for the camels the first good feed since leaving "Kallaida" Cattle Station last month.  Tuesday Jan. 5. - Getting away early and now clear of the sandridges and porcupine we travelled to "Kalhaida" a distance of about twenty-two (22) miles.  Wednesday Jan. 6. - Travelled between river flats and spurs from the St. George Range to avoid flooded ground and numerous billabongs.  Camped at fifteen (15) miles.  Thursday Jan. 7. - Travelled about twenty (20) miles camping on the bank of a large creek emptying into the Fitzroy River. [48]  Friday Jan. 8. - Travelled to Christmas Creek crossing at the same point as on our outward trip. Did twenty (20) miles for day.  Saturday Jan. 9. - Reached Mt. Campbell (" Gogo" Cattle Station) and were kindly received by Mr. Livingstone who expressed sympathy for us in our disappointment.  A terrific storm occurred during the night hasting about an hour; four inches of rain fell.  Travelled fifteen (15) miles for day.  Sunday Jan. 10.- - Owing to the rain and the boggy nature of the country we were unable to move to-day.  Monday Jan. 11. - With difficulty and after bogging the camels in attempting to cross a creek we managed to reach the Telegraph Station at seven (7) miles.  Sent lengthy report of our trip and adventures to Adelaide.  The rainy season having set in it will be impossible to move from here for some weeks; but the camels will now improve in condition as feed will come on fast.  From Jan. 12 to Feb. 20. - Camped at Telegraph Station Upper Fitzroy. In constant telegraphic communication with Mr. A. T. Magarey. During this time twenty (20) inches of rain fell the country being in a state of flood. The camels have all become in excellent order and are fit to encounter the desert.  From Feb. 21 to March 14. - Having telegraphed my readiness and wish to again continue the search for our friends I was detained by advice from Adelaide to the effect that it was considered probable that our friends had been in the vicinity of the Oakover and advising me not to start until Mr. Rudall's return when it was expected that the mystery of their whereabouts would be cleared up.  Monday March 15. - As Mr. Rudall has returned unsuccessful I have decided to continue the search.  Tuesday March 16. - Preparing for further search for our friends.  The camels are all in good condition with the exception of one animal that has been unwell for some time. He appears to have been slightly poisoned. [49] [...]  1897.  Wednesday March 17. - Left the Telegraph Station at noon accompanied by Mr. Keartland Trainor Bejah Said Ameer and a native boy " Sandy" and travelled to the Police Station five (5) miles distant where we crossed the Fitzroy River. On arrival I found that the police and trackers had left for the "Oscar Range" Station the scene of a murder and about six (6) miles distant. A notorious outlaw named "Pigeon" who was at one time a black tracker had with his gang shot and speared a white man named Thomas Jasper a man I had met in Queensland in 1885. This is the fourth white man this native has murdered. Equipped with firearms he has been at large about two (2) years.  Thursday March 18. - The trooper not having returned I was unable to get a tracker from him so have arranged for a native boy called "Dick" to accompany us with the hope that by having the two for company to one another they may stay with us after we leave the river.  A messenger has returned from the scene of the murder and states that the police have shot four (4) of "Pigeon's" gang but that "Pigeon" himself escaped with a Winchester rifle.  Friday March 19. - Left Police Camp. Passing Blythe's Cattle Station and following a track keeping out from the river we cut the main road to Derby at nine (9) miles and followed same for seven (7) miles camping on the bank of the River.  Saturday March 20. - Travelled to "Quanbun" Station distance fifteen (15) miles. The weather is still very hot and the camels as yet are rather soft after their long spell.  Sunday March 21 . - Waiting arrival of telegraphic messages from Mr. A. T. Magarey in accordance with his wishes.  During the evening a native and his gin arrived with the expected messages.  Monday March 22. - Sent the native messenger on return journey to the Telegraph Station with replies to telegrams. Left "Quanbun" at 7 a.m. travelling along the road for 17 miles and camping at a small bluebush swamp.  Tuesday March 23. - Travelled for thirteen (13) miles and reached "Noonkanbah" Station. Here I wrote letters to Adcock Bros. Derby and to Faiz and Tagh Mahomet of Geraldton arranging for Said Ameer to return to Geraldton via Derby. I also sent a telegram to Mr. A. T. Magarey asking him to arrange for payment of wages due to Said Ameer whom I shall not require and am therefore sending back to Geraldton.  Shortly after our arrival here a native messenger from Upper Liverynga Station brought a letter from Mr. Rose to the effect that Mr. Gregory of "Gregory's Station" had brought news from the natives at his station that two (2) white men were seen beyond Mt. Arthur some time ago by desert natives and these reported that one (1) white man and one (1) camel were then alive and the other white man and one (1) camel were dead; also that the surviving white man had killed and eaten a native. Sent telegraph message to Adelaide to this effect and have now decided to proceed at once to Gregory's Station to investigate the report.  Wednesday March 24. - We experienced some difficulty in crossing the river this morning; the banks were steep and the cutting was damaged by the floods. Having lost two (2) hours in crossing we then travelled to "Kallaida" hut and saw Mr. Mills who gave me directions for the best route to Gregory's Station in order to avoid billabongs and flooded ground.  Travelled eight (8) miles from "Noonkanbah."  Thursday March 25. - Travelled along open plains and river flats for twelve (12) miles and rested during the middle of the day under an enormous baobab tree the first I have seen. The trunk afforded good shade for us all. [50] Continued. on during the afternoon and camped at twenty (20) miles for the day at a small stockyard on the bank of a billabong.  Friday March 26. - Continued on over low sandstone ridges and patches of porcupine noting many large baobab trees. Passing through a fence at ten (10) miles we entered "Myada" Run resting at fifteen (15) miles at a large lagoon. Resuming our journey during the afternoon we passed a boundary rider's hut camping near the head station at twenty-two (22) miles.  Saturday March 27. - Called at the station for directions and travelled to Gregory's Station (17 miles).  The native who brought the news regarding the whites seen by desert natives is absent at Derby but Mr. Gregory informs me he expects him back daily. I questioned other natives here and they corroborate "Peter's" statement but say they have only heard it through him. As there are no natives here who know the desert country or could speak to the natives there Mr. Gregory strongly advises me to await the return of Peter who will be able to accompany me.  Sunday March& 2&. - At Gregory's Station getting all possible information from natives here.  Monday Mai-eh 29. - The native "Peter" returned from Derby during the afternoon. He states that be was amongst the first tribe of desert natives beyond Mt. Arthur (during the wet weather) from whence he came as a child with his mother and that the desert natives told him about the white men but he did not learn where they were last seen. He says the white man living was at a water called "Ngowallarra." This water no doubt is the identical one visited by Buchanan and myself in December during our search and I am doubtful of the veracity of the report. I believe the natives were referring to myself and Buchanan as the two (2) white men seen by them. Peter seems very hazy regarding that part of the statement which dealt with the killing of a native and the death of a white man.  Tuesday March 30. - Making a start from Gregory's Station at 8 a.m. and taking with us the native "Peter" and two (2) friends to accompany him on his return we travelled up Nerrima Creek for ten (10) miles camping on a good water-hole. There are many large baobab trees here; we measured one and the circumference of the trunk was sixty (60) feet  Wednesday March 31.- - Generally following along the channel of the creek which is very crooked. Passed some fair water-holes camping about three (3) miles from Mt. Arthur which lies to the South-West of camp.  Travelled twenty (20) miles for day. Mr. Keartland was fortunate enough to bag a brace of turkeys just before camping.  Thursday April 1. - Continued on up the channel. At five (5) miles we came to some springs one of which is very fresh and there are some peculiar-looking trees growing in close proximity to the water and around the springs where the soil is very black and spongy and covered with a thick mat of springy grass. The water is slightly warm and the springs are a little above the level of the surrounding country. I believe these waters are artesian. They are situated about five (5) or six (6) miles to the South-East of Mount Arthur and I believe the first white man to visit them was Mr. John Collins of the "Oscar Range" Station after whom I have named them.  This would be an excellent spot at which to plant the seeds of the date palm but we have none to spare as I purpose planting what few I have further afield. Finding we would lose time in waiting to fill our kegs here I returned one (1) mile to the last fresh water-hole seen as we came along gave all the camels water and made another start. Travelling about South from the springs for four (4) miles we rested during the hottest part of the day. During the afternoon we continued on for nine (9) miles Peter acting as pilot arriving at a native well at 5.50 p.m.  Travelled eighteen (18) miles for day. Mt. Arthur bears from here about North 350deg. East. I believe this well would give a good supply if dug out but at present we are not in need of water.  Friday April 2. - For the first mile Peter took us on a bearing of North 200deg. East to a small claypan which the natives had been scooping out at some time or other. Watered camels here then bearing North £46deg. East we travelled for seven (7) miles reaching two remarkable hills one with a crown at the top and the other flat-topped. Peter calls this place "Joal Joal" (Oraven Ord Hill). Mt. Tuckfleed (A. Forrest) bears 75deg. East.  Now bearing on the same course for a group of flat-topped hills which we reached at four and a half (4 1/2) miles from "Joal Joal." Rested here during the beat the sandridges being still very hot and trying for the camels. This range which is of desert sandstone extends East-South-East for about two (2) miles. Continuing our course until 6 p.m. we reached the end of a range of detached sandstone hillocks feed here poor and scanty for the camels. Travelled six (6) miles for the afternoon or eighteen and a-half (18 1/2) miles for the day.  After dark we noticed a fire on a high elevation bearing South-Easterly probably the result of natives burning the porcupine a daily occurrence with all these natives of the Great Sandy Desert. It enables them to track game more readily and reduces the area of shelter for the porcupine wallabies.  Saturday April 3 - The camels did badly here and tried to make off during the night.  Started at 6.20 a.m. now bearing for fire seen hast evening North 130deg. East for one and a-half (1 1/2) miles through hillocks of sandstone and sandridges when a smoke rose on a bearing of North 154deg. East. Altering our course for this we travelled for three and a-half (3 1/2) miles when Peter from a sandridge said he could see some natives about a mile in advance coming in our direction.  Keeping the camels out of sight behind the sandridge we waited. until the natives had come within half-a-mile of us. Peter took off his clothes and with his mates went to meet them. I told him to explain that we were friendly and were looking for our friends. [51] At a signal from Peter we crossed the sandridge and went to meet them.  Peter acting as interpreter questioned them and found they knew nothing of the death of any white men. I recognise one of these of which there are four (4) young men and a boy as the identical native Mr. Buchanan and self made the acquaintance of at "Tallingurr Rock Water" and who afterwards ran away from us at "Waddru Well." Through Peter I explained that I wanted two (2) of them to accompany me Southwards to the next tribe that I would not molest any of the natives and that I wanted to find two (2) white men who were lost; that if they would accompany me and get a native from the next tribe to the Southward I would give them a tomahawk and a knife and feed them. The one who had before been with me and another whom he says is "Mabu" which means good or quiet have agreed to go with us. They state that they are at present camped at "Tallingurr."  Travelling due South we cut the old camel pad of December and January last and followed same to "Tallingurr" which we reached at three (3) miles having travelled eight (8) miles for day. There were a number of older natives at this water also women and children.  I decided to camp and allow the camels to take advantage of a little feed around here endeavouring to get in the meantime some more information from these natives. They state that they have not been to "Ngowallarra" since I was last there and have heard nothing of the report that any other whites had been there. They also affirm that no white men except my party and my search expedition with Mr. Buchanan have ever been through their country but that several parties of whites had passed by the head of "Jurgurra Creek" travelling in the direction of Le Grange Bay. I made these inquiries because of Mr. Isdale's statement to the effect that he had travelled from Mt. Dockrell in the Kimberley District to Joanna Spring and thence to the Oakover. On inquiry on the Fitzroy River I ascertained that Isdale and party after leaving Mt. Dockrell called at Fossil Downs Station or the Margaret River and were afterwards camped between the St. George Bange and the Fitzroy eventually turning up on the coast a little below Le Grange Bay. I think Mr. Isdale must have mistaken Joanna Spring for some other water a considerable distance from it. In a letter of his to Mr. John Collins which I read and in which Mr. Isdale gives a description of the country he says that the sandridges are all running North and South. The true bearing of all these sandridges is 20deg. above West and below East between here and Joanna Spring.  Sunday April 4. - Having watered all the camels I allowed Peter and his mates to return to their country sending a note with them to Mr. Gregory. With our new acquaintances we left the rock-hole for "Tanndulha Well." In some of the flats I noted a fine species of soft grass growing amongst the porcupine. We reached the well at 11 a.m. at ten (10) miles resting the camels until the afternoon; travelled then on to "Dillawuddi Rock-hole" reaching it at four (4) miles. We found it about half-full of water containing in all about 200 gallons. Camped here on a little good feed around the water and old native encampments.  Travelled for day fourteen (14) miles.  Monday April 5. - Making a start at 6.25 a.m. we travelled direct for "Ngowallarra Well" reaching it at seven (7) miles at 10 a.m. Apparently no one has been here since Mr. Buchanan and I left in January last. I am now convinced that the report circulated by the natives was in reference to our visit. I marked a Leichardt tree four (4) chains West of the well "L.A.W. 8." The latitude I make 19deg. 18min. 26sec. South.  Tuesday April 6. - The camels did fairly well on the little feed around the water.  Leaving a pair of empty cases here we started at 8.50 a.m. for "Waddru Well" reaching it at twelve (12) miles at noon. Resting for two (2) hours we allowed the camels to feed on a little soft herbage around the water. I believe permanent water will be found here by deepening this well and timbering it the drift sand being very troublesome at the bottom. Travelled five (5) miles during the afternoon and reached "Kulga-ngunn-ngunn." Noticed that the flats were low and the limestone outcropping before reaching this spot.  Travelled for day seventeen (17) miles. Found camp and well as we had left them last January.  Marked a tree about eight (8) chains West of well at camp "L.A.W. 7." This is one of several specimens of fine Leichardt trees to which I have previously referred. The latitude of previous observation is 19deg. 32min. 48sec. South.  If we can manage to avoid the poison plant the camels will do well on some soft herbage and grass on a small space around the water.  Wednesday April 7. - Cleaned out the hole watered all camels and filled kegs. Planted date stones in the two (2) large excavations made by the natives. This is undoubtedly a good water and is apparently of a permanent nature. As far as we can judge the rainfall has been very light during the wet season whilst we were on the river and I think not more than two or three inches have fallen here. These natives point on a bearing of North 205deg. East for "Terniakka" another water over which we were puzzled on our last Search Expedition.  Thursday April 8. - Starting early over innumerable sandridges and porcupine we reached the water a rock-hole at six (6) miles. The natives state that they do not know the country any further to the South and are anxious to go West. Fortunately seeing some smoke about due South I informed them I was going that way and asked whether they would come with me reminding them of the promised tomahawk. They however seemed somewhat disinclined to accompany me and on our starting they walked in the rear instead of in advance as before.  Bearing North 175deg. East we travelled for six (6) miles Camping for two (2) hours then resuming our march crossing countless ridges of sand and hummocks our old friends the desert gums becoming numerous as we advanced and Leichardt trees appeared in the flats. [52] We travelled seven (7) miles further and camped at 19 miles for the day.  Latitude £9deg. 49min. 48sec. South.  Friday April 9. - Continued on same bearing for one and a-half (1 1/2) miles when we came to some recently-burnt patches of porcupine and shortly afterwards to a fresh track of a native going in a North-West direction. The two (2) native boys immediately ran off along the tracks whilst we crossed over a sandridge. Here Sandy saw a gin creeping under a bush. She was very frightened and Sandy had to pull her out by the leg. I said "Napa" to her whereupon he pointed South-Easterly for the water. We started with her in this direction Sandy heading her by the arm until he saw another gin on a sandridge whom he immediately made off after. The other one then attempted to get away and I was obliged to run her down with my camel. She then took us to the water which was a mile and a-half on this course. There were two (2) old women in camp and they set up a wail as we approached crying "Mabu." This is a soakage well called "Tchundurtu" by the natives. There is very little water in it so it is of no use to us. Trying to explain to one of the old gins that I wanted water for the camels she pointed in several directions one of which was about South-South-West and called it "Kalunngalong." On my telling her that one of them must come and show us the water they both discovered that they were footsore. I noticed that one of them wore a peculiar-looking pair of shoos made from bark. We then told the young gin whom we had captured that she must come with us. She protested crying and pointing out a canoe-shaped piece of bark in which there was a dead child. It was bound round with strips of bark and she was evidently carrying it about with her. However the old lady gave her a piece of her mind and she then prepared for the journey. This did not take many seconds as she was not over fastidious about her wardrobe which consisted of a yam stick. Sandy walking with her we had just started when we heard a call and saw the two (2) native boys running towards us accompanied by another rather tall and well-built native. They had tracked him up and brought him to us for an introduction. He informed me that his name was "Lirmi" and that he was "Mabu" and I told him we wanted water. The old gins said something to him whereupon he suggested going South-East but I struck out for "Kalunngalong" believing from the direction that it would be Joanna Spring. Telling the gin she could stay tho native who was evidently her lord and master threw her two porcupine wallabies and started off first bearing North 240deg. East for three (3) miles when we reached another well adjacent to a flat of cork-bark trees. This well may be a good one if dug out but it is twelve (12) or fifteen (15) foot deep at present and but little water can be obtained from it. It was very hot and the natives did not like walking over the burning sand; they wanted to stop at this well which is called "Yellingaggidi" but explaining that this was no good for camels I induced them to go on. Now bearing North 205deg. East for "Kalunngalong" we crossed over high drift sandridges and narrow flats for four (4) miles resting for two (2) hours during the middle of the day.  In endeavouring to find out what sort of a water we were now going to the natives from the Northern tribe whom we could better understand explained on inquiry from "Lirmi" that it was a spring water "Tcharramarra." Two (2) more natives followed us up and were peeping at us over a sandridge but perceiving that we had seen them they ran off.  Pushing on during the afternoon the natives running ahead and standing in any shade they could find to avoid the hot sand we crossed over wretched country consisting of high and steep sandridges desert gums and porcupine for the whole distance.  The camels knocked up and we were compelled to divide the load of one animal amongst the others. We reached a valley in the lowest part of which are some samphire flats with loose earth and tea-tree. These flats are called "Kalunngalong" on the Southern side of which at dusk we came to a water in a large hole with shelving limestone sides and a Pool in the centre having travelled nine (9) miles since halting or nineteen (19) miles for the day. The natives call this water" Biggarong" and say a short distance to the Eastward some natives are camped at another water. There is a miniature claypan surrounded by samphire immediately on the East of this beautiful water. At the other water which is under a shelf of limestone and is but a small hole which one would pass by without notice called by the natives "Griinng" were two (2) more natives with two (2) women and two (2) children. This water is in a samphire lead and the soil is black with a springy grass similar to that seen at other springs to the North of the desert. This water is about half a mile to the Eastward of "Biggarong." Searching about this vicinity I could find no traces such as dry horse dung or anything else to indicate that whites had ever been here; but about ten (10) chains South-Easterly from "Biggarong" is a large Leichardt tree the rough bark on the trunk of which showed the outline of a diamond in shape as though the tree had been blazed and overgrown for many years. There is little doubt in my mind but that this is Joanna Spring. Probably this is the tree where Colonel Warburton camped during his distress in 1873.  I have been careful not to question the natives about dead white men before we got to this water being afraid of scaring them; however will do so to-morrow. Sent all the natives including the boys from the Northern tribe to camp at "Griinug" for the night telling them to come back for breakfast.  By observation I find the latitude here 20deg. 4min. 56sec. South the approximate longitude being 124deg. 7min. East. The rainfall has been light here; the grass is quite dry but there is a little green herbage.  Saturday April 10. - The natives came to camp early this morning and we noticed that one of them wore a girdle of native string over which hung a piece of tweed the exact pattern of a pair of trousers my cousin had taken with him when he left me. Without asking questions I took hold of the tweed when "Lirmi" said "Purrunng white fellow " pointing in a Westerly direction. The other natives repeated this laughing in which I joined so that they should not be suspicious. I asked if there was one white man dead (" Untu white fellow purrunng ") when they all replied "Kutharra purrunng" holding up two fingers. Pointing to the sun they said " Para white fellow purrunng" thus informing me that the sun had killed them. They then tried to explain something by passing their hands over their legs arms and cheeks. [53] From what I could understand they were trying to explain that they have been dead for a long while and nothing but bones remain. I believe we are on the right track for discovering our poor friends but I am afraid they have perished long ago. Even had they found water I feel they could not have survived such a terrible summer in the heat of this frightful wilderness. From what I can gather from these natives they are at or near a water called "Kaddawich."  This morning in accordance with my agreement I gave a tomahawk and a knife to the two (2) natives who had accompanied me from the Northern tribes and had fulfilled their mission as they promised. They are anxious to return to their own country and do not seem quite at home amongst these natives apparently speaking but little of their language.  "Lirini" and another of this tribe have offered to show us the dead men and I have promised them a tomahawk and knife for their services.  Mr. Keartland shot a hawk and four (4) pigeons giving the former to the natives who appeared greatly taken with the gun. Although they plucked and roasted the hawk they were evidently afraid to eat it for one of my boys discovered it after they had gone to camp for the night.  I have arranged with the two natives of this tribe "Kammarra" to come to camp at daylight for breakfast as we make our start to-morrow.  I marked a Leichardt tree about eight (8) chains South-East of the water "L.A.W. 9."  Mr. Keartland and myself in endeavouring to remove the bark and young wood from the tree we supposed had been blazed found the whole of the old growth decayed with dry rot and a large hollow inside the tree which afterwards fell down. I felt disappointed. as I had hoped to get some conclusive proof that this tree had been marked many years ago. The natives point East-South-East for another water which I understand is not far distant but is only a soakage in sand. This may also have been one of the waters visited by Colonel Warburton.  Sunday April 11. - As the natives did not put in an appearance this morning Bejah and I walked over to the camp at Griinng and found that they had all decamped last night. This is most disappointing. I cannot understand why they have done so. It is possible that the shooting last evening scared them or they were afraid for some reason to take us to the spot. The latter I fancy was the cause for they appeared greatly taken with the gun. Last evening before leaving us four (4) of them the two who had accompanied us thus far from the North and the two who were to have gone on with us to-day came to me and putting their hands on my shoulders kept repeating something in a sympathetic tone which I was at a loss to understand. I almost wish now that I had broken my promise and chained one of these fellows up to make sure of a guide. However as it is we must do the best we can for ourselves for I see little prospect of getting near any others.  I have now determined to give the camels the benefit of another day here hoping that the natives may come back to us.  Mr. Keartland and Bejah are keeping the larder well supplied with bronzewing and crested pigeons and galahs.  Monday April 12. - Having watered the camels and filled the kegs three parts full we left the spring at 7.45 a.m. bearing North 265deg. East. We crossed high country which extends North-East and South-West but the sandridges covering all still keep their bearing of North 290deg. East. Looking back at five (5) miles I noticed that the spring valley has high country on all sides the sandridges rising higher and higher as one leaves the water.  After ten (10) miles travelling we rested during the hottest part of the day having previously seen a smoke to the South-West apparently not far distant.  During the afternoon we travelled seven (7) miles Camping at seventeen (17) miles for the day on miserable feed for the camels.  Latitude 20deg. 6min. 56sec. South.  We kept a sharp look-out in the hope of finding some old tracks of natives which might lead us to the dead men.  Tuesday April 13. - Now bearing North 270deg. East we travelled for nine (9) miles without finding any tracks although we had passed over my route of October last where there was a pad made by fifteen (15) camels without seeing it. Rain and drift sand have completely hidden it.  Ascending a high sandridge I saw a smoke bearing North 137deg. East and altering our course for this we travelled four (4) miles camping at midday under some desert gums for two (2) hours; then resuming at 2 a.m. we travelled for five (5) miles further and came upon the fresh footprints of a native going in our direction. We followed these tracks for a mile when it began to get late so I determined. to camp fearing to get too close to the camp of the natives and thus perhaps scaring them off. They might also hear the camel bells if we were too near. Whilst we were busy unpacking I sent Sandy to run the tracks for three or four sandridges further in advance with instructions not to go too far but to see if there was a native camp anywhere in our vicinity.  Sandy returned very excited and said that the camp was close ahead and that he had seen two (2) blackfellows and he thought some women and children sitting under a tree. Thinking they might discover our presence before we could get to them in the morning I decided to walk over with Bejah and the two (2) natives Sandy and Dick and take one of them. We walked about a mile and Sandy then told me they were in the next flat. We crept up to near the top of the sandridge and looking over I could see two blackfellows about fifteen (15) chains distant and the heads of some others which Sandy said he thought were women. I made the boys strip off their clothes and show themselves on the sandridge and call out. I saw the natives were puzzled for the skin of the boys wearing clothes was dark and shiny whilst the wild natives have a lighter-coloured skin. Waiting a few seconds Bejah and myself showed ourselves whereupon several women and children panic-stricken fled for the next sandridge and seven men armed to the teeth with spears boomerangs and waddies came out into the open and threw out a challenge calling "Yarra" "Yarra." [54] Bejah suggested going back for Mr. Keartland and Trainor whilst the two boys said "Look out boss him sulky fellow." Telling Bejah that if we ran away now they would come after us with spears I began an approach with Bejah about two (2) chains behind me and the boys bringing up the rear.  Bejah was very excited calling to me not to get too close to them as their spears were shipped As we approached the natives became more excited yelling furiously but when I got within a hundred yards they began to retreat backwards still shaking their spears. Then I called to them in a pacific manner "Mabu" "Mabu" and holding up my hand they halted for a moment and one of them stood his ground whilst the others still retreated. Going up to him I patted him on the back and taking hold of his spears made him put them on the ground. The others then approached but would not put their weapons down until I took hold of them and made them do so. They then began to feel my arms and catching hold of my rifle made a most horrible sound with their tongues and rattled their lips in astonishment. Bejah was most excited and kept calling to me not to let them get too close as I should not be able to shoot them. I had difficulty in keeping him quiet and was afraid he would shoot me as his gun was full cock. Three (3) of the natives attempted to get on terms with him but he kept them off with the muzzle of the gun.  Seeing two (2) plates a quart-pot tomahawk a piece of iron and clothing I pointed to them and said "purrunng whitefellow" to which they assented. Asking them for water they pointed to a well and invited me to go down it. I told them I had come from "Biggarong" which they all repeated laughing. I asked them about dead white men but at that they grew sulky and pushing me gently said" Bah! Bah!" This which I understand meant "Go" they afterwards did repeatedly. I tried to persuade them to come over to our camp for food (" Myi") but they decided and were only anxious for me to go away. They would not talk about our friends although I am certain they know of their whereabouts. I was at a loss to know what to do. To have taken one of these fellows would have meant in all probability a struggle and the use of firearms which I felt loth to have recourse to without proof that a murder had been committed. Determining to leave them on friendly terms I made up my mind to return to camp and come over in the morning and to further investigate as it was then nearly dusk. Not risking leaving in their possession the evidence I saw I made my boys pick up the various things we recognised as ours. When Dick picked up the tomahawk the natives demurred but I told them it was ours and belonged to "purrunng whitefellow." After we had got a hundred yards from them they began to call out something I could not understand but on turning round and facing them they ceased and merely watched us until we got over the sandridge. From the spot where I first saw these natives I picked up a geological sketch map of the Colony which was presented to me at Cue and which I had given my cousin for his guidance. It has some pencil memoranda in my writing. This plan was lying near an old wurley which had been used by the natives some months since. There were no tracks of any description about the spot and the map must have been there for some considerable time. Returning to camp we surprised Mr. Keartland and Trainor by relating our adventures and showing what we had found. Tied camels up for night and kept watch all night in turn one white and one black at a time. This is the first time I have considered it necessary to watch but I felt we were not quite safe with these fellows.  Wednesday April 14. - Yesterday one of the natives encountered showed me a wound in his arm as though a hole had been made right through it. He said something about "whitefellow" and pointed to the wound. In my opinion he has either shot himself with a stolen revolver or else has been fired at.  Packing the camels at daylight we went over to the well and instituted a thorough search. The well is a poor soakage and would only contain water for a little while after rain. There were no signs of whites having been here; no tree marked or camel dung lying about the flat. We found quantities of hoop-iron from water kegs a pack bag in the fork of a tree containing some hobble-rings and an old felt hat pieces of clothing etc. which we recognised as the property of my cousin and Mr. Jones pieces of iron from riding-saddle and a portion of a rib from between the barrels of a gun. This latter is new and I think taken from a new gun I had lent Mr. Jones for the trip.  I marked a Leichardt tree where we found the pack bag about fifteen (15) chains North-East of the well "L.A.W. 10."  Thinking matters over I have come to the conclusion that there has been foul play. The desertion of the Joanna Spring natives the meeting with these warlike fellows and the evidence of the goods in their possession several of which articles I can swear to as being part of my cousin's outfit together with the hole through the arm of the native and the unwillingness of them all to discuss the matter with me all point in favour of such a supposition.  Having spent half the morning in fruitless search I decided to travel direct for Joanna Spring the camels being in need of water. Bearing North 57deg. East we travelled 11 miles camping on poor feed as usual.  Thursday April 15. - Continuing on the same course we cut our outward pad at five (5) miles and following the same Easterly for 4 1/2 miles we reached Joanna Spring. I found placed on a clump of porcupine right on our camel pad two (2) boomerangs. These had evidently been placed there by a native after we had left on the 12th inst. There may be a meaning in this.  Friday April 16. - Yesterday on arrival the camels drank a great quantity of the water which is perfectly fresh though hard for washing without reducing the level. There is any quantity of water here. [55]  On a sand ridge to the Eastward of the water I discovered wider two (2) bushes two (2) bundles of native implements (" bull roarers") each bundle lying on some dry leaves evidently recently placed there with a view of keeping them from the ravages of white ants. They were each about eighteen (18) inches long flat and rounded off at the ends with a hole at one end. These are used in connection with some of the mystic ceremonies of the natives and I have been before informed by the natives that women must not see them. They were curiously marked and most if not all were of different patterns. They ranged in appearance from about new to very old ones. The two separate bundles suggest the idea that they belong to members of two different families. I ascertained that as in other parts they are divided into four (4) families by which division their marriage laws are guided. I took possession of several of the best made implements. Sandy says they are used in connection with the initiation of young men and that one of these is used for each young man during the ceremony. He says the older "bull roarers" belong to the old men. Apparently these are kept sacred as a record and for use during these ceremonies. I hope the loss of those I have taken will not mean anything serious to the desert natives.  Leaving Joanna Spring at 6.50 a.m. we followed our pad of the 12th inst. for seventeen (17) miles camping at our former halting place.  Saturday April 17. - In the hope of finding some old tracks of natives or traces which would lead us to the spot where our friends have perished I started with Bejah and Sandy to examine the country in this neighbourhood. We travelled South-South-West for two (2) miles when we saw numbers of flocks of small finches flying to the North-North-East thence one (1) mile Easterly where we found some old tracks of a native which I left Sandy to run Bejah and I travelling in the direction the birds were flying viz. North-Easterly for five (5) miles without success although I feel sure there is a water in this direction not far distant. Making a detour we returned to camp in five (5) miles Sandy returning shortly afterwards having followed the tracks a mile or two and then losing them as they became too old.  Travelled for this morning thirteen (13) miles.  Left camp during the afternoon with the whole of the party. We are now bearing North 32deg. East keeping a sharp look-out for water and making the native boys keep watch for old tracks. We passed over rather low flats at five (5) miles and noted some sandstone outcrops. At seven (7) mules Sandy ran some old tracks to a native soakage well twelve (12) feet deep but not at all promising as regards water and with not a bite in the vicinity for the camels. Travelled from here due North through wretched country - mallee porcupine and desert gums - for three (3) miles when we found a few Leichardt trees so I decided to camp having travelled ten (10) miles or twenty-three (23) miles for the day.  The only smokes seen since our last adventure with the natives were some which rose to-day far distant to the North-West.  This evening we saw some cockatoos flying South-South-West. I feel sure we passed a good water about five (5) miles back.  It is my intention to proceed North-Westerly in the direction of smokes seen in the slight hope of meeting with natives; but I feel that I lost my chance in not securing one of those we met at any hazard If unsuccessful to-morrow I will travel direct for Jurgurra Creek and follow it down to the Fitzroy River going thence to Derby with the view of getting horses with which to arrest some of the natives and compel them to take us to the spot which I feel confident is within a few miles of the well where we found the articles in possession of the natives. There will be no chance of getting near any now without the aid of a horse.  Sunday April 18. - Now bearing North 330deg. East over most wretched steep and red sandridges desert gums and porcupine. Rested at 11 miles and continued on during the afternoon but at sixteen (16) miles for the day we were compelled to camp on a burnt flat where there were a few bushes. The day was intensely hot and the camels were knocked up. Being very thirsty they attempted to clear out this evening so we were compelled to tie them up for the night. No animal could endure much of this class of country almost destitute of feed as it is. We found the sandridges very bad for the whole day's travel.  Monday April 19. - Making a very early start and pursuing the same course we found travelling a little improved. At seven (7) miles we met with cork-bark and tea-tree in the flats and finches flying  N.N.E. My camel was almost done up here and I was compelled to take him to the rear of the caravan giving Bejah directions from there.  The tea-tree flats continued on for two (2) miles when we came on some old wurleys on a sand ridge and crossing over found by accident a native well which looked very promising so I decided to stop and give it a trial. By noon we had a well twelve (12) feet deep of excellent water and apparently a large and permanent supply with drift sand at the top and soft sandstone in which the water is at bottom. The camels drank about seventy (70) buckets of water and the supply does not appear affected. There is some soft grass similar to that growing at the Springs near Mount Fenton and Mount Arthur. This is a most fortunate find for us for through the sudden collapse of the camels I fear we should have been compelled to abandon some of them before reaching Jurgurra Creek had we not found water.  Marked a Leichardt tree ten (10) chains North-West of the well "L.A.W. 11" and blazed another to the South-West.  Tuesday April 20. - Natives have evidently not visited this spot since last summer. Mr. Keartland and Bejah bagged a number of pigeons this morning. It is most remarkable how quickly birds find out where water is to be had. On our arrival yesterday there was us water nearer than nine (9) feet from the surface and the hole was almost filled with silt and quite dry. No birds were to be seen about here. To-day we have numbers of pigeons finches and a few doves. I believe these birds are like the crows and can either see or smell the smokes of the natives (who must always be on water) and are thereby guided. [56] From here some high sand hills are conspicuous to the West-North-West about one (1) mile distant and a bearing to the most Northern and apparently the highest of a group of three stony hills reads North 280deg. magnetic. These hills appear to be about twelve (12) miles distant. The bearing to the Northern portion of a low range reads North 305deg. East mag. thirteen (13) miles distant. These are the best landmarks for finding this water which I have named "Rescue Well."  It has been too cloudy to observe for latitude here.  Wednesday April 21. - -The camels are much improved and fresher. Got an early start now bearing North 307deg. East. Travelling is much better. Tea-tree flats occurred between the sand ridges for two miles but no desert gums. Came upon a few Leichardt trees and coarse acacia scrub. Saw native camping places and dry clay holes at eleven miles and at thirteen miles reached the low range seen yesterday. This is composed of sandstone hillocks partly capped with ironstone and clothed with porcupine. Altered bearing here to North 342deg. E. Gradually descending we passed some more hillocks on either side of which one to the Eastward is conspicuous from the North having three dark bushes or trees on its summit. Travelled nine (9) miles on this latter course or twenty-two (22) miles for the day. No feed as usual.  Thursday April 22. - Travelled on same course this morning. Reached at three (3) miles a high point where are sandstone hillocks capped with ironstone and partly covered with drift sand and at eight (8) miles lowest valley. Then followed desert gums also ant-hills porcupine coarse scrub of acacia and patches of grass all very dry for the time of year. At seven (7) miles we came upon recently-made tracks of natives and at fifteen (15) miles another high point a sandridge where there was an old wurley and soakage well. Then followed undulating desert gum country a few low sandridges coarse acacia and cork tree flats. Camped at twenty-two (22) miles and tied camels up at night.  Friday April 23. - We were off camp at 5 a.m. this morning. Ascended at three (3) miles a low tableland with valleys on either side of us clothed with desert gums and porcupine and then crossed the heft-hand valley and at five (5) miles reached a broken tableland full of water-channels and creeks and in endeavouring to get through these we lost a lot of time. Broken hills and conspicuous ranges extend for some miles to the East-South-East and. an apparently high tableland stretches away towards the North-West with a valley between it and us. We are now on the watershed of Jurgurra Creek. Numbers of small gum creeks bear North-Westerly. At ten (10) Miles rested in a valley for two (2) hours. At thirteen (13) Miles reached "Goorda Tower" (W.A. Survey Department) and at fourteen and a half (14 1/2) Miles the main channel of the creek which we followed down camping at twenty (20) miles for the day the camels getting a drink and some good feed. It was a great relief to get clear of those wretched sandridges.  Saturday April 24. - Bearing North-North-East we crossed the creek twice when it bore of to the Eastward. Continuing our course we passed "Babrongan Tower" an isolated hill with perpendicular walls and capped with a large square top. It forms a curious and conspicuous feature. At fourteen (14) miles altered course to E.N.E. and at seven (7) miles crossed the creek and camped on open grass plains.  Sunday April 25.- - Following creek over fair pastoral country we saw cattle the property of Mr. John Collins of Roebuck Downs.  Camped at twenty (20) miles.  Monday April 26. - Passed some cattle yards at four Miles on Roebuck Downs Station which was deserted. At fifteen (15) miles reached the River flats camping on a billabong.  Tuesday April 27. - Crossing numbers of billabongs and also the Fitzroy River we reached Mount Anderson Station where we struck the main road to Derby travelling thence to Liverynga Station.  Travelled eighteen (18) miles for day.  Wednesday April 28. - Travelled to "Yeeda Cattle Station" making twenty-five (25) Miles for day. Mr. Keartland had been very busy amongst the birds since reaching the good country.  Thursday April 29. - Travelled twenty (20) miles forming camp five (5) miles from Derby at "Mayall's Well." Mosquitoes are here night and day giving us a lively time.  Friday April 30. - Proceeded to Derby five (5) miles. Purchased supplies and returned to "Mayall's Well." Travelled ten (10) miles for day.  From May 1 to May 8. - Engaged in Derby forwarding and receiving telegraph messages and arranging to form another search expedition with camels and horses as without the latter for the purpose of running down the natives and forcing them to show us the spot where our friends have perished we can do nothing.  Eventually arranged for police assistance with black trackers and horses.  We are at present the guests of Mr. Craven Ord Sub-inspector of Police and Dr. House Government Resident. These gentlemen together with others in Derby have been most hospitable.  Sunday May 9. - S.S. "Australind" arrived from Singapore.  Saw Messrs. Keartland and Trainor of to Adelaide Mr. Keartland taking letters of advice vouchers and details of expenditure to date to deliver to Mr. A. T. Magarey. [57]  Monday May 10. - Sub-Inspector Ord and myself left Derby and driving by road reached Liverynga Station at fifty (50) miles.  Tuesday May 11. - Travelled via Mount Anderson to Gregory's Station where we were joined by Trooper Nicholson and black trackers; also police from Derby arrived.  Wednesday May 12. - Bejah and Sandy arrived with the camels from Upper Liverynga where the camels have been spelling. [58] [...]  Thursday May 13 1897. - Making preparation for start. Inquiring into various rumours about two (2) white men who were reported to have been in close proximity to this neighbourhood. Investigation proves these reports to be without foundation.  Friday May 14. - Started Bejah up Nerrima Creek. I myself accompanied Sub-Inspector Ord three (3) troopers and four (4) trackers in pursuit of some natives who were wanted for killing stock. Travelled South-West for eight (8) miles thence S.S.W. for thirteen (13) miles reaching an open grassy and samphire flat. Here we found two (2) springs about half a mile apart the largest where we camped is called by natives "Yallagudyne." We found a very large encampment here but the natives had all left during the last day or two.  Saturday May 15. - Passed the smaller spring at half-a-mile then went East for two (2) miles to a remarkable-looking hill; thence E.N.E. for four (4) miles to a high flat-topped hill thence North-East to a native well and E.N.E. to a large water-hole in Nerrima Creek eight (8) miles from the flat-topped hill. We then travelled five (5) miles up the creek and camped.  Sunday May 16. - Following up the Creek we overtook Bejah with the camels sit two (2) miles then all travelling together we reached Collins Springs at seven (7) miles. Cleaned out spring watered camels and horses and filled kegs.  Monday May 17. - Mr. Ord started off two (2) troopers and two (2) trackers to endeavour to arrest natives wanted who are supposed to be between here and the River. Our party left the Spring at 8 a.m. bearing North 162deg. East. We travelled twenty-three (23) miles camping at a low range previously visited.  Gave the horses six (6) buckets of water from the kegs.  Tuesday. May 18. - Continuing on same course we passed the range of detached sandstone hillocks at six (6) miles reaching my route of Nov. 4th last at nine (9) miles. This spot was indicated as one where white men and camels were seen. Made an exhaustive search here without finding the reported spot. Finding natives' tracks and seeing smokes Mr. Ord and a tracker endeavoured to overtake natives but without success.  Gave the horses nine (9) buckets of water from the kegs.  Wednesday May 19.- - Now bearing North 150deg. East we travelled 11 miles cutting my old pad between "Tallingurr" and "Tanndulla" and following pad for two (2) miles to Tanndulla thence for four (4) miles to "Dillawuddi" which was dry.  Travelled seventeen 17 miles for day. Gave horses eight (8) buckets of water from the kegs having but one bucket remaining.  Thursday May 20. - Making a daylight start we reached "Ngowallarra" sit 8 a.m. Nicholson and myself working at the well all the morning. We put one of the two ration cases left here by me on April 6th in the hole and digging out the drift sand got it down to ten (10) feet from the original surface forcing porcupine and grass at its back to keep back the drift. It was then making three (3) buckets an hour. Spent the rest of the day until 10 p.m. watering the camels giving them three (3) buckets apiece  Travelled seven (7) miles for day.  Friday May 21. - Travelled via "Waddru" to "Kullga-ngunn-ngunn" seventeen (17) miles. Dug the well out and found that the water supply had not decreased. Watered the horses.  Saturday May 22. - It will be necessary to rest camels and horses here to-day.  Watered camels and filled kegs. One camel is sick this evening but does not show the same symptoms as those which were poisoned here last December. [59]  Sunday May 23. - Following my camel pad we passed " Yerniakka " at six (6) miles camping at nineteen (19) miles. The sick camel is better and is feeding this evening. From " Yerniakka " I noted distant smoke to the South-South-East.  Monday May 24.-- - Started Bejah with the camels accompanied by Sandy and the tracker " Ned" for Joanna Spring. Taking Ned's horse I accompanied Mr. Ord Nicholson and " Bob." Bearing North 152deg. East in the direction where smokes were seen yesterday we travelled over wretched desert sandridges for ten (10) miles when smoke began to rise in several directions one which we made for immediately on our bearing. Getting close to it Bob crawled up a sandridge to " look out" and returning reported two (2) natives some distance East along the ridge which we followed down and crossing over it galloped down upon them but discovered they were two (2) gins the elder almost a dwarf about thirty (30) years of age and the other a young gin and good-looking for a native. They were very frightened at first but the younger soon recovered and in answer to our inquiries pointed on the course we were taking for a water called " Djillill" thirteen (13) miles from our camp and took us to it. Here we surprised a wizard or doctor rejoicing in the name of " Yallamerri." He rushed out of a bough wurley with a spear shaking it at Bob who covered him with his rifle and would have fired but for Mr. Ord who called to him to desist. There were also four (4) small boys at the water. The " wise man " could not understand the horses and was trembling with fear. Searching the camp we found several pieces of iron including a large piece of a part of the bow of a camel riding saddle. It was sharpened at one end evidently for use as an axe. Questioning the native about this he said " Purrunng whitefellow" pointing South-Westerly. Noting smokes a few miles W.N.W. we took the wise man gins and children in that direction. The old fellow pleaded lameness but being prodded occasionally with a spear he soon forgot he was lame. He was most anxious to go for a number of smokes where he pointed saying " Jibir" and counting ten (10) on his fingers ; but as we did not want ten (10) more natives we made him go for a single smoke bearing N. 280 deg. East for four (4) miles where we found a native whom with "Yallamerri's" assistance we enticed to come up to us. He was a bold-looking customer and walked round the horses in astonishment making peculiar noises with his tongue and lips. Informing them they must come on with us to Joanna Spring (Biggarong) they both pleaded lameness afterwards pointing Northwards in the direction of the smokes saying Biggarong was there. Finding we were to have trouble Mr. Ord handcuffed them together. Sending the gins and children back to "Djillill" I rode in advance bearing North 247 deg. East whilst Mr. Ord and Nicholson drove the natives after me having to jostle them to make them follow up. After travelling eight (8) miles they ran up behind me and decided I was going in the right direction.  Reached the Spring at ten (10) miles and found that Bejah's party had arrived.  Travelled for day twenty-seven (27) miles. We chained the natives to the tree I had previously marked here. They had visited this tree since I had marked it and cut all the lettering off. The younger native whose name is "Pallarri" says "Wanndanni" had done this meaning the women. Being a descendant of Adam I suppose we must excuse him. We found the Spring in the same condition as on our last visit the supply being abundant. Hundreds of birds are now coming here to water.  This being the birthday of Her Majesty the Queen we drank her health in whiskey.  The natives are fastened to the tree by means of chains padlocked round their necks and their legs are fastened with handcuffs. They have a break of bushes and some firewood the nights being cold now. I was very anxious and could not rest fearing the natives would get away. In the middle of the night I noticed a flicker of light and could see from behind my saddle where I was sleeping their dark eyes by the scanty firelight. For a long while I watched them trying to get the chain over their heads. Twice I called Mr. Ord; the second time he was annoyed and administered a little chastisement to Master "Yallamerri" telling them both to "lummbo."  Tuesday May 25. - We bagged thirteen (13) galahs and six (6) pigeons this morning.  Spelled the camels here to-day and filled kegs. During the afternoon Mr. Ord and myself each with a tracker circled around the Spring for some miles to ascertain whether any other of the natives had come in acting as spies; but we could see no signs of them.  We shall have difficulty in inducing these natives to conduct us to the spot where our comrades have perished. They say that two (2) are dead and that the sun killed them but they profess ignorance regarding the locality and state that the women and children had found the remains and taken the goods. They are anxious to go North-West to some smokes where they say other natives are. No doubt they are afraid and naturally think we are in quest of the equipment our friends had and cannot understand our coming after the bodies or bones of dead men. To-morrow Wednesday we purpose travelling Westward.  Wednesday May 26. - Left Joanna Spring at 7.30 a.m. Bejah in advance with the camels and following my old pad Westerly then the two natives handcuffed together and Mr. Ord with Nicholson the trackers and myself bringing up the rear. We frequently asked the natives where the dead men were but they were silent on this subject. We heard the elder native telling the younger something in whispers. They were very eager to go North and eventually said the dead men were in that direction I could not stand this for it would not agree with statements made by the natives at other times. At fifteen (15) miles we reached the top of an unusually high sand ridge and halted to again question the natives. They pointed eagerly for Joanna Spring or other places and also where other natives were but on my suggesting the whereabouts of the dead white men they said nothing but walked on. It was most exasperating and Mr. Ord losing patience cantered after them and lifting Master "Pallarri" off his legs by a chignon (the style in which they dress the hair in these parts) shook him and brought them both back. "Paflarri" angrily exclaimed "wah" at this treatment and when I questioned him and spoke severely he laughed at me. Mr. Ord then instructed Nicholson to administer a little moral suasion whereupon "Pallarri" threw himself on the sand partly dragging the wizard with him. Master "Yallameri" trembling and becoming afraid that his time had arrived turned to me and eagerly snapping his fingers in a Southerly direction exclaimed " Purrunng whitefellow." [60] "Pallarri" jumping up they started off at a Chinaman's trot exclaiming " Bah! bah ! " which I suppose means " Go quickly." Whistling to Bejah we gave him a sign to wheel round and driving the natives we followed them for three (3) miles when it was getting late so we decided to camp for the night. Our last course was North 145deg. East. After the natives were chained up and fed and made comfortable I explained that if they did not take us to the dead men they would get neither food water nor fire. They replied " Mabu mabu." As I feed them and have so far not hurt them they say I am good but they have a wholesome dread of Nicholson the chain and handcuffs and look with suspicion upon Mr. Ord.  Thursday May 27. - After we had packed and mounted this morning the natives when loosened again attempted to plead their ignorance but upon Nicholson dismounting they ran off on the same bearing exclaiming "Bah! bah !" At two (2) miles on this course they halted on a high sandridge and had a conversation together. Urging them on they then turned South-Westerly for one and-a-half (1 1/2) miles when we came to a recently burnt patch of porcupine. Yallameri then held his hand up and moving his fingers about said "Purrunng whitefellow." Urging them forward again they ran along with their "Bah! bah!" Immediately in front of us was a high point of sandridge with a low saddle to the West. Being on my camel this morning I had a better view and seeing a rope hanging from a small desert gum tree on the ridge I drew Sub-inspector Ord's attention to it. The natives now at the foot of the ridge exclaimed in one awed breath "Wah! wah!" I could then see my cousin's iron-grey beard and we were at last at the scene of their terrible death with its horrible surroundings : - Where Nature is sombre and sear  Midst Solitude's silent embrace;  In reflection - pray pardon a tear  For the heroes who died in this place.  Dismounting Mr. Ord and myself went to my cousin whilst Nicholson and Bejah went where they saw some remnants of the camp equipment and found the body of Mr. G. L. Jones which was partly covered with drift sand. Where Charles Wells lay half-clothed and dried like a mummy we found nothing but a rug a piece of rope hanging from a tree and some old straps hanging to some burnt bushes which held the brass eyelets of a fly that had either been rifled by the natives or burnt by a fire which had been within a few feet of his body. Where Mr. Jones lay and near his head was a note-book with a piece of paper fastened outside it by an elastic band. It was addressed to his father and mother. On suggesting to Sub-Inspector Ord that we should not open the note he pointed out that in has official capacity it was imperative that he should see the contents. Besides the note might give us something to act upon out here. Amongst a heap of remnants of their equipment we also found a satchel containing a box of medicines a prayer book leather pouch Mr. Jones' compass and journal which was kept from the time of their departure from Separation Well until they returned to that water. He stated in his Journal that they had gone W.N.W. for five (5) days after separating from the main party then travelling a short distance N.E. and that both himself and Charles has felt the heat terribly and were both unwell. They then returned to the well after an absence of nine (9) days rested at the water five (5) days and then started to follow our tracks Northward. Afterwards one of their camels died which obliged them to walk a great deal and they became very weak and exhausted by the intense heat. When writing he says that two (2) days previously he attempted to follow their camels which had strayed but after walking half a mile he felt too weak to go further and returned with difficulty. Charles Wells he then said was very ill indeed. There was at that time but about two (2) quarts of water remaining to them and he did not think they could last long after that was finished.  The natives have rifled the spot of everything that would be of any service to them. They have by some means cut up and removed the whole of the iron from the riding saddle and taken all the hoops from both pairs of water-kegs firearms etc. Although we made a careful search we could not find any writing left by my cousin nor has journal plans sextant compass artificial horizon or star charts etc. and with the exception of the map I picked up at the well six (6) miles South-West of this spot we have not seen a sign of any of these articles amongst the different natives I have met with.  Looking at my cousin as he lay on the sand with features perfect and outstretched open hand I recalled the time we last parted when I felt his hard strong grip. I little thought then that this would be our next meeting! I remember we spent a lively evening our last together at Separation Well when both he and Mr. Jones were joking freely hopeful and full of life. The lines of his favorite poet Adam Lindsay Gordon occur to me - With the pistol clenched in his failing hand  With the death mists spread o'er his fading eyes  He saw the sun go down on the sand  And he slept and never saw it rise.  God grant that whenever soon or late  Our course is run and our goal is reached  We may meet our fate as steady and straight  As he whose bones on yon desert bleached  This spot is six (6) miles North-Easterly from the well where we encountered natives in April last with rifled goods in their possession and my camel pad from that place to Joanna Spring passes within a quarter of a mile to the South-East of the scene.  Sub-inspector Ord has taken charge of all articles found here and the bodies are sewn up in sheets ready for removal to Derby.  Leaving this melancholy spot we followed my old pad on route for Joanna Spring during the afternoon travelling seven (7) miles and camped for the night. The natives are well fed but still prisoners. [61]  The following is a copy taken from Mr. G. L. Jones Official Journal : - 1896.  October 11. - Bearings 290deg. 2 1/2 miles 295deg. 94 miles 293deg. 14 miles 290deg.  16 miles.  Started away from well with Mr. Charles taking three (3) camels and provisions for about three (3) weeks travelling down flats had fairly good. travelling ground rising from well for two miles when quartzite grit and ferruginous occurs and it outcrops again at eight (8) miles. Camped on a little wattle-bush. Ants and flies very numerous.  Oct. 12. - Bearings 290deg. 6 miles 295deg. 10 miles 290deg. 15 miles.  We managed to load up the water casks successfully and left camp at 5.30. At 24 miles saw hill bearing 250deg. about two (2) miles off; the hill is table-topped and has bluff ends.  At three (3) miles country and valley fell away about 100 feet in a quarter of a mile quartzitic grits and quartzite being visible; nice tea-tree growing in valley. Saw three (3)  crested pigeons. Travertine occurs twice in valley.  At sixteen (16) miles came to big salt lake about one (1) mile broad and ten (10) or fifteen (15) miles long running North-Westerly. Camped at South end of lake as there is fairly good feed. for the camels. The lake has an awful appearance - . - one shining surface of spotless white.  Bar. 29deg. 00. Lake surface 1250 feet above sea-level.  Oct. 13. - Leaving lake at daybreak we followed up valley with travertine limestone blows and clay-pans. Passed over sandridge into similar country one big clay-pan with desert gums growing round it and from the number of old fires this is a much-frequented spot by the natives.  Camped under bloodwood tree. Nineteen (19) miles. Numbers of finches about. Going out in search of water I came across a watercourse and followed it down through ironstone then white and grey sandstone. Saw large lake about two (2) miles off. Returned to camp and found Mr. Charles had seen lake from top of sandridge.  Oct. 14. - Mr. Charles followed the watercourse down while I led camels direct to lake. Although we saw hundreds of finches no sign of water. Came to lake which extends North-East and South-West. The lake (1100 feet) is about three-quarters of a mile wide and extends as far as we could see bending about like a big river surface coated with white saline matter and has the appearance of running strongly at times to North-East as the surface is all eddies where stones occur; there is a hole on South-West side while surface comes up level on the other. Leaving this place we crossed several ridges and camped under tea-tree at 12.30.  The heat is intense. At 5 p.m. loaded up again to see if we could find any feed for the camels. After going two (2) miles camped near some desert gums not a bite of feed gave camels a bucket of water each. We are both feeling rather weak. The days are frightfully hot after 11 a.m. Twenty-one (21) miles.  Oct. 15. - (Detail accidentally omitted but can be supplied by Mr. J. W. Jones.)  Oct. 16. - Bearings 2 miles 42deg. 1 mile 120deg. 8 miles 42deg.  Were rather late in starting as camels had gone some distance from camp. After travelling two (2) miles on 42deg. Mr. Charles turned down a valley to look for water; travertine on surface in places. Crossed a clay-pan and camped among some acacia the camels seeking shelter at once from the merciless sun. Started again at 7 p.m. and travelled for eight (8) miles when we came to some salt lakes which camels refused to face so we camped. No feed for camels.  I am feeling very ill and Mr. Charles is far from well.  Oct. 17. - Started at 5.30 a.m. after giving camels some water. Spent some time in search of water on account of seeing galahs and pigeons about. Travertine limestone occurs in mounds here and immense ant-hills up to ten (10) feet high are dotted all over the flats.  Camped at 10.30 after going ten (10) miles. Started again at 10 p.m. and travelled till 2 a.m. twenty (20) miles.  Oct. 18. - Started at sunrise and after six (6) miles stopped for breakfast amongst some desert gums. After a fresh start proceeded for three (3) miles when we camped for day among some tea-tree. Starting again at 7 p.m. struck lake at two (2) miles and followed it down to 12 doing in all 124 miles or 214 for day.  Oct. 19. - Struck our outgoing pad and after going six (6) miles camped in shade for the day. Started at sundown; we travelled all through the night and arrived at the native well just after sunrise.  Oct. 20. - Cleaned out well and watered camels and after breakfast we rigged a shade and had a few hours sleep. Immense numbers of birds appear to water here arriving just at sunrise and again about an hour before sunset.  Oct. 21. - Made a bough shade and got things snug around camp. Found piece of native boomerang amid old camp fires. [62]  1897.  Friday May 28. - Travelling eight (8) miles this morning we returned to Joanna Spring and camped to allow our horses to recruit.  Saturday May 29. - Myself Mr. Ord and two (2) trackers with Yallamerri as guide started in a South-Easterly direction to try and find Bundir Water of which natives had previously informed me. Yallamerri explains that that water is at present dead -  Bundir purrunng napa. But we could not make him understand that we merely wanted to see the place. After going eight (8) miles the whole distance having recently been burnt he told us the waters round about were all dead and not springs -  Waddji tcharramnarra  - that the only spring water was far away East-South-East and it would take three (3) sleeps to reach the spots.  Returning to Joanna Spring we questioned the natives and they said there was another spring to the Westward but not in their country. They also knew nothing of a water called Lambeena which in my opinion must therefore be a considerable distance from here. Travelled sixteen (16) miles per day.  Sunday May 30. - Started on return journey travelling twenty (20) miles along our old camel pad. The natives we have taken as far as this for our own safety. They both fairly broke down this morning when they found the direction we were taking them. And crying Sunndai they pretended great lameness. However forcing them along for fourteen miles they then forgot their ailments and 'Yallamerri caught six (6) bandicoots amongst the clumps of porcupine grass.  Monday May 31. - Presenting the natives with knives handkerchiefs some food and water we liberated them telling them they could go back again to Djillill ; they stood on the first sandridge and watched us out of sight. We travelled direct to Kullga-ngunn-ngunn finding plenty of water in the well.  Travelled for day eighteen (18) miles.  Tuesday June 1. - Travelled to Ngowailarra seventeen miles. Found some natives had camped here a night during our last visit. Watered the horses at the well.  Wednesday June 2. - Passed Dillawuddi and Tanndulla thence North-North-East for four (4) miles camping at a dry soakage well. Travelled 1.5 miles.  Thursday June 3. - Now bearing 347deg. East we travelled direct for Joal-joal Hill arriving at same at nineteen (19) miles. I have named this remarkable-looking feature Craven Ord Hill after Sub-inspector Ord who has been a kind friend and companion to me and through whose valuable assistance I have been enabled to rescue the bodies of our comrades from this cruel desert.  Friday June 4. - Travelled direct to Collins Springs eighteen (18) miles for day. This is a beautiful water and apparently wholesome.  Saturday June 5. - Followed course of Nerrima Creek for seventeen (17) miles and camped on good feed South of a large waterhole.  Sunday June 6. - Followed Nerrima Creek to its junction with the Fitzroy camping a short distance beyond Gregory's Station.  Travelled eighteen (18) miles.  Monday June 7. - Travelled to Upper Liverynga Station fourteen miles. Here we met Mr. McLarty who gave us a kind reception and expressed his pleasure at learning that we had at last been successful and his regrets that the Expedition had had so melancholy an ending.  Tuesday June 8. - Travelled via Mount Anderson to Liverynga Station. Mr. Hutton the general manager was absent from the latter place.  Wednesday June 9. - Travelled to Yeeda Cattle Station spending the night with the manager Mr. Clifton.  Thursday June 10. - Reached Derby and telegraphed result of Expedition to Adelaide and Perth from which places I received many messages of congratulation and sympathy. I also telegraphed to Colonel Philips thanking him for the valuable assistance rendered me by the Fitzroy police. Sub-Inspector Ord has kindly invited me to be his guest whilst remaining here. He has also undertaken the whole of the arrangements necessary in connection with the attention and shipping of the remains of our comrades to Adelaide.  My dear father this is the first place I have got a show of sending mail since soon after leaving Princess Alix. Three of us started out from there with three big horses and a strong cart and about 5 months supply of flour etc. for the Earlstown Creek via Mount Margaret' Hawk's Nest and British Flag'. [94] Not finding any good country about the Earlstown we took the bush for it and got into the desert. We steered north-west and as we had no map we didn't know where we would hit out but after travelling for over 200 miles we have just struck Lake Way. We were lucky enough to get water and only did a perish twice and then only for the horses. We saw no blacks but could see their tracks fresh sometimes in the morning. We had a dog and she kept them off in the night as unless a nigger can make a dead certainty he won't tackle you. We had 3 revolvers 2 rifles and a 12 bore shot gun. We found water by ranging out 5 or 6 miles from the line the dray took one on each side and sent up smoke signals when we noticed signs of Blacks or found water which latter were usually got on flat granite rocks and unless one tumbled right bang on top of it he might miss it. The sand was up the spokes half-way to the nave and as we always kept our 100 gallon tank full (half a ton) you can imagine that we had a job.   We are at present on a small patch of alluvial and are making tucker. As for wages it is impossible to get work; the country is flooded with men out of employment.   Do not write to me as I may be on my way to the Territory or Kimberley in a month.   We have been the furthest east of any dray and I expect the police will be sent out to look for us from Princess Alix as only three months before we left a man I knew called Reison was killed by the niggers on the Earlstown Creek....   This country will be in a bad state shortly. The mines are going bung but you wouldn't hear about that as the papers make such a noise about the few good mines in Western Australia. Anyone in England would naturally think it was a grand place for the working man but it takes a very few men to work even a mine like the Boulder until they get down to 2000 or 3000 feet which won't be for 15 or 20 years at the present rate and there are thousands in the country who can't get out of it.   I will drop you a line now and again from such points of civilisation as we may touch in our trave1s. There are about 500 niggers here always cadging tucker [...] When I see any prospects of our being anytime in once place I will write to the Alix for my mail and if you people have acted up to my expectations I should get a good budget.   There are lots of ducks swans and geese on the lake but without a canoe one stands no show of getting them. I've got a lot of native weapons but goodness knows if I'll ever be able to take them home.   We got 276 ozs. of gold and sent it round to the Sydney mint to be smelted as it had some of the matrix with it. The largest piece was 7 lbs. (avoirdupoids) the others being two of 6 lbs and one of 14 ozs. (troy). They are the finest nuggets that have brought in from Murchison for sometime. I will invest my share in a block of land and build a house on it in Bunbury. I can get £40 a year rent and this on any outlay of £250 is good interest. [95]  I was nearly going home for a spell but it would cost me £100 and I've earned it too hard to sling it away to gratify a pleasure. I may go back to the fields and I may start in some business in a small way in Bunbury which by the way is going ahead wonderfully.   We got all the gold by dry-blowing and all in about 8 weeks.  I am going into Bunbury on Wednesday next to have a look at the fishing banks as there is a big population and no one to supply the demand.... I will get my photo taken in Perth in a few weeks when I get all right. I had no clothes when I was coming down from Cue or I would have got it done then. I think you will find me little changed in appearance but a few more years of the life I've led on the back blocks would make an old man of me. I am turning grey already like all the young men in the fields. Isn't that strange. I think it must be the tinned stuff. I know it has ruined my stomach [...]   I was quite bashful talking to the first white girl. I hadn't seen one for so long but it soon wore off.   One of my mates has gone to England and one to South Australia. There is great talk of British Columbia out here and lots are going. It is too jolly cold for me. You people have been having a fine time over Her Majesty lately. What a lot of rot it all is. I see Dublin didn't altogether approve. I may come home in the summer if I've luck but don't expect me.   You see in New Zealand things are much like the old country too civilised and as a natural consequence wages are down to zero and as Lewis says the highest wage he can possibly obtain is £1 a week and found. I have given half as much again to a nigger and a stray hiding now and again thrown in gratis. [...] Out here on the fields I can save £10 a month and when I say save I mean I can put that much in the bank and have plenty of pocket money besides for clothes boots tobacco etc. [...] [96]  I am doing all right but cannot get settled down. My sole ambition is to make a place I can call home and I can assure you it is through no fault of mine that I haven't done so. I am trying to rent this place I spoke about with the right of purchase for £1900 when my lease is up by instalments of course and I think I could manage all right when I have the place in working order.   [...] according to your letter things are not much improved; I am sorry at that but you are not alone in this. I expect before this reaches you that the news of my having to give up business will have reached you or Bangor at any rate. However the deficiency was not a great deal only £32 19 shillings. The last two years has been very trying on everyone in and about Bendigo owing to the severe drought. Farmers in Bendigo and Northern districts are simply in a state of insolvency consequently shopkeepers suffered as they had to give credit with the hope that things would improve after the first year but as things did not improve and I was one who gave a little credit I could not make sufficient return and could not get my money in when wanted to meet my bills and as the prospects for the districts mentioned are very black and not much hope for the next twelve months.   At the present time there is not a blade of grass in the Northern districts. Sheep have died by the thousand cattle by hundreds and are dying daily. In the face of this I thought it would be simply putting off the evil day. Had I sufficient capital I might have pulled through until things righted themselves again but as this was the state of affairs was compelled to go under after 7 years hard struggle. However such is life. This is what makes up the world and I should and am thankful that my health is good; am also pleased to say that Maggie is enjoying better health now than she has for some time. The heat at Bendigo was very trying on her besides she shared with me in my worries about business. The doctor told us some 12 months ago that she should go away from Bendigo that it did not suit her and one thing after another has been pointed toward a change.   About 2 1/2 years ago I had a great longing to go West Australia but being tied to Bendigo could not carry out my wishes and satisfy my longings. However the day has arrived when Bendigo and its cares have ended. By the time this reaches it destination I hope to about 3 weeks in Fremantle or Perth West Australia.   Feed he says is simply luxuriant. He is putting on as many sheep as he can manage to buy; thinks prices will advance owing to the scarcity of sheep in the Northern districts caused by the drought. He is not very favourable towards my going West having had bad reports. These reports were principally from miners who simply rushed the place and when exemption set in (mines stopped work for say 3 to 4 months for want of water which has been gradually overcome through people making dams and sinking for water) they were thrown out of work. [208]  I see by today's paper that the gold yield for Coolgardie has been splendid. Coolgardie is about 200 miles from Fremantle. The latter is a shipping port for the former as well as Kalgoorlie and other gold fields so you see there is bound to be a good deal of traffic.   Young Rankin who used to be at Agnew's when I was there (I think you met him) went to Coolgardie about 18 months ago. He has done remarkably well. The little fellow Woodward who was with me for 5 years left and went to Fremantle got a situation second day after he landed; is still in the place in a large ironmongery store besides numerous others that I know have done well.    [...] strange how news of that kind travels. However I am pleased to say there was nothing dishonourable about it. It was caused by that over which I had no control. If anyone is asking about me you can truthfully say that I sold out (which I did for the benefit of my creditors) and went to Western Australia. The words bracketed and underlined need not be mentioned. I am exceedingly sorry I did not come here 2 1/2 years ago. However must make the most of things now.   You will be pleased that I have got a start in the already mentioned stores. It is the largest place here being the retail shop for Bateman and Sons who own the largest wholesale place in Western Australia. I did not get position I wanted or was qualified to fill but hope to get to the top most rung of the ladder. They are few and far between who can give me a point here. The department I am now in is the furnishing and I have already made myself felt although I have just completed my third week last Saturday. The manager of the builder's ironmongery wants me badly as second sale. This will come off as the manager of the firm has promised that I should go there after stocktaking which is now on.   Fremantle as you know is on the sea and is much healthier than Perth although the latter is the best business place. The wages are not as good as I would like viz. £2 10s. and overtime with a promise of 5s. to be added in a few weeks. I could have got better wages if I had gone up country but I prefer staying here even at the lower wages. I think this place will suit Maggie first rate. She is going to Hugh's place for a month before she comes over here. She is going up about the end of this month. I don't expect her here before the middle of November. The sooner she is here the better.   [...] we have no school here now it was closed last Christmas. The attendance was so poor. The people did not appreciate it when they had it. Now they are making a great fuss I don't know what to do about our children. A week or two ago I commenced to teach them their capital letters [...]   To My SISTER LILIAN  It seems but yesterday when you were fifteen I not far behind and one of us was suddenly seized with a desire to write something.  And immediately the other was seized with the same overwhelming desire - had we not all our little lives done everything together and cared for nothing the other could not share?  We used to lock the bedroom door and write at the old marble washstand that was so generously roomy; no housewifery has ever been able since to take those ink-stains from its surface. Do you remember the characters we conjured up? Our heroes with their proud black eyes and their invariable habit of grinding their heels into the gravel in moments of annoyance? My heroines who had brown starry heavily lashed eyes and were always attired in clinging cream dresses with one crimson rosebud nestling in their regal coronets of hair? Yours who had dreamy violet orbs wore robes of dead white silk on every possible and impossible occasion and were always drawing their slim willowy figures up to their full height and gazing at their persecutors in noble indignation?  Oh the paper we wasted and the lessons we left undone that we ought to have done! Oh the candles that burnt to their last breath and used to flicker and go out near midnight just when the whispered reading of closely written pages reached the most thrilling point!  You were never satisfied with your stories unless you could work in a murder and your most harmless people used to kill each other for entirely insufficient reasons. I was never happy unless my favourite character or characters had died on beautiful death-beds to slow music. Do you remember that story I wrote where when I scribbled "Finis" (we scorned the word "End") there was no one left alive but the old faithful servant - I mean retainer?  Our faith in each other in those days made our mutual criticisms gentle and our admiration boundless.  This plain little tale bears your name and gleans its grace in bearing it. So the gift must make you as a child again blind to all faults and pleased to offer praise.  E.S.C. / Mossman's BAY / SYDNEY  Well Uncle and Aunt I have been a bit unfortunate this last eleven months past I had a good situation in the leading Shipping Firm here as (Wharfinger Delivery Clerk) until we got two New Managers from Sydney up here they both are Roman Catholics Mr. Doyle was my boss as Shipping Manager Mr. Condell as Merchandise Manager. [60] Whenever they found out that I was an Irish Protestant they both had a set on me with the result I had to leave my Billet to make room for a man who owed the firm a lot of money. The rumour went round that I would have to leave to let this man get my situation so I wrote out my resignation to give them as I had another better situation offered to me if I would take it in the Shipping line too but I was advised to not give in my resignation until I first asked this Mr. Doyle if there were any truth in the rumour that was going. He said to me no there are no truth in it Witherow and don't believe any lying reports so I took his word as truth and did not give him my resignation and one week after that he came to me and said Witherow your time will finish in a week so what do you think of an old scoundrel like that. I lost the other situation through his telling me lies so I have never dropped into a good permanent situation since.   I am going to look at some land 20 miles from here as soon as I get maps down from Perth so that I can make a home for myself and I think Louis couldn't do a better thing in the event of my getting suitable blocks than join me. I can keep him with me all right and he can take up some land when he comes of age as he has a few pounds then and would have half the increase of my stock while helping me and I could help with the rough work in return for his work while with me. I really believe he would do better that way than in New Zealand where he will sink to the level of a labouring man as I nearly did here but have since risen a bit socially and don't ever mean to work for wages down here again.   I want to get away from Wright's if I can and make a home for myself [...] I am getting to know some very nice people round about and frequently stay away for a few days which breaks the monotony a bit. It is so nice to hear a piano again. You wouldn't believe how I enjoyed it. A branch of the Edgerton Warburton's are among the earliest settlers here and have kept themselves very select. However I am admitted into the charmed circle and I can tell you I am glad to see a little refinement after so much roughness.   I am getting along slowly as I am by myself Geoff being on his own place. I am still fencing but the land not being as yet surveyed I am at a standstill until it is [...] I expect the surveyors any day. The weather is very wet the river being in a flood [...]   I could do well if I had enough to stock my paddock when it is fenced and ring-barked as meat is 8d. and 9d. a lb. in the towns now owing to the duty on imported stock and the dread cattle tick (ixodes bovis) has made its appearance in the North. Kangaroos are plentiful now and I can get one anytime in an hour or two. But ducks are breeding and I won't shoot them [...] I have the makings of a very pretty place if I can only get over the first three years I will be all right. I am getting a bit scared. I have to raise £25 a year rent. I would have only taken up half the quantity of land but was afraid of its being selected all round me and I was right too as it has been taken up on three sides already and a man can't make a living off less than 1000 acres that is grazing. If I can get other people's stock to fatten in my paddock I can raise the rent that way as they are giving good rent for paddocks. But I suppose I'll get through all OK so won't despair.   Carrie is going to send me out some papers regularly and I wish you would try and do the same. If you were here for a week you would know what it was to be without anything to read in the evenings and no one to talk to.   I have been so busy that I have not had a rest for this last 6 months Sundays included. I have been helping Geoff but have finished with him now and am back in my own little humpy running the wire round my block. The weather is very warm now about 112 degrees in the shade today and the sun is fearful. I am in good health but thin and could do with a spell very well but must keep at it while my money lasts which won't be much longer now. Rent in March means £25 and I have just paid £50 for fencing wire freight and carting from station to here.   [...] when I can get stocked and farm implements I will be right. I will have a very nice place in a few years and I hope with good management profitable one. [98] I have only £50 in the bank now and when I pay rent in March and for the young fruit trees in June ordered from Victoria at 2s. 0d. a piece I will have nil and must work for wages again. I won't go back to the fields unless it is for wages or other surety. I can't afford any more wild trips through the back country much as I would like. I have spent my all on the block and am convinced it will pay me to stick to it. In fact it is Hobson's choice.   I have never got a paper of any kind from you but Carrie sends me a budget of penny papers weekly or thereabouts which keeps me fairly sane.   There are plenty of young ducks about and I anticipate good sport when the season opens in January. Everywhere people are looking for land but as I foresaw when I selected it is all taken up that is any good. I wish you could come over for a spell. I can promise you good rifle shooting. I shot two kangaroos at daylight the other morning in sight of the house. Their tails make grand soup...   I heard from Lewis sometime ago. He talks of coming over here. I am not very keen on it. He says he has no money and I think has fooled all his inheritance away. The New Zealanders are a bad lot they bear a bad name in all the Colonies. The place seems to be the resort of all the nere-do-wells and broken down Johnnies in the old country and he would be better out here. I could get him a good billet on a survey party in a few months at 30s. 0d. a week and found which is better than being groom for a sharper at 10s. 0d.   Entally 27 April 1898  My Dear old Lottie  A few days ago the good news of your second child's birth & "both very well" was grateful to my heart & this night's mail has brought me a very pleasant photo of Newton. Many thanks for thinking of me. I am very thankful that your trouble is so well over & that you can rejoice that another man is born into the world. How many inches has Barton grown since the event Of course I am glad to be one of the Godfathers & hope some day to show that I am. [140] The photo of Newton is now in the dining room... and I love to look at the dear child's face. Why? Because his eyes & face take me back to the past. I wish you were here today and could look at the oil portraits of my Father & your grandfather in my library you would see that Newton is a Reibey. The eyes are my dear fathers Newton's great great grandfather and of my dear brother his great grandfather. In the face of Newton I can see my Father & my brother. If in character all that is generous & true he proves to be like either you & Barton will have cause to thankful & no cause to hang down your heads in shame. God grant that your boy may be like them both. I must compliment you on the way you dress Newton It is very charming. His hat is perfect. His legs and gaiters perfection. Of course you placed him in his chair while sitting for his photo... the knowing look of importance the little man assumes. Lottie dear don't spoil him... On Monday next I must go to Hobart as Parliament opens on Tuesday. Mary & Harrie talk of going to Melbourne for the winter. & to be near Charlotte After a very long drought such as we have never known rain has come again & the grass is getting green. A great relief to us... I fear the winter will be very severe for all stock after so much drought. The gossips are always ready in giving me another wife. Every single woman & every widow visiting Entally is to be the future Mrs Tom Reibey. So I have announced that I am engaged to Mrs Delaroyde a widow. Several are very curious to know who she is but I won't satisfy their curiosity but I will tell you as you will remember her. It is the lady who sells "Happles" at Perth station. She is almost 77 years old - a Roman Catholic... very stout weighs about 13 stone.  Kate Nelson wrote to Mary by the last mail and we were glad to hear that she and her daughter are well & enjoying life I have no more to tell you with this mail. So with love to you & Barton & your two sons I am your loving uncle  Tho. Reibey.  God Bless you Dear Lottie.  I am still on the place although just about done now financially. It seems so hard when I have been getting on so well to have to leave and work for someone else. A little capital now would make me independent of work off the place [...]   I have been on a three weeks holiday to the seaside to one of the oldest places in the Colony Lockeville the residence of the Locke's a highly respectable family one of them being M.L.A. for this district. They keep race horses and a few stallions of their own and have a fine old place all through. Plenty of tennis parties etc. and boating fishing and bathing besides balls and riding parties and the best duck shooting on the estate of any place in the SouthWest. It did me the world of good as I was quite run down but I found that work when I got back was very irksome. However I am fairly into harness again and I suppose it will be a year before I go on the spree again [...]   I find the kangaroos scarce here now but ducks seem plentiful. I am still fencing; it is slow work by oneself. The ground is so hilly that the wire has to be packed on horseback for miles and if you ever meet a man who has packed any barbed wire keep out of his way. Still on the whole I have got a lot done in the 9 months I have been living here but I badly want a little money now.   Work is hard to get and when got pay is poor. The reaction which always follows a boom has set in and things are flat now in WA. A steady boom in land has however been going on but the selectors are a poor lot and will never stick. They are chiefly store-keepers etc from the fields and don't know how to work much less farm as one has to here to make it pay. While their money lasts they may do all right but in three or four years partly improved places will be going cheap.   Potato growing pays better than anything as they bring from £8 to £22 per ton about £12 being the common price. [99] [100] I have no implements and so am stuck in the mud.   He says that on his arrival at Auckland his box with all his money was stolen and so he was left stranded there and had to find a job as best he could. But as you remark his letters are never very explicit and show great indecision. Of course he is young and soft and all these little things will sharpen his wits. You doubtless know that his partner was broken and that poor Lewis was swamped in the flood to the tune of all his little fortune. I think myself he got into the hands of sharpers at Auckland as surely he would never leave his money in his box and how is it he didn't come on to Albany WA as he must have had a through ticket. Of course he might explain these things but in his letter he gives no explanations at all. He has saved £5 where he is and when he makes it up to £10 he will come on. I am afraid he has been in bad hands all through.   The Balingup brook is a tributary of the Blackwood and the town site and station are called Balingup too. Powalup is the black's name for the junction of the two. I enclose a map showing position of block and how I was enabled to get so much river frontage. Water being scarce in WA the Government only give a certain frontage running you back till you have the quantity of land applied for in a long narrow block but by taking a big block in the bend and there being a block at the back they had no help for it.   I have finished the fence and am getting the ground clear for my fruit trees coming in June from Melbourne. I am very fond of fruit growing. The pruning etc is very interesting if carried out scientifically and the profits just now are enormous. Apples in the winter go up to 1s.6d. per lb. as there are no foreign or inter-colonial apples allowed into Western Australia for fear of disease etc. The importation of vines is disallowed but anyone will give you the cuttings. One or two trellised round the house are all I will require for jam and eating.   The rosella is the parrot you mean. They are worse than the rook at home for corn and I have shot hundreds. Snakes are only thick in the damp places. An Irish rush meadow like the one in front of Clogher cottage would be the very place for them. Of course we often kill them about the houses but a snake as a rule will always scoot when he hears you coming.   I enclose a bit of the black cockatoo tail feather peculiar I believe to WA untameable and nearly extinct.   I am getting rather sick of Lewis. He is an awful fool and I am afraid a liar as well. He left Napier to come to me with a few pounds he had saved from the wreck of his legacy and on reaching Auckland (says) he had his box stolen with his money in and after a hard struggle got work as groom in some racing stables at 15s. 0d. per week and find himself and winds up by asking me to send him a fiver. However James is nothing green and I wrote and told him to sue the company under the Carrier's Act if the box was stolen while in their charge as it must have been. [101]  Now from your letter I should say you had heard a totally different story and from Aunt's letters to me he tells them some awful crammers. He was in debt to a fair amount before he got his pile on the expectation system chiefly for subs to golf clubs etc. and then went in partner with his boss (poultry) who went broke and Lewis lost all. This is from what he has told me. He had £5 when he wrote and I think he had been cleaned out by sharpers. His box unless very green would not be the place to keep his boodle in and by his own showing prior to his departure he only had enough to come comfortably and then again he must have booked right through to Albany to save fare in which case why not come on on his ticket and wire me for train fare from Albany.   I am stiff now myself and just about to take over a fencing contract 2 miles at £14 and Lewis could have helped me through with it. It is hard to have to leave the place when I am getting on so well. I want £40 to make my paddock sheep proof and £110 to stock it with sheep. I would in two years from then have a very decent living of say £150 to £200 per annum as of course I can work at home and grow spuds onions fruit etc. But money is very scarce here now even the Government have over-reached themselves and are forced to retrench in the various departments pretty considerably.   Gold has been found within one mile of old Wright's on the road to his house a fine big micaceous schist formation and some 12 miles further good reefs are crushing 3 ozs. regular. My place is just off the line (north and south) of the same belt of country and I am so tied down that I can't get off to prospect. One must have a little capital to take up a lease and develop it.   Of course land is going up like smoke and if I can I mean to stick to the farm. I will have a tight squeeze for the next twelve months and if I can wriggle through I can then manage. My fruit trees are all in and making growth. Tomorrow I am going to ring-bark for a neighbour about 8 weeks solid slogging with the axe 200 acres at £16 by myself camped out 3 miles from a human being.   Of course if I can let the big paddock next year I will be much better off as I won't have to save £25 for Government rent [...]   This is going to be a wonderful country. The mineral wealth is only just being tapped and in 5 years the output of gold will mean three times what it is now. This country down here will be harder to prospect it is so thick and rough very like the Welsh country with giant trees added but once found mines should be easily worked as all the needful barring the battery would be on the lease.   Towns spring up here like mushrooms in a night and the first thing one thinks is how they all live. About 5 pubs and 20 stores in a mining town of 1000 about 400 in the town and the residue scattered in tents over say 5 miles square coming in to get drunk every night. The Boer War is now on. I pity the Boers and in fact a number here sympathize with them.   Horses are very dear here now that is the draught stamp. Of course ponies of 14.2 or 15.2 are still cheap say from £5 to £15. Some of these bush reared things make excellent hacks and as hard as nails doing better far on grass then chaff and oats. [102] Medium draughts fetch now from £20 to £25 in fact can't be had. Heavies are very little more being unsuitable for the majority of the farmers there is no demand. You see a farmer likes something he can turn out when not in work and the heavy horses being all imported can't get their own living except when the feed is at its best.   Prices generally are coming down for farm produce and should we be forced to federate on the present terms it will just about ruin us around here all the newly started industries for a certainty such as vineyards orchards etc.   Prices are down to zero now and I am very much surprised at labour keeping up so well. Wages have never altered since I've been here but must soon as men can live very cheaply here now. I did my 200 acre job of ringing in 4 weeks making £4 a week. This is a record for the district 8 weeks being the average time. Tucker cost 10s. 0d. a week as I shot my own meat. I worked like a nigger as it was life or death with me. I have I think another job coming off after Christmas 100 (acres) at £8 10s. 0d. the lot and I am sure I can do it in a fortnight if the weather keeps cool. It is 104 degrees in the shade now and has been for weeks. We generally work from 6 to 11 have dinner and a siesta work again at 2 and knock off half six then bathe tea smoke and bed. It is black as a dungeon at quarter past eight.   I feel the want of some stock badly and cannot really make anything off the place till I get some of my own. The £25 rent is what takes making up and a fellow can't always get work.   My trees look very well considering the heat. It must be 140 degrees in the sun as we often have it 160 degrees a little later and such a fierce heat too if your sleeves are rolled up a bit higher than usual you will have all the skin peel off in 10 minutes and the ground is like a brick. I shot a large emu this morning running over 200 yards broke his leg but flukes count you know every time.   We have a spare room which is occupied by boarders and in this way we are able to put a little in the bank every week although rents are very high; imagine 20s. per week for a five bedroom cottage. This makes a hole in a fellow's screw to begin with.   I forgot the mention that I got the promised rise of 5s. but is not likely to be able to get another for sometime owing to a standard wage being the ruling of the firm which in my opinion is a very bad idea. There is no encouragement for further advance. However my purpose is to stick to it and save what I can as I intend someday going squatting. It pays better than being behind the counter providing one has a little cash to make a start with. This was my only reason why I did not go to Gippsland when I left Bendigo; would not be afraid to make it pay if I only got a fair start and we did not wish to be any encumbrance on Hugh. He had a hard beginning and struggles through honourably.   Sunday 23. During the week I was offered another situation in one of the largest houses in Perth (William Sandover & Co.). The salary is the same but there is promises of a rise according to ability. As I have already mentioned there was no further prospect of a rise in the Union Store having reached the standard wages. This is not so in Sandovers. I prefer living in Fremantle to Perth. However we will not move from here until the summer is over.    [...] We have determined to go in for a little cultivation so with that end in view we started grubbing a piece of ground of the ridge that runs in front of the old hut only about a quarter of a mile further back in the paddock. We have about 5 acres now grubbed and the posts for the fence up and expect soon to have all ready to plough. We shall put part of in early potatoes and the rest in oats for hay. The piece we have chosen is a nob with a broadspur running north from the main ridge which runs east and west. As it was one of the highest points in the front block it was a very favourite camp of the sheep so it should be fertile for a few years at any rate and being on high ground all we have to do is open the gate when crop is taken off and the sheep will again make it a camping ground. [...]We bought a little one horse plough strong built but handy which we work with 2 horses. James went down to the sale at Bairnsdale and bought a useful half bred mare unbroken fit for saddle buggy or plough work for £9. She has turned out very well and now works very quietly in plough or harrow (we also got a light harrow).  The grubbing was very slow tedious work as the ground was very heavily timbered. However I think it will give a good return for labour and expense. The ewes are nearly all lambed. They are earlier this year having started lambing 10th July which is at least 3 weeks earlier than is usual in this district. That I hope will have the effect of giving a better grown crop of lambs as heretofore the later lambs were somewhat weedy and small. The lambing I think will be very fair.   We have had a wet winter which keep us back in many ways. Dingoes have been very bad in the district for the last 12 or 14 months. We had one visit from them in April but have got off much easier than any of our neighbours. On the whole our paddocks are considered the safest in the group but at the same time we are all liable to a visit from the dingoes at any time. [210] Again the heavy rains have risen the river several times so that we could not cross for a few days at a stretch. This is a great bother to us. If we can manage it after shearing we will try and build a four roomed house in our own paddock. Then we will be nearer the stock in case of danger and also handy to our work in the way of cultivation. All being well we intend doing some more clearing as there are two more favoured spurs with the north by east aspect.   I am at present prospecting for tin some 8 miles from Powalup for a person named Gilbert at a wage of 9s. 0d. per day and all tools found and dynamite. I will stick at it for 6 months if possible.   I am glad to see the Irish soldiers fought so well and that all our best Generals are Irish. It makes one feel proud to think he hails from the same country. The Australian are as you say no doubt useful as scouts etc but don't take kindly to discipline.   I would greatly appreciate any kindness in the way of woollen socks and brown flannel shirts. The former cannot be had in Australia; I mean such as I wore at home and I find the wool is unobtainable in that heavy quality. Perhaps you had better only send socks as I wear under flannel and cotton shirts. [103] The former are from 4s.6d. to 6s.6d. and the shirts from 3s.6d. to 6s.6d. or even less. I would rather if you still knit have one of those white woollen sweaters like Dick used to wear for cricket. I play tennis a good deal and have to pay 12s.6d. for a flannel shirt and it shrinks when washed so that I cannot button the neck. Be sure and put the Ad Valorem duty as low as your conscience will allow. I will get photoed again when I go up to Perth next. Be sure and send me one of yours.   I expect no more fruit than I can eat myself for four years as we prune hard back for three years after planting to get a stout stem and encourage root growth. A seven year's tree here is the shape of a wine glass and low. Apples are 7d. a lb. here now. I have had very little fruit this year.   Everything is dear here. Look at wages nothing less than 8s. 0d. a day and of course stores are in proportion.   The Boers hold out well.  I have been seriously thinking of selling Powalup and have actually had it under offer at £600 for the last 4 months. I got a reply yesterday. I refused by wire. The intending purchaser would give £500 in 12 months. I would have bought a store here in the mining town I am now in situated about 13 miles from Powalup as the crow flies. I am getting now 10s. 0d. per day of eight hours. I get the extra 1s. 0d. to camp with the tin down on the washing site with a gun to keep tin thieves off at night.   I don't think I ever told you I was robbed myself at the farm and caught the thief who had stolen my horse and saddle and all my belongings. I had my rifle with me of course and laid him out with the butt end. He has been in the asylum ever since from the effects of the blow.   Since I've been here I was robbed again but the police caught the thief and I recovered one article the revolver which I had marked and could swear to.   I am trying hard to borrow enough money to make my place sheep-proof and get sheep. If I fail I will sell out and go to South Africa. I am sick of working off the place for wages. One can just earn enough to keep the place without ever being able to stock it. I can earn at the lowest estimation £200 per year from my place had I it stocked. It would carry 450 ewes and I would make this and more out of the increase and wool besides what I could grow in the way of fruit and corn and potatoes etc. For security I have the place itself worth £500 which I have refused from two people. [104] I can get money but at 8% which is too high. I am trying for 6 or 5 if I can get it.   If I had the farm so that I could make a living off it I could get a wife and things wouldn't be quite so lonely. Fancy seeing people only when you ride from 3 to 9 miles for I am separated from the Wright's by a roaring river and in any case it is only Geoff I care to keep acquaintanced with.   I nearly lost my foal which is rather a valuable animal through poison not long ago but I roped it and bled it and it is all right now. This is the wettest winter in the memory of man [...]   The Colonies as you doubtless are aware have all Federated which means among other things that there will be no inter-colonial duty on anything so that farmers and especially fruit growers will suffer. Instead of 10d. 1s. 0d. and 1s.6d. per lb. it will (fruit) be 2d. and up to 4d. as they can send fruit from the older colonies cheaper than we can grow it. The benefits we derive in WA will be chiefly of the sentimental order one Nation one Flag and one destiny etc. We are getting along very nicely and could have held our own with any of them in another 10 years but it will cripple a lot of young industries on which thousands have been spent.   Stock are dearer in the colonies than ever they have been before meat 8d. a lb. in Adelaide and up to 1s. 1d. here in Perth. I have never since heard from Lewis. My fruit trees are just starting to sprout out some being in blossom (plums and peaches) and I expect one or two on each tree will set.   The constant hard living and hard work is making me stiff already. A man here of 30 is to all appearance as old as a man of 45 in the old country. Somehow one gets careless of cooking and often when one comes home wet and tired at night one hasn't got heart to cook an edible supper and just has some bread and butter (if he has butter) and goes to bed.   I am getting sheep (200 ewes) on the following terms: a friend finds the sheep I the paddocks and sole management and two-thirds of the increase and two-thirds of the wool he of course the remaining third of each.   I am paying 8% for £75 to fence it with and believe it will pay well if I only have luck and no dingoes come around. It is I can assure you nothing to lose £30 or £40 in a single night by dingoes. The Government give 10s. 0d. reward for every dingo destroyed the proof being the scalp and tail [...]   I have refused another (cash) offer of £500 for my place but will battle along now. The weather is glorious here now and the bush simply goregous with colour blue yellow and white flowers creepers etc mixed in one dense mass as far as one can see. If you ever pay me a visit come in September as from then till Christmas is the pick of all the year.   Carrie sent me some woollen socks which were very acceptable I can assure you. I suffered with indigestion from the same cause as you and went under chloroform and had the lot (back teeth) yanked out and although I have had no others instead still I suffer no toothache and the other trouble a little Siegle's syrup always cures. A teaspoonful neat after meals and before going to bed will shift old Nick.   We cannot get sufficient per ton here to make the growing of them profitable unless close to town so that a big source of income is now removed from the bush farmer and he has to depend mainly on wool and meat to fetch him a living as the country down in this district is not adapted for the growth of corn being too hilly and wet not to mention the cost of clearing the land in the first instance which does away with five year's profits at least.   I am busy making my paddocks sheep-proof in hopes of getting sheep this season and should they do well and the dingoes keep away I may pull along all right. It is strange that since I wrote to Dick the said dingoes got into Geoff's paddocks and in two nights killed 36 ewes and lambs and more are so badly bitten that the blow flies will kill them too. He has poisoned one dog and other baits have disappeared so it may be sometime before he gets another visit. The blow-flies are a kind of big blue bottle and are so bad at the beginning of the winter and summer that they blow the sheep's wool and the maggots unless constantly attended to will eat the sheep alive. So you see a farmer fights nature out here in all forms. As the land gets opened up these things get less as the fly likes the dense bush [...]   I have borrowed £200 for which in accordance with rules I have to do £400 worth of work. As I put a good valuation on the work the half value obtained from the bank will pay me well and give a profit from each completed piece of work to carry on the next.   Clearing 5 acres entirely at £10 £50  Cutting black boys and ring-barking 950 acres at 5s. 0d. £237 10s. 0d.  Fencing 22 miles wire netting at 10s. 0d. per chain £80 0s. 0d.  Shed with lean-to 30 foot long 14 feet wide 12 foot high £32 10s. 0d.  Total £400 0s. 0d.   [...] I feel the want of a little capital awfully as I have any amount of grass going to waste and could buy stock and fatten at an average profit of £2 per head at least. I am also stuck for a house. I could build a very decent four-room cottage (one storey of course) for £100 chiefly of timber. Matrimony might then be considered and the kids you mention duly counted before they were hatched. There is very little trouble here in bringing up youngsters. They earn their tucker I can assure you as soon as they can ride and muster stock. I am afraid no Clogher money will come our way; those Dungannon sharks will take care of that. However with help and luck I should be a prosperous man in ten years.   Could you not send me out a nice little Irish girl with a small fortune? The life is a glorious one. A man can grow all he wants and a woman has little to do and no conventionalities to study. It would have suited a wild little monkey like you to rights.   My orchard looks well and I expect some few apples next year. I have ripe cherries now! [105] Working horses are very dear here and horse and cart costs the horse £25 and the cart and harness £22; these are the lowest. At present I borrow from my neighbours. I am working now harder than ever in my life before ring-barking.  