 My dearest Nan  As I wrote to you only six weeks ago I should not so soon have taken up my pen but I had since a nice letter from dear Janet and I know not her address to reply so I must enclose my answer to your care; her accounts of her health and happiness are most pleasing and she was just arrived in London to see the Great Exhibition! for which I certainly much envy her; I do hope you may also get a peep of the wonderful sight and tell me the impression it makes on you; as to the wonders you would see there I should never expect you to describe them as I am sure a large volume would be needful but I should like much to hear from some one what feelings so wonderful a scene excited; it appears to me that bewilderment would be the first thing. I have not much news since I wrote except that the weather is now beautiful and in consequence the gold frenzy has burst forth now in full force and we are about to be left without either cook or nurse as all the servants have got their heads perfectly turned and even those who cannot go to dig for themselves go off in the idea that they will make fortunes of wages elsewhere rating their value so high and getting so insolent that for my part I would rather cook than have them but I am told this state of things will not last long and by and bye crowds are sure to come to the gold from home & elsewhere and they will find themselves disappointed at least all who are not fit for very hard work. One man lately was smothered in the hole he was digging and others narrowly escaped; they have each just 8 feet square & in these little spaces dig perhaps twenty feet down so imagine the risk but they all get too much excited to mind; many gentlemen are there others go just for a few days to see the strange scene which they say at the principal diggings is very exciting one person said he did not think the great Exhibition could be more extraordinary!! Then they have such difficulty in getting all the necessaries of life collected in the bush for such crowds; fancy one man pushing a wheelbarrow with a 200 lb bag of flour 70 miles! This really occurred; others carry their goods & chattels in little carts drawn by dogs and all [?] as they cannot get drays & Bullocks enough to furnish them and the roads have been shocking Baby has been very well since I wrote last but I am afraid Sarah will find it one great burden to take the entire charge of him his nurse leaves tomorrow with her husband who has been cook; they are a Nasty ill tempered Mischievous pair and he is every way a useless servant but she was very useful to the baby and Sarah is much annoyed at losing her; for my part I think that if others may [be] got they would be a good riddance. [53] I shall have to do all the kitchen work with the help of a Black woman the only useful one of her tribe who is fortunately here at present; we still have a washerwoman but she and her husband also leave in three weeks for the diggings. I do hope we shall get another before that as I can do nothing about washing. Sarah and her husband went to Kilmore a township fifty miles off last week in search of servants but without success and Mr Wrey has had an illness in consequence of the ride; he is however well again. We have had such a houseful of gentlemen for eight days. We have sold 500 head of cattle to a Young Swiss a Mr Castella [?] and he and others are here collecting them; I hope it will be over tomorrow morning for it causes a terrible bustle and stops all other work it is fortunate it has been before any servants leave Now I must say goodbye as I cannot cross more on this thin paper. With kind regards to your gudeman and many loves from us all to you and your little chicks  BELIEVE ME DEAREST AGNES  YOUR AFFECTE COUSIN / CHRISTINA  DEAR MOTHER BROTHERS AND SISTERS  We are quite well hoping this will find ye all likewise. Dear Mother we are now 70 miles from home at the Goldmines there is about 800 men at the diggings. I am getting at the very least £12 per week to my own Share there is the three in our party and we all dig the hole first and then we wash one rocks the cradle and the other heals [bails] in the water and another draws the stuff to be washed the cradle is just like a childs cradle with a wire cive [sieve] on the top which we wash the earth in what lies in the bottom that we take in a tin dish and washes Sometimes we get one ounce and sometimes more the gold is £3 per oz and sometimes we get 2 or 4 oz in the day it is £3-17s in England. Dear Brothers I would advise you all to come out and my brother-in-law for I think you could do well out here. There is poor boys come out here in the same vessel with me that is independant just with this gold work. I would like to see John and William and George and in fact you all if my mother was aggreable to come and if not let George leave the place with Sinclair and send him money for paying in it [the rent] and if not come on and if you prefer wheeling earth on the bracklagh hills to gold here you may stay but if not come on like men. [54] You need not fear the sea for it is not half as dangerous as going to America and if you come put your name down for emigration to Port Phillip and when you land in the bay write to Mr. Bell Grocer Newtown or come on and inquire for him and you will not go astray for he is a Brother-in-Law of mine. You can get out on a free passage as well as a paid one and be thought of as much as if you had paid it 10 times Dear Mother I hope you will have spent as happy a Christmas day as I have one of us went down into the hole and got 6 oz of pure gold. Dear Brother come out here for I think you could not do better than come for if you were working until you be old men you could not do as well as you could do here in one twelve month or in two years you would be independant. Dear Mother if you could bring out some flour and some butter and ham or two of Bacon and some tea and sugar and some Baking Soda and bring plenty of Shoes and boots and if the girls come they need not bring any dresses they are as cheap here as at home but the girls might bring 5 or 4 pairs of boots and Shoes. They might bring my wife three or four pair of fine ones and I will pay them. Get ones with lether straps across the toe of them they should be a middling large size 4 or 5's and dont forget a fether bed for me put it in the bottom of your chest. Give my love to all inquiring friends John McFarland could do well here my wife and Sarah Jane hoping to see ye  YOURS TRULY   R.H. SHEGOG.  P.S. The gold is for seven years in these mountains it is for 30 miles around here when ye come ashore dress yourselves well and neat.  Copied at Ayle this 22nd day of May 1852.  William Clay.  Newlands  21st January 1851  Dear Kate   Mary came here for a little change with baby a few weeks before Xmas.  She wanted it for she had got one of her low fits on her and was not as fancied very strong. She was wonderfully benefited by it and writes me word that everything at home now wears a different aspect. I never saw a baby thrive as hers does. She is a sweet little thing and would be very handsome had she a better nose. Oh dear that nose will stick to the Earles! I never thought Mary would be such fidget with a baby. Indeed there is a pair of them and Henry spoils her - Mary I mean.  We are in the middle of harvest the wheat spoiling for want of men who are very scarce. What we have are earning 10s or 12s a day with beer and spirits and the best of living. George has a splendid crop and I think he will get a good price as there has been very poor ones in every other district but the Port Fairy. -  It was reported that the Bishop was putting up prayers and exhorting the people to be careful for fear of famine in Sydney - and with these men I have in the Kitchen! [184] Each has a lump of beautiful bread after every meal - I suppose they think it ill manners to eat up all they cut. The waste makes me angry. If you said a word they would talk of the feed at the  different places and won't go where it is rough. Fortunately there is less used here than at some they do not like but I have the scraps cooked up a second time which they are very fond of in fact any mess. Of course they don't suspect it is the bits they leave.  Believe me always  Your affectionate sister  Penelope Selby  17th August 1851  My dear Mother   I know you will not mind my commencing this letter with self and telling you that through God's blessing I am once more in a fair way of being strong again. You will certainly have received letters intimating that I was expecting to be confined about the end of last month and also in consequence of my health being so much improved my friends had great hopes that my baby would be born alive and so it proved but indeed only to make the disappointment greater for my dear boy breathed a few hours long enough to make my heart yearn towards him and to be deceived into hoping that he might be spared to us. I was not told at the time that although a remarkably fine grown child he had an enlarged liver so that it was better that he was taken soon than that he should have lived even a few months for the Dr told me that it was a very uncommon thing for an infant ever to outgrow or recover. I did not think I should have felt so sorry having become accustomed to the loss and not even this time allowing myself to be sanguine but it makes a great difference when you have heard a feeble cry and have them with you in bed.  I am wearying terribly to see my dear Mary and her little Kate and am trying to persuade myself and George that I shall be able to go up in a few days. He shakes his head for it is a long way and the roads here are such as you cannot imagine. However when the will is strong it goes a great way. Mary was very anxious to come down but the journey would have been almost impossible for her with the baby so I promised I would see her almost before she could expect me. [185] [186]  This country is in a state of great excitement in consequence of the gold discovered. One person a Dr Ken got a lump the largest ever was found weighing more than a hundred pounds. It is being discovered now close to Melbourne and within a few miles of our old station on the Yarra. I have not the least doubt it must have gold on it as it is precisely the same kind of country. Indeed there is no telling where the discoveries will end. Meanwhile labour has risen enormously and it is said this crop of wheat will rot in the ground for want of men to reap. Woe to the country if such prove the case for it will take all their gold next year to get bread. At present it is very high with a prospect of being still higher and we poor farmers are beginning to hold up our heads.  I thought of you this morning when I was on a little hill at the end of the farm and saw the wheat looking so green and beautiful in the clear sunshine and such a pretty view beyond. All this that a few years ago was thick timber. Indeed everything looks well to a person that has been almost chained to one spot for many months.  Another cause of excitement at present is the elections which are to take place next month. Our landlord Mr Rutledge is one of the candidates. George promised of course to vote for him and moreover he really believes he will make the best member for this district. He has so much interest in it. Henry [LeMann] votes for his opponent Mr Manifold who is a Squatter and these squatters wish to have all the country to do as they please with but I think when it comes to be better known how few their numbers are they will not be able to carry things with quite so high a hand.  George and the boys are quite well Prid growing very fast almost as tall as his Father and so like him. Willie is very little but I suppose will spring up in time. What should I have done if I had had my eight boys about me? The one girl would have had plenty of work shirt making. I should have been obliged to send them home in a body to seek wives. I must just hope the two I have combine the good qualities of all for indeed they are good boys. I could hardly expect all would have become equally so and I ought to be most thankful to the Almighty if he spares them to me.  You will have a mob of grandchildren soon. If my Prid had been a girl you would likely have had a great grandchild shortly. Many girls marry in this country between 15 and 16 and are broken worn-out looking creatures at five-and-twenty. [187]   Believe me dearest Mother  Your affectionate daughter  Penelope Selby  Belfast Port Fairy Feb 3rd 1851   Dear Parents   It is so long since I wrote or received any news from Home that I was almost afraid of hearing from home however to do so but I hope you will not defer writing as soon as you get this. As the ship sails direct from Belfast to London there is no danger of it getting mislaid. Helenah and myself and Children is all well: Thank God: and I sincerely hope this may find all Our Mother's and Father's Sisters and Brothers in as good health as this leaves us.   Our Family consists of 5 sons and One Daughter. Robert 9 years Old: Mary Jane 7 years old John Devlin 5 years and 5 months Joseph near 4 years: Samuell Lutton from Hillshore who has been a Friend to us for some years is now 2 years and 6 months. Richard the last and the best liked. Doulls Daughter is 16 months old.   We are living within one mile of Belfast and have 100 acres rented at 4 shillings per acre. The land is not very good but it does for Grazing cattle and growing what we want ourselves. The very best of land is rented at 6 / - per acre. We have lived in the Bush to within the last 12 months. We left then and came to our present Home to get the Children to school. Robert is able to read and write: John is spelling Mary Jane is reading & spelling: Joseph we intend to send to school next summer and Samuell as soon as we can if our Family has increased. [379] [380]  We have got a little more than we could expect to have in Ireland. We have 27 Milk Cows with a team of working Bullocks and a good dray I paid £17 for 4 months ago beside Heifers & steers that would number up to 100 with a good brood mare yearling colt foal at foot and a good saddle horse for myself and another for Robert in all 5 head.   I sold a good filly fit for the Plough 3 year old for £14 and a good saddle horse 4 year old for £13 that is about the price for Hack horses. Good cart horses will bring £20 Race Horses will bring from £20 to 75 to my knowledge. Cattle is cheap a good milk cow bring £3 - Working Bullocks from £6 to 9£ a pair according to quality. The prices of everything varies very much in this colony - for instance Flour is sold now for 15 / shillings per 100 Ibs - very good Beef 1.5lb Mutton the best 1d per pound. We kill our own beef therefore it costs us little. Good sugar 3d per lb - Tea very good 1 / 6 lb coffee 1 / - per lb Potatoes £6 per ton. But this is our Summers consequently in a few months they will fall to about £2 / 10 to £3per ton. This is about the standing price yearly. Wheat was this last 2 or 3 years from 2 / 10 to 3 / 3 per bushel: Oats a little dearer. [381] All kinds of wearing apparel cheaper than we saw them in Ireland for instance good Moleskins Trousers 7 / 6 Pair Strong Waist Coats 5 / - each: Tweed Frock Coats £1-7-6 to £1-10- or there abouts - Boots & shoes dearer. The leather is not so good as in Ireland. Wellington Boots £1-15 to £2. Strong Bush boots 14 / - per pair. There are very fair shoes worn here. Womens Kangaroo & Calfskin boots 11 per Pair. Boots & shoes dont cost us much as I have been working at the trade the last 6 years. I am well known in Belfast as Hammond the shoe maker.   H Harrison lives in Geelong. James Patton lives in the River Plenty near Melbourne. The rest that came from our place I know nothing of them. Dear Parents write as soon as you can. Let us know the Particulars of Druinger [Drumgor] and Killiconan. Let my Brother John know I will write to him about a month from this date.   Give Helenah's kind love & best wishes to our Mothers & Fathers Sisters & Brothers and all kind friends. Helenah wishes to know how Susana & Edward and family is and Richard is doing in America and if more has left the Paternal Home.   Dear Friends I now not say much. I would like to hear from Home but I would like better to see you all in Australia for me I will never be in Ireland.  Yours ever Son & Daughter   Joseph & Helenah Hammond Mr Robert Thompson Ireland County Armagh Lurgan - Driagor[?] Hill  Perth  March 12 1851  Dear Eliza  As Mr. Parker is likely to return before I am ready to accompany him I enclose you a letter recd. from my Brother William. I shall write long letters to all parties on my return your Father as well as my Father and Mother.  Kenneth had his teeth that is the two which you wished taken out yesterday by Dr. Galbraith. I could not find Dr. Ferguson. We took lunch with the Governor and Mrs. Fitzgerald afterwards both were very kind to Kenneth. In the evening we took tea with Dr. Ferguson. This morning we breakfasted with Mr. Yule and at 3 oclock we are invited to dine with Mr. Samson.  Mrs. Leake we have seen the Major and Simmonds [?] and during the day I intend calling on Col. Irwin. The Insurance Company have sent out a Surveyor who is to be sent to the Greenough to survey the district and prepare for the reception of a number of small settlers etc. and it is not unlikely that he may accompany us on horseback when we go down. [114]  The Mary did not bring any letters for us - the one seal was brought by the Union which came in last night and the letter was delivered this morning.  Vigors has just left me. He paid me a visit on the part of the M' Company with the aim of ascertaining whether we can assist each other  In haste  Yours very truly  Thos Brown  Grass Dale  April 2 1851  My dearest Papa  As I have not heard from you by so many ships that have lately come to the Colony I begin to think you have made up your mind not to write any more. You promised if you got over your illness you would "tell me all about it" now to my great relief and pleasure I have heard through an indirect channel that you were convalescent and apparently in good spirits in the month of September last when Wm. Brown looked in upon you.  I fear you have been a good deal pestered with my lots of writing and that they are as the "idle wind which you regard not" nevertheless I will keep up the persecution unless you absolutely forbid it were it only to rouse you to a fit of the spleen for it is better to be scolded at than to be forgotten altogether. Besides "coming events" justify me.  "There is a tide in the affairs of men which taken at" etc - This prelude from our immortal bard which I leave you to finish from recollection or reference brings me to the relation of the fact that I am about to encounter the risk of being eaten up by Cannibals for D.V. after the first fall of rain I set out in company with my Husband and Kenneth for the Northern Country. The object of this is for me to see whether I could make up my mind to go and reside there with the family and I look upon it as a wondrous privilege to be allowed a choice in the matter. You know my predilections with respect to our present abode and I do assure you I shall cast many a wistful glance behind and I am afraid there will be many lingering thoughts of regret if it is my fate to leave it but still I will not be in the way of bettering our fortune if my Husband sees a good chance of extricating himself from pecuniary difficulties in the change. [115]  Good surface specimens of copper have been found on our station at Wizard Peak and the Colonization Assurance Company have taken up sixty thousand acres of land on the Greenough close to us and intend to commence operations there. They have sent out a surveyor to mark the grants who will most likely accompany us. My Husband is a good deal applied to at present both by the members of the Colonization Assurance Company and also of the Mining Company. Either of these parties will have it in their power to give an agency worth accepting when their plans are more matured and the Governor has promised to remember you know who let him be at Grass Dale the Northward or wherever he may be. Now do cheer up and bid us do the same. You will say it is all expectation there is no fruition but wait a while and you will see that all this (to sing the song of the witches) double double toil and trouble will end satisfactorily. Now I think this is a very good ending and that it would be a pity to spoil it with saying any thing more than that.   I am  as ever  Yours most Affectionately  Eliza Brown  P S I am afraid you look down upon us with contempt since we have harboured convicts. I must own that my pride is taken down a few notches perhaps it will prove a wholesome castigation. I copy from the Inquirer date - but I cannot find the Inquirer and have lost half an hour in looking for it so I give the passage from recollection. It appeared in the first publication of that journal after Mr. Brown and Kenneth returned from the Northward in Decr. last. "A native had fixed his spear in the womera and was in the act of launching it at Master Kenneth Brown when that young gentleman fired. The ball broke the native's spear and entered his shoulder. He was doing well when we left". This information had been given by the Messrs. Gregory who were aware of the incident. You see they were exposed to great dangers. The Govr. Col. Irwin and every one say Kenneth did perfectly right. The above incident had not been revealed to me when I wrote you on the 25th of Decr.  I was glad to hear that your Grand Daughter my dear Niece Ada and her Brother St Barbe were with you. How much I wish that I could see them. My youngest child has very indifferent health. Pray insert the word scripsit in lieu of sculpsit in the family picture the latter is too monumental. [116]  If you have not received that interesting document I shall get the character of being very learned for this will be all Greek to you.  E.B.  Grass Dale  April 17 1851  My dearest Papa  This very day I have received your letter Anna's and Emma's and the package all safe. I am delighted with your goodness and generosity but at the same time much touched in my feelings at the affecting tenor of your truly kind epistle. You speak sympathetically of our trials in this struggling Colony but what are they compared to yours. The sense of any thing I may ever have suffered mentally or bodily is lost in the contemplation of what you have endured through a long and anxious pilgrimage in this world of sorrow.  I can guess at your mention of Dorchester! Dorchester! twice repeated though there is no allusion from which to draw the inference that V.C. is perhaps in the same position towards you as some others of your sons-in-law and that there is a backwardness to refund the loan his expensive habits must make him a dangerous debtor. I am awaiting with as much patience as my very small stock of philosophy will admit of for your reply to our joint letters of December last in which two modes were proposed of our settling with you for the two thousand pounds which you confided to our trust and advanced for our benefit. My great hope is that you may live to see the accomplishment of your views fulfilled in our increasing prosperity. If we decide upon residing at the Northward Grass Dale will be let it will bring us ninety pounds per annum exclusive of a small farm now let on an improving lease which has two more years to run out it will then according to the general rate of letting be worth twenty pounds per annum.  This is the way in which the different parts of the Estate will be let. Dwelling house vineyard with trellised walks etc fenced paddock stable with two stalls loose box and a fenced stockyard with right of run on the grant for two horses and two cows if required fifty pounds per annum. Six thousand acres of pasture land from forty to fifty acres of cleared and fenced corn fields a cottage four stalled stable and granary fenced stockyard and stockyard forty pounds per annum. Kumkedon [?] Spring farm on the back of the grant £20 per annum. This last is the part now occupied on an improving lease. [117] Our residence is well calculated as a pleasurable abode with its extensive garden of six acres for a gentleman and his family.  On the 2nd. of this month as I was musing my thoughts shaped themselves into expression and I wrote you a letter (I was going to use the Scripture illustration substituting the word pen for tongue but checked myself). It is enclosed with this as I had not posted it no ship sailing at the time. I never received Emma's letter that she speaks of of course it would not come unless she had paid the postage as regulated by law for ship letters. The Australian notes were enclosed as you directed so that I am quite rich now in pin money. The shoes and boots fit me remarkably well. I am very glad you enclosed them. I will write Anna and Emma shortly and to you again after my return from Champion Bay till which adieu  Ever  Yours most affectionately  Eliza Brown  Grass Dale  April 21 1851  My Dear Sir  Mrs. Brown having written so fully on general matters I merely beg to acknowledge your very kind letter of the 26 of September 1850 received on the 17 of this month.  I much regret you have suffered so much of late. Mrs. Brown grieves to think that she shall see your face no more in this world but I have still a lingering hope that I shall see you in the course of a few years. There is much before me in the interim to do and battle with. If I gain the victory of overcoming my difficulties it will be a pleasing interview on both sides.  Mrs. Brown and myself wrote to you in the month of December last which letters I trust you have received. In some way or other I will not fail to raise you the two thousand pounds if you do not comply with our proposals made in those letters and that I think will be best done by the sale of Grass Dale.  I expect Mrs. B and myself with Kenneth will leave this in about a fortnight for Champion Bay and on my return I shall write to you very fully. [118] I am greatly obliged for the attention you have paid to my affairs in England. I do not know what I shall do when you are unable to give it your attention. I am quite of your opinion with respect to Piercy but I suppose we must put up with him for the present.  I am glad the account at Morrells stands so well as it does.  I remain  My Dear Sir  Yours very Truly  Thos Brown  Perth  May 3 1851  Dearest Papa  I hope you will forgive me for putting you to the expense of so much postage but when I consider that is but a drop in the ocean compared to other disbursements which you are constantly called upon to make I don't think you will bestow a thought upon it. After this I shall perhaps content myself with sending you single letters not whole packets of them at a time.  This is going to be a very vainglorious epistle. What should you think if your Daughter had performed a task like that of Hannibal and melted the rock? and which is the greatest conquest do you think? to do it in a physical or a moral sense. I send you a letter or two in order that you may see the state of feeling.  We have come down to Perth in consequence of my Husband having received a summons from the Governor to take the oaths and his seat in the Legislative Council. He was going to decline but by the advice of His Excellency and Colonel Irwin he will sit the remainder of this session (which is nearly at a close) whatever he may do afterwards. Every great man you know must have his private secretary I hope you will take the hint and not think he is extravagant enough to have such an official in pay therefore he does not travel unaccompanied. Mr. M.W. Clifton Father of the Settlement at Australind is his colleague being summoned to the Council at the same time. The consideration of the Estimates came on yesterday at which both the new members were present. The Council had previously met for that purpose and the Governor had adjourned the meeting for the 2nd of May on purpose that the new members should be present at the discussion. [119]  Throughout a period of ten years I have endeavoured to give a faithful picture of all that has happened to us of good or evil storm or sunshine. If I have lifted up the veil that should have been hidden in some matters it was that you might know all my heart.  Dearest Papa  Ever  Yours most Affectionately  Eliza Brown  Grass Dale  August 21 1851  My dearest Papa  This will be a large packet containing my journal of our trip to the Northward. I wrote you on the 16th of April (the day on which I received the parcel) and also on the 2nd of May. Your last letter is the one which came in the parcel dated Sept. 26th 1850.  You will perceive that my journey was rather an anxious undertaking it has terminated well thanks to a superintending Providence. I have great delight in being with the Children once more.  I enclose a letter of the Governor's commenting upon the journal etc. and it would tend further to complete my satisfaction if I could hear also that you approve of my conduct not only in this particular but generally in the circumstances in which I have been placed since leaving my kindred and Native Country. [120]  A good prospect seems opening up to us in every way now an establishment is forming at the North that is likely to be carried on upon an extensive and profitable scale. It is most likely we shall all go there for a time at least but as yet it is by no means certain. I hope and trust dearest Papa your valuable life will be long preserved and that you will yet have the satisfaction of seeing us go on to your heart's content. Honors have fallen upon us more than I could have expected as yet they are empty ones not having filled the pockets; neither have they diminished aught. On the whole I think we must be in safe circumstances all having been kept together and now every thing is increasing so much in value.  Mr. Brown has got very handsomely out of the Council after having sat one session his removal to the Northward is the pretext his letter to the Governor tendering his resignation was answered by complimentary regrets at losing him he stands fairer than ever now for a Govt. berth and our receiving this is one thing it would rejoice me to communicate to you. You will rightly guess what would give us still greater joy than that which if our proposals are complied with is near an accomplishment.  I will close this letter with expressions of my gratitude for your domestic readings the only kind of education that ever [words torn] the least good and which I hope I have been able to profit by though perhaps not to the full extent I ought to have done.  Dearest Papa  Yours most Affectionately  Eliza Brown  P.S. To my Sisters Anna Mary and Emma I have not written for an age. I do hope they see your letters. I am very anxious to hear about Emma considering the event that was anticipated when I last heard. I have not forgotten the little Eliza and have something to say to you about her bye and bye. Is my poor dear Aunt in the land of the living? Bussel re-established in health? do not fail to answer these inquiries. E.B.  Grass Dale October 6 1851  My dearest Papa  This post conveys to you a number of letters and newspapers. So long a time has passed since any mail has been forwarded to England that all our news of the last few months namely since May comes at once. The times have been eventful both for the Colony and ourselves and I have now the great pleasure of telling you that Mr. Brown has got the appointment of Police Magistrate. He is to sit in Perth in the first instance in order to relieve Mr. Mackie who was holding the appointment for another person for whom it is being kept in reserve until the Colonial Secretary comes out but the duties became too arduous connected with his Office of Commissioner of the Civil Court in other words Colonial Judge so Mr. Brown was applied to. When Mr. Yule (now Acting Colonial Secretary) for whom the Office is intended is at liberty to hold it Mr. Brown will be appointed for Fremantle and it is hinted will have something else in addition namely the Residency but mind this is all secret as also about Mr. Yule but I must let you know why should I keep anything from you. The salary as Police Magistrate is two hundred and sixty three pounds per annum.  Champion Bay of course is out of the question as a residence for us at present but the station will be kept on under a superintendant. Kenneth will come in very useful too and in a very few years will be able to take charge. He went down on Monday last as guide to a shepherd and two Natives bound to our station and to receive the stock from Davis Walcot and Logue whose time of engagement with us has come to a close and he will have the principal charge until the horses go over in November and at the same time Alfred Thomson as managing man.  A number of ships are expected from England some are already due but I must not keep my budget open any longer for fear of missing the chance of sending by the Leander and there will be a chance again in a few weeks by the John Panter by which time I shall perhaps receive those long expected answers to our letters of November December and January last. I had intended sending you my Journal in manuscript but as it has appeared in print I send you the Inquirer instead. There are some mistakes in the printing some of which have been corrected in an erratum. As I do not know whether that paper will be sent to you I must to save my own credit mention them. The first is "The Messrs. Burgess's" for "the Messrs Burges" - in another place "would" for "should" - "stopped" for "stepped" in speaking of the horses in riding [word lost by seal] the flat on the Irwin. "Out" instead of "on" to Wookerina - "embodied" for "embedded" in speaking of the lead stones at the mine on the Bowes. [122] Trusting to hear that all is well and that you will receive your rights and ourselves your blessing  Believe me  Ever  Your Affectionate Daughter  Eliza Brown  November 20 1851  My Dear Eliza  I received yours of the 16th Inst. last night and beg to give you warning that if you continue to write in the same strain you will dispel all my stern and morose disposition and more than ever charm me in love and affection.  I am very pleased to hear of Matilda and Janet's progress and the boys I doubt not are as well behaved and as obedient to you as we could expect. It has just occured to me that we ought to have recalled Kenneth so that he might have been at Grass Dale during the fruit season. He would be as vigilant and useful as any person you could hire and I fear all will be stolen if a strict watch is not kept. I expect John Taylor in a day or two. He told me that he intended going to Champion Bay almost immediately and if so I will write to both Kenneth and Thomson and if Kenneth can be spared I see no reason why he should not return to assist during the fruit season. He would also be of use in assisting you in removing to Fremantle. I am afraid I shall be unable to render you much assistance in getting the goods down for although I may not be without plenty of kind friends to take my duty occasionally yet the principle part or the whole of the correspondence would be left for me so that it will be very difficult to leave as an accumulation of such matters would be perplexing and probably lead me into confusion.  I merely make the above suggestions for your consideration and if opportunity offers will send my letter to Kenneth for your approval as I should be sorry for him to return unless you felt that he could either improve himself or be of use in the way I have suggested.  I am sorry you were disappointed in not hearing from me by Post last week but very glad to hear of your anxiety on the subject. You will by this time have found out the reasons of my not writing per Perth viz I wrote by Cowan. I heard a very interesting lecture last night at the Court House by Dr. Barry on the Poets of the Present Century. I cannot help thinking how much Kenneth would have been benefited by the recital of some of the poetry and the allusions and comparisons drawn by the lecturer.  If you find that you can manage it try to drive up and see Mr and Mrs Wittenoom and ask them to dine with you. Monger could let you have 1 / 2 a cwt. of potatos which would come in useful in the event of the Governor or any other person coming in accidentally.  I called yesterday to pay my respects to Mrs. Fitzgerald about 4 oclock and confess I did not feel the dressings* that some complain of in morning calls and afterwards waited upon Mrs. Bruce as in duty bound having dined them last week. [125] I next went to call upon Mrs. Irwin but not finding her at home left a card afterwards met with her at Courthopes where I called for some magazines. I have paid a quarter subscription to the book club and shall read as much as my time will allow. I have Chambers Edinburgh Journal at present and begin it tonight. I wish you were here to read to me.  Nov. 21  An accumulation of business prevented my continuing your letter yesterday and in the evening Mr. F. Wittenoom informed me that Dr. Barry was to deliver a lecture on Astronomy at the Methodist Chapel at eight oclock and asked me to accompany him. I at once said it would give me great pleasure to hear Dr. Barry on Astronomy and under his F.W's wing I would venture to enter the chapel. Away we went were received and ushered through the chapel to the upper seat with great ceremony but O we had an awful infliction. "Tell it not in gath". When all was over I accompanied Mr. W home. He produced some bread and cheese and with a stiff glass of brandy and water we endeavoured but without success to forget the past. How Wittenoom has slept during the night I know not but must call and enquire for him on my way to the Court House. The consequence of all this is you have lost a long letter and I some delightful reading. I wish you were here to read to me.  Viveash was here yesterday and took a chop with me. Mrs. Viveash is poorly. He has been expecting to see me for some time and I have promised to ride up some night and return next morning.  Mr. Bussell and some others are preparing for the gold diggings.  I remain  Dear Eliza ever affectionately  Thos Brown  P S Some cards were sent here for you from the Clifton Family. I opened them to see what they were like and enclose them.  If I see Taylor I will get him to call on you for letters for Kenneth.  *Alluding to a Gentleman who mentioned to us his silk stockings thin shoes etc. in connection with a morning call on Mrs. Fitzgerald. E.B.  Perth  November 13 1851  My Dear Eliza  I received your letter of the 9th and 10th with more than usual pleasure as it was very apparent from the whole tenor of your letter that you had been relieved from very considerable anxiety by getting Thomson and party fairly away. Aubrey is also no doubt glad and I trust Thomson will be successful.  I need not say how flattering it is to my vanity to find you are desirous I should be at Home at Christmas particularly as it chimes in so cordially with my own wishes. As yet I do not see how I can get away but it is an old saying that "where there is a will there is a way" and it is possible I may get some kind friend or other to take my duties for two days but I shall not like to ask Mr. Mackie again as it is more than he ought to undertake. He has acted once for me with so much cordiality and received me on my return with such a hearty welcome that it would be unkind to ask him. I dine tonight with Mr. Symmons at 7 oclock he is very kind and obliging whenever I want a 2nd Magistrate and is most likely to oblige me at Christmas.  I am also about to bring Elliot Lt. 99th J.P upon the bench as soon and as often as I can as it is necessary to have more than one who will feel inclined to assist in case of necessity. Poor fellow he had a heavy fall while dancing the other night at Capt. Bruce's with Mrs. Knight. She shared the same fate. The party was a pleasant one and dancing kept up until "day in the morning". The party was given in honor of the Bride and Bridegroom Mr and Mrs Galbraith. Mr and Mrs Smith were there also after supper the Comptroller General called for all to fill a bumper to the health of the Brides and Bridegrooms. Galbraith in an easy and jocose manner animadverted upon the pleasures delights and true happiness of matrimony and urged his bachelor friends to go and do likewise. Mr. Smith was not so fortunate in his speech talked of having met his fate but whether for happiness or misery chance or time would determine. Mrs. Mends is a fine woman fond of dancing and kept the Comptroller very considerably under control the whole evening. Mrs. Henderson is gentle and ladylike.  I tried all over the Town last night to get you a bonnet cap for mourning but without success. Mrs. Cowan has promised me to get one made for you today by some of the dress makers for which I will pay. The gloves I hope to get this morning.  Your poor Father must be very lonely. His letter to both you and me is very kind and more than we ought to expect of him. I wish we were near him that we might endeavour to aleviate his sorrows. [127] [128] I have been twice to the Post office to find out when the mail was delivered in London which conveyed our letters of January last. You will recollect it was just before the 1st. of January that I put them into the Post office here and your Father's letter to us is dated April 11 and it is possible the ship did not sail from this for some weeks after the letters were put into the office and that the letters were not delivered which went by that mail when your father wrote but I am promised every information at 11 oclock today and I shall let you know particulars.  Yours very affectionately  Thos Brown  I shall write to Charles Messingham to get him if possible to put up the little house at the bottom of the garden and put up the fence which was washed down by the flood after this is done Filly and Pony would do well in the paddock for some time when the hay is carried. I promised Chas. Smith another cask he may have the one in the hail or any of those in the store room. Those in the store room are small but strong and good.  Shenton gives 50 per cent on the amount or cost price so that if we should think it necessary to purchase an allottment at Fremantle we can.  I have sold to Shenton goods cost in England 26.19.0 and kept for the men goods value 7.3.0 - 34.2.0  Mr. Lukin is appointed Land Valuator at a salary of £200 per annum and forage allowance for one horse. Fred. Wittenoom is appointed Sheriff and Emigration agent salary £200 Geo Stone to be Crown Solicitor salary £200.  Friday - I have seen the cap which Mrs Cowan got made and think you will like it. Price 3 / 6. If you send me down the invoice perhaps I could explain it to you T.B.  Mr and Mrs De Burgh called last night she is now living at a very small place betwixt Twines and Viveash's. She is on the look out for a [?] Burgh goes back to attend to stock and bring down furniture. Friday mg. George Leake has arrived yesterday but I have not seen him. I do not think you will have the Governor next week.  Was the young colt which was lame able to go with the herd and did Thomson take De Burgh's foal with him or was it shut up until he got away from the district? How does the Pony and foal get on did Thomson take the plastering trowell?  Grass Dale November 23 1851  My dear Thomas  I have received your double correspondence I may say triple there being three letters: the first two came by Cowan the last by post and your sentiments have not failed in their cheering influence. Have I not often told you that I only wanted a little encouragement.  Carter wrote to me yesterday (somewhat late in the day I must confess) to say that he should be starting for Champion Bay on Monday. I immediately wrote to Kenneth and enclosed your letter along with mine together with a note to Carter which I took to Church this morning and not finding him there forwarded them by Chas. Wittenoom. I asked Miss Helms if she was going to Carters and finding she was not invited her together with James Brockman to dine with me but no she had promised to be home by two oclock.  I intend Aubrey to drive me to Gwambygine tomorrow morning and intend taking Matilda. I shall tell them I should have done myself the pleasure of calling before but did not like to go out before going into mourning having lost some relatives and having all to do ourselves it took some time to prepare and then invite Mr and Mrs Wittenoom and the whole family party to dine at Grass Dale on Wednesday next offering to lend the spring cart and fix country hours 2 oclock at latest. I dare say they will not come but if they should do not be afraid as to the entertainment. I will do if possible more than if you were present except that you are a host in yourself and there is a piece of flattery from a wife one who thinking no little of herself has often experienced the mortification of a defeat. It gratifies me much that you wish me to be your companion in reading how could we not improve if this is your taste.  November 24th. I have just returned from Wittenooms they are going to dine here on Sunday next the visit has been an agreeable one; they pressed me very much to stay dinner but I declined saying the cart would be going into York to fetch a person who is expected to be called for which is the case. Fanny and dear little Janet are going in principally for a drive and Mrs. Colville the superintendant's Wife is to be brought out to see how she can acquit herself in making dresses and if she does the first well and fashionably perhaps more may fall into her hands as we must not disgrace you when we come below. I must ask you to send me five yards of diaper to make pinafores for Matilda and to send me another cap. I like the bonnet cap very well apply to the person who made that and say I should like white feather flowers just like the black ones white goffering without the rim of black and an additional row beyond that bordered with white ribbon and it would make a very pretty half cap. [130] Be it known unto you I am too juvenile in age or in spirit to wear a whole cap which perhaps may impart some knowledge to your already over wise pate.  After all this rodomontade I come to a very serious matter. On Sunday being too early for Church I took Matilda and the rest to the 1st Vernon's grave. Matilda had often been enquiring and had not the story only by heart but at heart about the bird's nest and fatal catastrophe attending it.  I wish before leaving the District to have a railing round dear Vernon's grave I know you will not deny me.  Thomson did not take the trowel with him but I will send it by Taylor if he should call. De Burgh's foal I hope you will forgive us for not knowing whether it was turned out or taken to Champion Bay. Thomson started very early and Aubrey was not up but I watched from the verandah saw Thomson's earnestness but it appears did not sufficiently enter into particulars. The horses were driven from the field into the stockyard some separated and left Filly Pony and her foal to my knowledge these I was most interested in. There might have been others without my knowledge belonging to other people turned into the bush. Pony the foal and Filly were turned into the yard.  I have heard that Stephen Parker is going down tomorrow and have just despatched a parcel to him for Mrs H [?] Knight. Will you get it conveyed to Fremantle it contains a dress of muslin as far as I can judge well selected for herself and some pink stripe for the children and a letter in which I have offered them to her acceptance and had some things that were friendly to say. I was much amused with your recital of the disappointment experienced by yourself and F. Wittenoom in being deprived of an intellectual treat. I wish to know what you got instead over which such a mysterious curtain is drawn and the effects of which your social supper and the stiff glass of brandy and water would not dispel. I expect you have both been very naughty and endeavoured to shut your ears to the voice of the charmer charm he never so wisely.  I almost forgot to answer your question about the young colt that was lame it was considerably better and went with the rest of the horses to Champion Bay.  25th. Matilda's birthday she is now four years old. Her doll is completely dressed and given to her today. We have also some sort of celebration in the way of plum cake etc. but school is kept all the same for it would be a disadvantage to her to relax discipline. You know very well it is an easy government they are under which is far better than none and perhaps better than too strict restraint. [131]  My dear Thomas Yours Truly  And affectionately  Eliza Brown  Grass Dale  November 26 1851  My dearest Papa  Again you have an enormous packet of letters but without the usual apologies which I am ashamed to offer upon again sinning in this respect after all the promises I have made of reformation. The fact is this is an important time in the history of our colonising and I wish you to see how we stand publickly privately and pecuniarily if I may use the term and I do not know better how to inform you more genuinely than in the chit chat we have amongst ourselves.  If my letters have come to hand you are informed of the change that has taken place in our views with regard to going to Champion Bay it is settled now that we become denizens of the Town; Mr. Brown has preceded me and is now in Perth doing the duties of his appointment as Police Magistrate which requires his daily attendance at the Court House to pass judgement on the offences committed against the peace of our Sovereign Lady the Queen.  When the new Colonial Secretary comes out we shall all go down to Fremantle for which place Mr. Brown is appointed but is doing the duties in Perth now until Mr. Yule the acting Colonial Secretary is at liberty who will be Police Magistrate in Perth. You see the introduction of convicts is doing some good to us a private family and to many who have long been struggling settlers. If it should not be a pleasant place to reside in in after years we seem likely from one source or other to have the means to quit the place if it suited our inclination to do so but I am still a stickler for the advantages of this place notwithstanding all that has been said to its disadvantage; it would lead into too long a discussion to enumerate them. I never thought our slow and difficult progress attributable to the country but to the frittering away of its capabilities in the first place by people being unaccustomed to the task they set themselves about to perform. Gentlemen turning labourers etc. at which they generally cut but a very poor figure literally wearing themselves out at elbows and in very few instances putting money in their purse for so great is the expense at which they do things that no profit remains out of all their labour the products of the earth are more valuable than riches! more precious than comforts! [132]  To give only two instances out of many - a gentleman came home from the Salt river a distance of about 35 miles with a load of salt in his team. He had worked hard by way of example along with one or two men in collecting it. He came home weary and sore all over having stood in the briny water for hours together under the rays of a burning sun collecting it. The horses were unharnessed and the waggon or dray left some little distance from the house at the end of the pool. It was in the month of February. In the night tremendous rain came on the first of the season indeed rather before the season and quite unexpectedly. Out runs this gentleman with a large and valuable Witney blanket in his hand and another over his back and carefully covered the precious mineral for salt and sugar will melt but Witney blankets will not melt. I question if a thought whether they would or would not ever entered this gentleman's head but I have heard his wife say and smiling when she related this anecdote illustrative of her husband's zeal that the unfortunate blankets had lost all their niceness and one a great deal of the quality of comfort it had been wont to impart from the dampness to the touch ever since the briny immersion even if it had been well washed and dried.  Then after harvest after the corn is threshed how many kind and good housewives have obeyed the call with alacrity to bring out their sheets there is a sudden breeze and the wheat must be winnowed immediately this sieve I have made myself! The wire was dreadfully expensive it cost what three sieves would do in England but there is no pleasure in them there is nothing like doing a thing yourself and having a great deal of trouble about it the trouble is a pleasure and never did sheets look so beautiful in the eyes of a wife than when put to such a purpose why they do their part passively it is true in assisting the industrious settler what could be done now without the sheets? Without them we should not have bread to eat. By and by it is astonishing how fast the sheets begin to wear and why they are all over holes already. Well! things do wear out faster in this country a great deal than they do in England!  Now the way for three of my boys seems very clear though it is dangerous to look into futurity. What may be the will of an over-riding Providence we cannot tell but calculating upon human probabilities it is likely Kenneth will in a very few years be the settler at Champion Bay Aubrey in one of the Govt. Offices perhaps clerk to his Father a very good beginning but he is too young as yet (though a very intelligent boy) Maitland the settler at Grass Dale. [133] In the meantime Grass Dale will be let most likely to Mr. Cowan (Native Protector) that is the house vineyard paddock etc. The Farm part is already let as I have told you before. It seems astonishing to me after all the pulls there have been on your fortune that you think of settling the £2000 pounds we are indebted to you on me. If it cannot be carried out I shall still feel extremely grateful as indeed I ought. The package is a delightful one. Alas! I have not heard from my Sisters. How much I deplore for Anna in her irreparable loss. Dear Aunt died as a good old Lady might be expected to do she had found mercy grace peace in Him who is faithful. The account of her last hours is very edifying. I pray God that I may be enabled to lay it to heart thank Mrs. Bussel again and again. I will certainly not fail to write to her. I have not had the consolation of knowing for certain that you have heard from us and I have written much and anxiously so has Mr. Brown.  My dearest Papa  Yours devotedly and affectionately  Eliza Brown  Perth  December 30 1851  My dearest Papa  It was with great joy I saw a letter in your handwriting on the mantlepiece on my arrival here this morning. I immediately broke open the seal and perused the contents. After many a weary day of expectation I learned you had heard from me at last and I hope my dearest Papa you will be pleased to hear from me again once a year as long as you live. I must not give up the privilege as long as you will permit it of sending you a few lines and will restrict myself to that period to guard against wearying and offending you. Alas! There is more of my trash on its way to you it cannot be recalled and I only regret it in case of wounding and inconveniencing you afresh but as our better star is prevailing I thought my relation of passing events would carry balm with it to one so much interested in our well-doing as yourself.  Matilda and I have come down to Perth as her Papa is tired of being without us. he got leave from the Government to spend Xmas with his family at Grass Dale and has driven us down. [134] We proceed to Fremantle on the 1st of January the new Colonial Secretary having come out. Kenneth is at Champion Bay the rest of the children at Grass Dale. I had an invitation to a grand Ball at Govt. House on the 23rd. of December but declined going as it would have broken up our Xmas family party at home though Mr. Brown thinking to gratify me had gone to the expense of a suitable dress and all the etceteras for the occasion which would have been displayed at another gala no less brilliant given by a fashionable lady in Perth but having no spirits left I have written to decline the invitation. There is more I could say but will restrict myself and leave the remaining space for a more valued correspondent.  Pray dearest Papa send me those unworthy annals they have one redeeming merit that of being faithful and will be useful to me as documents from which to cull reminiscences of a settler's life which in after years may possess some interest for my children. When the calamity befals me of having no more my dearest Father to write to one of my Sisters must bear the burden of hearing from [me] once a year. I promise only a single letter. If a parent cannot bear with my infirmity how can I expect any one less bound by kindred ties to listen with interest to the outpourings of my heart in its search for sympathy tedious descriptions and labours in vain for that is the light in which I now regard those unfortunate productions.  Monday March. Went down with Mr. Armstrong into a neighbouring glen to make a seizure of a sly-grog shop. As we were walking over the hill under which the camp lies we came up with a digger who was erecting a sort of tent with poles cut from the forest. It was a large tent and involved a good deal of work for a single man; but it was nearly finished. But as this hill was destined in winter for the camp it was of course sacred ground and Mr. Armstrong told the unhappy man that he must pull his erection down. He grumbled as was natural inasmuch as he had not heard of the reservation before; but like the rest he submitted. When we arrived at the grog shop we found a policeman already standing as sentry at the door and others carbines in hand standing round. Mr. Armstrong went in ordered all he found inside to be handcuffed and proceeded to search. The man however had been too much for him - we only discovered half a keg of port. However the selling had been sworn to by a police spy and so the tent was doomed. The culprit's own spade was used to knock his tent down and his wife actually helped to pull the stakes out of the ground. All the woodwork was piled and a glorious bonfire was made. The kegs and the tent were confiscated for the use of the authorities. Meanwhile a crowd was gaping round without venturing to offer one word of interruption; both they and some diggers who were washing their gold in the waterhole beneath seemed to look on with the most perfect unconcern. At Ballarat in more lawless days when Mr. Armstrong had it entirely his own way he used to collect a bundle of faggots pile them up in the middle of the forfeited tent and set the whole concern in a blaze - burning them out as he expressed it "rump and stump" destroying bedding furniture merchandise and clothing; and yet even to this unauthorised as it was they never offered serious resistance. On the present occasion the culprit seemed to fear that Mr. Armstrong was going to do the same and humbly begged an exemption for his "traps" which was graciously granted. In the course of the day this man was fined £100 (it being a second offence) which he paid before night; such are the profits of the illicit trade.  My Dear Mother I have had many trials and troubles since I saw you and a great deal of sickness but I have never wanted for anything amongst it all and for the first twelve months we was geting what I call on step forine and to back [one step forward and two back?]. I think I told you when I was home that Hart was very saveing and very fond of money which made me very uncomfortable has I could not save anything out of his wages has we had so much sickness and of course I had many little things to buy for such a time I could not save much you might think but Mother I have never been without a pound in my pocket since I have been John Harts wife and I think that is a great thing to say.  Should I have been so well off in England NO work hard and be half starved Australia is the place to live I would not come back to England again unless I had enough to keep me without work on no account neither would my husband I am speaking now the very sentiments of our hearts but people must be saving industrious and persevering we have deprived ourselves of many things we might have had but what was it for all to try to do something for ourselves so that my husband should not allways work under a Master and happy am I to inform you that we have gained that point he is now his own Master My Dear Mother after I had quite recovered from my confinement and quite strong I was determined to work to help get a living I began to take in washing and ironing at 3 shillings per Dozen so I used to earn about 15 shillings per week which was as much as I could do with a young Baby then we could save a pound per week and live comfortable was then paying seven shillings per week for a house garden we was then geting on in the world very well for working people and just got things comfortable about us when my poor husband was taken ill with a violent fever fevers are very prevalent here and so they are in most hot climates when he was taken ill we had about 20 pounds in the house it was twelve weeks before he went to work again the very day he went to work we had but one shilling but thank God we did not owe any person a penny piece he went Back to his old place to work and you see My Dear Mother that through our own industry it kept us from the cold hand of Charity I still kept on my work all through his sickness so you might think my hands was full enough then I never expected him to recover the Doctor gave me very slight hopes of him after he got well and went to work again we was obliged to begin afresh and try to save a little more that is two years ago this month since then we neither of us has not had a days illness and everything have prospered then in a month or two we bought a cow and she used to turn me in about 12 shillings per week and a lot of poultry of my own rearing we was then doing well I had by that time a great deal of washing as my little girl could run about I did many weeks earn 30s myself by my washing so I have not spent much idle time I was exactly like that when Mr. White Brought the letter to me that Stephen wrote and we had got 50 pounds in the Bank and all got by real hard work I must tell you Mother that Hart is a very steady sober man and would not spend a shilling in waste on no account neither would I myself. . . the diggins Broke out soon after Mr. White called on me well I beged of my husband to come here and try his luck has so many Adelaide people had been here and done well at last he made up his mind to come and leave me in Adelaide has I could get my living without touching the little money we had saved. . . in about 5 weeks after he left I received a letter from him containing the joyfull news that he had got his own share 200 pounds worth of gold and also to tell me to sell my things and come to Melbourne as quick as possible so My Dear Mother gladly did I comply with that request. [167] I sold my things and took the first vessel Bound for Melbourne. . . where I found my husband anxiously waiting my arrival he was then determined that I should not work so hard any more of course I have no need to now for with the money that I Brought with me we could raise 300 pounds and now I consider myself well off in the world so I do nothing but my own work now. . . now Hart bought 2 Horses and a Dray he gave 100 and 50 pounds for them he is now taking stores to the diggins for shopkeepers and he is making 30 pounds per week and making money fast but he will be off to the diggins again as soon as the rain comes as they are obliged to wash all the earth after they dig it to get the precious metal I hope he will do something handsome this time.  I have had a most serious illness occasioned by a violent miscarriage which happened on the 21st of last April since which I have scarcely been able to leave my room. I was taken ill the night of the Ball given in honor of the Governor's visit to Bathurst and was so alarmingly ill that for some days I could not leave Mrs Whitton's and then I was taken to Alloway Bank where I remained till the 2nd of May - . - however through God's mercy alone I was restored to my family and am now feeling pretty well.  [...] - I have not been well having had a feeling of faintness coming over me and constant headache - .  28th. I was very ill all day with fainting fits. Dr McHattie came and prescribed for me - it is from the effects of my recent illness.  Jan. 15 1852. - To-day I asked a black fellow called Peacock if he had ever eaten 'black fellow'? As I said it laughingly he was thrown off his guard and acknowledged that he had; and from his look the reminiscences of the fact seemed to be rather pleasurable to him than otherwise. 'What is the taste like?' I asked. 'Like pig' he unhesitatingly replied. Then I changed my manner and asked him how he could dare to do so horrible a thing? On this he declared that what he had just said was in jest and that he had never eaten man. This is the first time I could ever get a confession of cannibalism out of a native. I have been told that the blacks cannot endure a white man's flesh. They say that it tastes very salt and is highly flavoured with tobacco.  Jan. 21. - Rode through the Black Forest. The road resembled one of the great thoroughfares out of London so full was it of waggons drays carts gigs equestrians and pedestrians proceeding to the diggings. And no wonder; for a very common-looking person who begged leave to ride by my side thinking perhaps that my calling might be a protection to him told me that he and three others had dug up sixteen hundred pounds worth of gold in nine weeks. He had a hundred and fifty pounds worth about his person then. He told me that previous to leaving England he had been a helper in a stable in Yorkshire. There was immense confusion and drunkenness at the Bush Inn at Gisborne where I slept. [191] At night the chambermaid advised me to lock and barricade the door of my bed-room otherwise she thought I may be intruded upon by drunken people; and it was well I did so for during the night two men practised upon the panels of the door for at least an hour and though they split them they could not get in.  Jan. 22. - Stopping to bait at a roadside inn near Melbourne I spoke with a common labouring man who had just dug up 800£ of gold.  Jan. 26. - The gold excitement is fast increasing. Seeing a crowd of people around a shop-door I found that there was on show inside a lump of solid purest gold weighing twenty-seven pounds eleven ounces. The men who found it - four ill-looking persons - were in attendance waiting to be paid for it. I heard that they had sold it for 1200£. The mass of gold had a very bizarre form looking something like a Hindoo god.  March 11. - Gold is selling in Melbourne at 3£ the ounce.  March 18. - Took my first stage out of Melbourne towards my district. At night the landlord and his wife both very drunk fought so furiously that I was obliged to separate them by force. During the fray all the little children came clustering round the mother taking her part. One sturdy urchin boldly attacked his father by kicking his shins and the calves of his legs.  March 19. - Gave some serious advice to the landlord about the scene of last night and afterwards rode to Kilmore to breakfast. Slept at the Mac Ivor Inn where I heard from one of the diggers that the goings on there are lamentably immoral.  March 21 (Sunday). - Arrived at Maiden's Punt on the Murray after a ride of thirty-two miles in four hours and a half. Held Service immediately and then rode on ten miles farther to another inn lower down the Murray and held a second Service.  April 10. - Went with two magistrates and the head constable of the district to examine the corpse of a man which had just been discovered on the banks of the Edward River. [192] As we approached the spot we came upon a dog who on seeing us slunk into some bushes frightened. Immediately afterwards we saw the body lying prone with the head partially submerged in a little pool of water. As it had been dragged from a place some yards off where two or three people had been camping I suggested that it was possible there might have been foul play although the corpse was so placed as to give a first impression that the man had in the last state of exhaustion from want of food dragged himself down to the water-side to drink and there had died. On closely examining the body we found that part had been devoured - probably by his glare-eyed guilty-hooking dog; and on turning round the head which was resting on the arm we discovered a tremendous fracture of the right parietal bone of the skull. Thus it is certain that a murder has been enacted here.  April 12. - Rode with a magistrate into Moolamon to hold an inquiry with regard to the murdered man. We elicited the fact that about ten days ago three men from the diggings had passed the night here and talked about having a quantity of gold about them. In the morning they went away together accompanied by a dog in the direction in which the body was found. We likewise were informed that the second day afterwards two men on horseback heading a third horse and having no dog with them were seen going at full speed across the spacious plain which extends to the Murrumbidgee. Thus it is pretty evident that the three must have camped by the side of the Edward; and during the night the two murdered the one for his share of the gold. They then arranged his body in a studied attitude to make it appear that he had died of exhaustion; and placed his head to rest on his arm so as to conceal the fracture. And this deceit would have succeeded if I had not particularly requested that the head should be lifted up. The murderers have however got clean off; and in such wild unsettled country as this all researches will be useless.  April 20. - Hear that a hut-keeper going from one hut to another on this run has lost his way and not been heard of. [193] He started the day before yesterday in the morning.  April 22. - As I was mounting a horse lately bought he suddenly put his head between his legs so as almost to meet his tail and bucked his back up so that I was shot off like an arrow from a bow. Luckily I broke no bones. I believe that an inveterate buck-jumper can be cured by slinging up one of the four legs and lunging him about severely in heavy ground on the three legs. It is called here 'turning a horse inside out.' No treatment can be too severe for a horse addicted to this abominable and incomprehensible vice.  April 26. - Went out with my friend to poison his run. It is thus done. When a beast is killed a quantity of small bits are cut off the carcass. By means of a sharp penknife little holes are cut in these morsels and into these little holes pinches of strichnia are introduced. These bits are put into a small bag and taken out on the run. The acting person then as he rides or drives along throws to the right and left this meat. At night the wild dogs come eat it all up greedily and ere long die. But the strichnia has not yet done its work. Wild dogs eat one another and begin their repast with the entrails of their brothers. Now the entrails of the dead dogs contain the strichnia which is so strong that after passing into the second dog it will kill him too and as I have been informed even a third. Thus the poor sheep call poison to their aid against their terrible enemies.  May 19. - The rain has fallen in torrents all day and my condition is wretched enough in such a country for there is no pastoral duty to attend to and study and privacy in a poor little wooden hut is next to impossible.  May 20. - Rode to Mr. L - 's station and there I heard of a shocking murder which has quite lately taken place in this neighbourhood. The actors in this horrible tragedy were Edward River blacks; the victim a man of colour from the United States settled for some years as a pastrycook in Sydney. This poor fellow gave up a remunerative business that he might go to the Port Phillip gold diggings and was travelling this way with a white comrade. [194] He was unfortunately seen by some members of a tribe of blacks belonging to this neighbourhood who followed him chased him and drove several spears jagged with bits of glass through his back working them up and down in his body as he lay on the ground. His comrade insane with terror ran or rather flew to the nearest station the blacks at first following him with his bundle which he had dropped and begging him to take it as they did not wish to hurt him. They then cut up the corpse of their victim into three or four pieces buried them and taking up his bundle as well as the bundle of his comrade walked very unconcernedly into the store at the Company's station and gave them up to the storekeeper saying that they had found them on the road. Now this dreadful crime has arisen from a most lamentable blunder. As I believe I have said before all the tribes or families of the indigenes which are scattered over the whole face of the country are in a state of natural warfare with one another. Sometimes alliances are concluded between them; but without such an alliance every black who ventures into another territory is liable to be assassinated. Now these stupid blacks mistook this poor American black for one of themselves and thus considered his life lawfully forfeited. They disdained to touch his property. A black expressed to me to-day great indignation at their stupidity saying that they ought to have known the difference between 'black fellow' and 'white man's black fellow.' It may be supposed that the whole country is much excited about this occurrence. The mounted police have been galloping about shooting the wrong people and letting the guilty authors of the outrage escape. They have shot a lame old woman I believe.  May 23. - Hold Divine Service at the Doctor's hut at Maiden's Punt. Ten adults and fifteen children attended - quite a refreshing number in comparison with the very few which usually attend my ministrations.  May 27. - After three or four days of heavy travelling over boggy ground the horses having scarce anything to eat I arrived at a station on the Barratta Creek where I had a fine black swan served up for dinner stewed. It ate very like rather tough fricasseed rabbit. [195]  May 28. - After crossing the Edward River in a frail canoe of bark and swimming my horse over two or three deep creeks I arrived at the hospitable and superior head-station of Mr. G - .  June 1. - My horses have strayed away so that I am doomed to remain here in a state of inactivity. In the evening I attended a native corrobery; or what would be called by the whites a soirée dansante. The old men sat and smoked the women drummed on skins and the young men enacted pantomimic dances These ballets were of diverse character; some were joyous others warlike others licentious whilst one was funereal. According to their character so the women chanted. Naked and painted as the dancers were they looked like demons as they flitted to and fro among the watchfires.  June 15. - My horses came back of their own accord so that I was able to get on; but the weather is atrocious and the roads of melted caoutchouc. The longer I stay in this country the more hopeless does my position seem The floods in winter and the droughts in summer render the life of a clergyman one of great difficulty and self-denial. It must be recollected that riding a horse and leading another over boggy ground for twenty-five miles is quite as fatiguing as walking ten. And the sole refreshment after such a day's exercise consists of poisonous green tea without milk lean beef without vegetables and heavy damper.  June 20. - Hear of some bushrangers on the Sydney side who robbed a gentleman stripped him naked and tied him across a nest of huge black ants which ate all the flesh off his bones. He was their old master who by his severity had caused them to take to the bosh.  June 21. - It having been always the object of my wishes to visit the confluence of the Darling and the Murray not only from being informed that the visit of a Minister would be very acceptable to the people of that district but also on account of various objects of interest to be seen there I started this morning at half-past nine from my head-quarters on the Edward River for the sheep-station of Canally on the Murrumbidgee. [196] Yet at the outset some difficulties occurred which might have affected a sensitive mind. My stipend is paid by a certain number of subscribers among whom the names of the Darling squatters do not figure. My people then seem not altogether well pleased that I should venture a hundred miles away from the limits of the subscription list although they know that there must he people to be married children to be baptized women to be churched and above all a population growing up in a most far-off district totally destitute of clerical visiting or of religious ministrations. But as I know that my health will not allow me to remain much longer in this extraordinary country and that after me no one probably will dare to come for a long time I have thought fit to set at defiance the half-smothered remonstrances of the subscription list and to do the best I can for my neglected fellow-Christians during the remainder of my stay here.  Aug. 23. - Rode to Maiden's Punt hoping to cross my horses; but the proprietor of the ferry absolutely refuses to attempt it. I baptized three children belonging to a man who is just starting for the diggings. He insisted on paying me. I said that our Church did not sell the Sacraments. He said that the clerk must be paid. I answered that there was no clerk. He then said roughly that he did not wish anything from anybody not even the Church without payment. I told him that in the present case there was no alternative. He then went away in a rude manner.  Aug. 25. - Find that the man whose children I baptized yesterday has gone away at daybreak and left a packet for me. On opening a very dirty bit of white-brown paper tightly twisted I found at least three ounces of small nuggets of pure gold in it. So he gained his point after all. [197]  Sept. 18. - After sleeping at the inn called Vinges and paying a pound sterling for a night's lodging for my two horses I started for Melbourne a distance of twelve miles. To describe this state of the road accurately would be impossible. Let us imagine four feet of pitch half cooled and we should arrive at some idea of this dozen miles of black loam trampled into a deep mud by the hoofs of innumerable beasts. Woe to the rider who lets his horse stand still a moment with his forelegs together in this glutinous mass. It would be difficult to get him out even with dismounting. And what dismounting! I met twenty-four bullocks drawing a dray and with difficulty they slowly progressed. And quite pitiable it was to see poor families on their way to the diggings in a cart drawn by one horse. There were the children extended on the bedding screaming while the lean horse stood still in the mud motionless as a statue and the father and mother bogged up to the knees themselves were vainly pushing behind. Every now and then came showers of rain to damp the little remaining ardour of these searchers for gold. At times suspicious-looking characters passed me armed to the teeth who looked with a covetous eye on the quantity of baggage I had on my spare horse. This colony was the most desirable of all which the Crown possesses. How changed now! No more tranquillity and good-fellowship between the grades of society. All is confusion selfishness licence and subversion of all respect for worth talent and education. Brawn and muscle are now the aristocracy and insolently bear their newly-assumed honours. In fact we have here the French Revolution without the guillotine. When I arrived in Melbourne I found the streets full of a dirty disorderly mob of people many of them tipsy who seemed to take a delight in setting the laws of decent behaviour at defiance.  Oct. 2. - Met in Collins Street a coarse-looking young woman very gaily dressed with a fine baby in her arms who to my surprise recognised me with a loud voice as the Minister who had baptized her child in the bush. She wore a French bonnet of a delicate lemon colour with a white lace veil; a common cotton coloured handkerchief tied round her red neck; a new green silk dress sufficiently short to show coarse puffy legs and ankles clothed with dirty socks and thick winter boots laced up in front. [198] She had a short and stocky figure and from the redness of her complexion seemed to have just risen from dinner. When she found that I rather shrank from the warmth of her greeting she said 'Don't you recollect me as hut-keeper at the head-station of -  and that you christened my baby and wouldn't take anything for doing it? And now I have got plenty of money and wish to make you a present.' I interrupted her by asking her what she meant by walking about town without her husband dressed in that way? 'Oh!' she answered 'my husband knows all about it; he is gone to the diggings for the second time to get some more gold.' 'Did he do pretty well on his first visit to the diggings?' I asked. 'Well thank God he did very fairly; he got 700£ and he has given it all to me to take charge of till he comes down again. This young woman six months before was a raw red-haired savage Scotch maid-of-all-work at a sheep-station 200 miles in the interior married to one of the shepherds. Her husband and she had left service gone to the diggings and found this great prize. She was now roaming about Melbourne amusing herself and rendering herself entirely unfit for the only thing nature ever intended her for - hard labour. She finished a very voluble harangue in answer to some advice I gave her by praying me to pay her a visit next morning that she might give me a handful of nuggets. But this is one only of a thousand strange things which are occurring. A lady told me yesterday that she had just lost an excellent maidservant who one day was followed about by a digger who proposed himself off-hand to her and backed his arguments so opportunely by a heavy bag of gold which weighed down his pocket that the girl when also came back showing her mistress the gold which the lover had given her to keep confessed that she was engaged to be married so soon as a licence could be procured. And this marriage ceremony goes off thus. After the ceremony is over and the officiating minister has received generous proofs of the prodigality of the contracting parties the couple and their friends drive to St. Kilda or Brighton with a suite of fortuitous applauding acquaintance. The toilette of the ladies is something preposterously extravagant. [199] Their blue satin bonnets and white ostrich feathers oppress their heads; their crimson satin dresses blaze upon squat bodies which have been submitted for this first and probably the last time to the screwing-in process of powerful stays. Next to the dress come the heavy boots laced up in front. The coachman wears blue and white ribbons; so do the horses; so even does the whip nay even the spokes of the wheels. During the journey which takes half an hour to an hour English porter beer and champagne are drunk by the driven and the drivers. On their reaching the inn an expensive banquet is served and the most expensive liquors which the colony affords are circulated in profusion. Evening comes on and everybody accumulates drunkenness on himself. Night arrives and the whole party gallop back to Melbourne in the most hopeless state of intoxication having squandered a sum which I dare not here name for fear of encountering incredulity. A week is spent by the married pair in all these delicate outpourings of first love and then satiety having intervened and the gold-bag having diminished the new bride awakes one morning without her partner at her side and discovers that he has bolted to the diggings. She suffers great misery and ultimately discovers that her partner having got more gold has married again in some other place and that in fact he has had two or three consorts before herself. So she too partly not of spite partly from destitution resolves to marry again. And thus the lower classes go on setting the marriage laws at defiance to the utter despair of the clergymen who see the inextricable social confusion prevailing around them without the power to remedy it. It may be supposed that the publicans reap a rich harvest from so much social disorganisation. So fast are immigrants arriving that this class of people have their houses crowded to suffocation and sell their poisoned adulterated liquors at fabulous prices. In the midst of all this social turmoil the Colonial Government although a little taken aback acts on the whole with that firmness and good sense which British gentlemen always show in cases of emergency. And the press too setting apart a little too much party violence nobly seconds the cause of order. The difficulty now is to get a sufficient police force on foot to check the disorder which prevails for men who come to dig gold will not act as policemen unless very well remunerated. [200] A horse patrol has been established the privates of which receive 8s. per diem exclusive of rations and lodgings.  Oct. 11. - Embarked in a steamer for Sydney and paid 12£ for a passage of three days. As we steamed down the bay we passed three vessels full of immigrants sailing up into the land of promise.  N.M. Barracks Chatham March 14th 1852  My dear Mr Hope  I received your kind letter a short time since and as you said it would give you great pleasure to hear from me sometime I now intend answering it. Although I fear cannot write a very interesting letter from this place it is very dull and the same things happen day after day but I must try my best you tell me to give you an account of my voyage it was a very long and tedious one we had little bad weather but so many calms and the ship was such a very slow sailer we left Sydney on the twenty fourth of August and did not arrive in England until the eleventh of January very nearly five months I should not have thought it half as long if my husband had been with me but he was obliged to come home in the Man of War he went out in. I suffered very much from sea sickness and feel quite a dread of the sea now but I think I should soon summon courage enough to go out to Sydney again it seemed so strange to me to be away from all my friends We were obliged to put in at Pernambuco for provisions such a wretched place it is we only stayed two days there but it was quite enough the heat was so intense we could hardly bear to walk across the sheds [?] I hope it will be my last visit there it is a fearfully dirty place but perhaps I am telling you what you know already for I daresay you have been there - You want to know how I like England it is hardly fair of me to judge for I have seen very little of it I have been to London several times but was glad to leave it I was quite bewildered and must confess astonished with everything / it is certainly a wonderful place I have not seen any sights yet but hope soon to be able to spend a few hours in that way Mr Pym is very busy just now studying for an examination for a Staff appointment - he is very anxious to get an Adjutancy but I am sorry to say has not very much interest / he however intends to try what he can do for himself / if he succeeds it will make us very comfortable for England is an expensive place to live in the prices of things astonish me every thing so much higher than in Sydney at least when I left but most likely there has been a great change on account of the Gold Mines such numbers of people from all quarters of the world are flocking there attracted with the accounts of the quantity of gold there is to be found. I suppose you have had an account of the piece weighing a hundred pounds that was found in one solid lump but the person who purchased it to send home very foolishly broke it up it would have been much better to send it as it was for people are inclined to doubt the fact but it is quite fun I can assure you. The people are mad about going to the Diggings Sydney I fear for some time will be in a sad state all the servants and labouring men were leaving and wages enormously high The man left Grandmama because she would not give him more than a pound a week besides keeping him rather absurd is it not! I have not heard From Sydney since I wrote to you but am expecting long letters every day I hope if you have a spare moment you will write to her soon I am much obliged for your offer of showing me all the wonders of your beautiful country but I am afraid it will be a long time before I can have that pleasure / I should indeed like to see Scotland must live in hopes of doing so some day before I go out again. I have your parcel still it is quite safe if I have an opportunity of sending it to your brother at Deptford I shall be sure not to forget it. You will be tired reading such a long uninteresting letter but I told you at first that there was no news of any interest in this place to tell you We have been very fortunate in getting nice quarters in Barracks and I dare say in course of time I shall like the place very well but we are both anxious to go out again / Mr Pym says if he does not succeed in getting a Staff appointment he will try and go in the ship that relieves the Man of War now there / [132] I cannot tell you how anxious I am to see my dear Mother and all my friends once again / Grandmama often talks of coming to England but I do not think she ever will indeed at her time of life it would be very foolish to risk such a long voyage She has a very pretty place a few miles out of town / until the last few months has enjoyed excellent health I forget if I told you that both my Aunts Atkinson and Thomson were in Sydney when I last heard / they went up to see Grandmama the latter only intended staying a very short time I should think she was quite tired of moving about so much they have left Melborne and gone back to their old house in Launceston / cannot tell you much of the Arthurs or Reibeys. We never hear from them but believe they are all getting on very well of course you know James has a little son he is now about three years old his wife has been very dangerously ill lately Mary has an immense family of little ones I think there are nine of them altogether and all very nice children one is very delicate indeed I fear she will not live she is subject to dreadful fits perhaps she may grow out of them some of the doctors say she will / I think I must now say good bye Mr Pym sends with me our kindest regards and Believe me dear Mr Hope [131]  Your sincere Cousin  Celia L. Pym  Fremantle  January 9th 1852  Perhaps the letter that more particularly displeases you deserves more attention than all the rest but I cannot oblige people to open their eyes happily my own mind is set at rest by having gained the object I aimed at namely a written acknowledgement from my husband of the amount of the pecuniary obligations he was under to you which you had complained of not receiving from him nor was that all he was induced by me to offer you payment. I had to point out in what manner. Afterwards we were both afraid impediments might come in the way of a settlement and then he wrote to offer to sell Grass Dale which is becoming more and more valuable and every word of that letter I dictated. All that I have to fear now is lest my endeavours to effect what is good and honorable should be turned against me by your betrayal of the private letter a woman's weapon with which to subdue the stony nature of his impenetrable feelings. I ought not to have sent it to you but should patiently have awaited the issue in God's good time without making a human confidante. I wished you to see my struggles and that your Daughter was true come what might but surely to me is verified the truth of the vanity of human wishes. Perhaps all that I have prided myself upon in any little way or had pride in communicating to you for in that rested my pride and pleasure I shall be humbled for by your disapproval. [135] If such be the will of Heaven I will endeavour to recognize in it the chastening hand of the Almighty. Let me have one kind letter to obliterate the past.  Inadvertently I have monopolized all the sheet leaving no room for my better half at the risk of incurring your displeasure. I have previously written to acknowledge the receipt of your bounty the package from England. I mention it again now in case that letter has not been received. I always look upon it as your gift because if you dealt strictly any fund out of our income beyond interest for the debt we owe could at all times have been applied had you chosen to paying off a little of the principal. I hope you have got the news of Mr. Brown being appointed Police Magistrate. He has been the first person to act in that capacity in the Colony. For the last year and a half of our sojourning in Western Australia an eventful period in the history of the Colony and also in our own private history it appears I have written too much. I hope you will forgive me and never mention the subject again.  I beg to be most affectionately remembered to my Sisters - nephews - neice - and the little Eliza - also that you will convey my best wishes to Mrs Bussel.  I have never heard the result of Emma's expected confinement which was reported to be near in a letter received sometime in April 1851 so you see I am rather starved for news.  My dearest Papa  Yours truly and affectionately  Eliza Brown  Fremantle  February 9 1852  Dear Papa  It would seem so unnatural to me not to write a few words to you now that I have an opportunity of sending to England free of expense; but it would be the most natural thing possible for me to give you a list of wants; which would make me quite your own Daughter again. You speak of there being a balance of our favor from the yearly income therefore please give my Sisters a commission to get me two pairs of stays two fly away veils very neat and chaste one black and one white and a ladylike shawl; also a tasty thing or two to cover the shoulders and give a little ornament and style to in-door dress and that would do to wear at a dinner party or in an evening. [136] Two thimbles for tiny children and a little useful nick-nack for each and all. The boys should one of them have a thing that contains compasses ruler pencils a knife etc another a small case with brush comb and other toilet conveniences on a small scale; none of these things would cost much. The reason of my wanting stays is that I have another to provide for as well as myself namely Fanny my good and patient help and friend though we are not just at present in want of them but shall be by the time they come out.  Every thing we get in the Colony is so trumpery unfashionable and expensive that England has always been my resource for satisfactory and cheap things. Now that I am going to reside in the more peopled parts of the Colony there is a duty one owes to society that creates more personal wants in the way of decoration that I should like to take the best steps in being provided with though I assure I always mean to be very economical in dress taking great care of every thing (which I always have done) and not having more than is necessary - but I don't expect to escape without a quiz from you which I will take as good naturedly as I hope you will my order - all you have to do is to put this into Anna's or Emma's hands and write me word that you are a very indulgent Papa and I am an incorrigable naughty Daughter.  I dared not send you the volume I have written to Mary though if you will be a listener to some portions of it I shall feel most proud the envelope will be left unsealed in case either my Sisters or yourself would like to know the contents. I have sent the same account to one of Mr. Brown's brothers.  My last letter to you was sent to England by Ann King who has returned to her friends. I did not see her but sent the letter after she was on board.  Dear Papa  Yours ever the same  Eliza Brown  Melbourne December 8th. 1853   Dr. Brother   I Avail meself of the opportunity of writing you those few lines in Receipt of your letter Dated June 2nd. 53 for which I am very happy to hear that you your W [wife] and Children & me Mother is in good health as this leaves me me Wife & Children Thanks be to God for it.   Dr. Brother you accuse me of Being very ungreatfull To you and not Sending you any remittance. Not knowing your P. Prst [parish priest's] Name I wrote to you before Margret Calihan came to Victoria wishing to know who I might remit you some money through. But I am told to Direct to yourself you Being as well knowing and in as good Oppolense [opulence] as many in the Parish of Cappawhite. I send you £30.0.0 thirty Pounds as a Token of gratitude and I would have sent you More But hearing of your welfare you keeping a Public house in the old Place. But I hope as soon as Opportunity offers you will come to me for it would Be the greatest Pleasure of mind for me to have you in this Cuntry with me as I know you could do well even by your trade. Me brother James acted very unkind when he was leaving Ireland in not coming here as he knew where I was. But I am very thankfull to you in Stoping with My Mother in her old age.   I have never herd of John Dwyer until I Reseived your letter. But through enquiry i found that he is in Morton Bay a long way above Sidney A Place very Difficult for Me to Send for him as he has never written to me and there are no People there i know. He has never written to me But I hope i will be able make off his address. Phillip White I herd of one Day Pr [prior] to me writing this note. He is at the Bendigo Diggings the Mounted Police. I was Speaking to Jermiah Ryan Richards Son he is gone to the Diggings in very good health. [170] I saw James Ryans Nailor two Daughters they a[re] in Melbourne in very good health and in good Situation.   This is a good Place for young men and Weoman now. Wages rules as follows. Single Men £60 to 70 per annum or per Day 12 to 15 Shilling. Single weoman 26 to 3 5 Pounds with rations of the Best. Married Couples with family 60 to 80 Pounds. Michael Ryans Boam son holyford is living near me in good health and Doing very well. I wonder you never let me know how John McGrath was. His friends Thos Ryan Bulloghs are very Independant here in Melbourne. I am very sorry to hear that young Patt Kilbride was not getting on as well as the father or uncle. I am very happy to hear that Richard Penfeather is Back Again and Doing well in Cappagh.   Dear Brother I am Sorry to Inform you that I Buried the two oldest of my children Mathew and Margret Hogan. Mathew was eight years & Margret Six years old. May god be with Them. I have four Children remaining by name Michael Ellon Mary & James Hogan.   Dr. Brother I am sending you Enclosed in this note a Draft for £30 Thirty Pounds and in case of any Delay I will write to you By next Mail. Please answer this as quick as Possible and Direct your letter to me Michael Hogan N. S. Wales Victoria South Melbourne. No more at Present from your ever Affectionate and loving Brother   Michael Hogan   Mr. Mathew Hogan   Cooper Cappa White County Tipperary Ireland  DEAR LOVE  I wrote to you and Mrs Bradshaw yesterday and I hope you received all safely We have had very severe weather last night and today hail rain wind and snow the last remaining on the ground some time giving us the rare opportunity of a game of that hearty English pastime snow-balling! I hope you are all well I am making your room comfortable been at it all day sewing nailing &c My poor friend that I left doing so nicely has had a relapse and is I am grieved to say gone to that [?] whence no traveller returns I called in another medical man to give me the benefit of his advice but medicine is of little avail in that disease; Think my darling how short and uncertain life is and come and give me the benefit and the pleasure of your company thro' life - Good night dearest kiss me. I dreamt of you all last night and did not like to let the day pass without penning a line or two.  Wednesday - I went to the Post Office today no letters from you no lock of hair as you promised; I was at the Police Court all day as witness in the case of a dog that had been once mine and was claimed by somebody that wished to appropriate her. Have not yet been able to go to the White Horse Gully but hope to do so tomorrow. Am very cold so you must excuse my wretched scribble tonight Good night dearest love!  FRIDAY  I went yesterday to the White Horse Hotel White Horse Gully. Bradshaw was not at home but tho' disappointed in not seeing him I had a very pleasant walk thro' beautiful scenery which I long to shew you - it resembles a gentlemans park in England more than any-thing else. I have caught a cold or rather a cold caught me while standing in the Police Court all day on Thursday but colds and Influenza are now quite a la mode." How is William? Give him my compliments and ask him if he will be able to attend at our interesting ceremony? I suppose you have perused the service by this time! Ha! Ha! I cant write for laughing! [60]  But joking apart seriously it is an impressive service - "Wilt thou love her comfort her honour and keep her in sickness and in health and forsaking all other keep thee only unto her as long as ye both shall live - Beautiful  And equally as follows "Then shall the priest say unto the woman."  I gathered some lovely heaths yesterday but tho' exquisite in appearance they want the perfume of English heaths a great loss to the flowers of the Antipodes! - Goodbye Sweet one  SUNDAY  Good morning dearest Mary many thanks for your kind letter and its enclosures which I received safely yesterday. I am confident your pleasure on receiving my letter was not equal to my joy as I had yours handed me and knowing by a squeeze what it contained hurried off to devour its contents in private. I suppose Mrs. B. dosent see my letters to you dearest love for altho' there is no harm in love still one hardly likes to write sweet nonsense for other eyes than the one next the heart Well I was going to say that I hurried off to devour it in private I don't like "My dearest Dr. Richardson" its not kind of you to be afraid to say "Walter" is the name ugly?  And so you all went to the cave did you pretty place that cave Eh? I prefer the scenery a little further on the wooded water course with the gentle slopes and deep precipices with the track along the face of the hill where you gently murmured "Yes"! Of course had the ground been a little less rough and the season a little milder I should have thrown myself on my left knee and with one hand on my heart become pathetic but dearest I think we managed it very well my feelings prevented me from saying all that I should have done but [crossed out] and I fancied I felt you tremble on my arm; I had told Brooke the day before in Melbourne that I had a serious duty to perform and I certainly never expected to see him on the Sunday With his usual exuberance of spirits he told me that altho' it undoubtedly was a serious matter he could not look upon any "popping the question" otherwise than a most ludicrous affair & we both laughed heartily.  You ask my opinion of his conduct to "dear little Polly." Now darling I do not see any thing so very unkind considering dear that he has a great deal to do always knocking about doubtless he has written before this and besides 12 months is a long time and I think he felt rather hurt himself (as I do) at being treated somewhat cavalierly! put off for so long. Besides he knows he is safe in the heart of his little betrothed and surely a ride with the hounds was too tempting and perhaps he expected to be home in time for the post. I know he loves her dearly and she is his first and only love and I would as soon doubt my own constancy to you as his to his second self. Give the little dear my kind love and sympathise between you sighing after two fond hearts that look upon each of you as part of their existence.  I think Brooke has very much improved and rejoice that he encountered the family for I think the mutual affection has been productive of much benefit to him - When we love and feel sure that we are beloved in return it does and must have a beneficial influence on our conduct - for as I would not like to have my body disfigured say by the loss of my fingers or eyes so I consider now that my mind should be purer and the moral standard of my actions higher is it not so? [61] And is not this one of the good effects of love? is not the state of love one designed for man by an al-creator [sic] for his good! undoubtedly dearest! and altho' some are not so happy as to encounter a heart that can beat in unison with theirs every creature on earth loves something. I am not poetical on the contrary (you think rather prosy) plain matter of sense I do not like poetry except perhaps on a quiet Sunday morning or late of a Saturday night; and I'll tell you why because I love it too much can you understand this apparent paradox at one time of my life I was dosy living in a land of dreams of spirits letting the realities of life glide past almost unheeded that was when at college (when all young men go thro' a little studying and a great deal of what they fancy is fun) Late hours &c impaired my health and it was not until I gave up poetry and nonsense and took to hard work that I found myself able to cope with the combination of angel and devil in my fellow mens composition I cannot read true poetry without feeling my heart beat stronger I think you have poetry in your soul I do not mean love that you can scribble verses any ass can do that but I think like myself you look beyond the hour the day don't you? the faculty of looking up as it were looking to the source of things I mean! Yes I think we shall be happy Of course dearest every man and woman have faults blemishes imperfections of body and mind but we must remember that there is no perfect one and remembering this we must forgive. Are not the following verses pretty?  The first dear thing that ever I loved  Was a mother's beaming eye  That smiled as I woke on my dreamy couch  That cradled my infancy.  I never forget the joyous thrill  That smile in my spirit stirred  Nor how it could charm me against my will  Till I laughed like a joyous bird.  And the next dear Thing that ever I loved  Was a bunch of summer flowers  With odours and hues & loveliness  Fresh as from Eden's bowers.  I never can find such hues again  Nor smell such sweet perfume  And if there be odours as sweet as them  Tis I that have lost my bloom.  And so it goes on until it comes to  And the next dear Thing that ever I loved  Is tenderer far to tell [62]  Twas a voice and a hand and a gentle eye   That dazzled me with its spell.  And the loveliest things I had loved before  Were but as the landscape now  On the canvass bright where I pictured her  In the glow of my early Vow.  And so on finishing with old age - like me as Mrs. B. said! Ha Ha.  Well this is a curious letter but it is amusing and delightful to me to talk to you and this sheet has occupied me as you see many days proving to you that my morning thoughts and my evening sigh has been dear Mary. I have got a little scheme when you come to me; you shall write to my mother and I to yours. I have a dear old mother that I love dearly if I were to say that she has been the finest & the cleverest woman of her day I might offend you sweet one but she sang as I never heard woman sing played the piano harp flageolet accordeon danced in her day played whist and now poor old soul having become old is anxious for me to return home oh! a letter from you will comfort her old age and shew her that her dear son is happy & does not forget the arms that nursed him.  I am delighted that your happiness is as you say coming fast I send you what you ask my darling but I am not accustomed to make bows with ribbon so you must take it as it is a token of my love. You say "about three months" now love let it be the beginning of August do there's a dear I think it wrong very wrong to postpone it as if you were afraid of me and as if Mr. B. was doubtful of my character. You will find a humble home and will have a poor man for your husband but there's no queen will be more welcome if you can do without society for a year or two we will go to England & spend many a happy hour in the society of old friends. Kind love to Mrs. B. Tilly & dear Polly and a thousand kisses from your dear and attached  WALTER  Birkinhead April the 28th. 1854   My dear Father   I take the liberty of writing these few lines to you hoping to find you my Stepmother Brothers and Sisters in good health as this leaves me & Sister and my Comerades in good health thanks be to our Blessed Redeemer for his goodness to our unworthiness.   My dear Father I am to inform you that we left Dublin on the 26th. Instant for the ship Araminta and she is to sail on Monday next. All the pasengers are a bord the vessel. We slept last night in it. There is about 300 Passengers on it and from 20 to 30 Sailors. It is a fine ship well regulated. They get good Provisions on Bread and tea for Breakfast potatoes and meat for dinner and the same as the first for supper. There is more Irish on it than any other Class of people.   I must be for ever under a compliment to Dean Armstrong for all the trouble he had got for us. He wrote to a friend of his to London to speak to the head Commisioners about us and so he did and got us off. We left Dublin about 7 oclock Tusday evening last. We took 15 hours coming across to Liverpool. Biddy got sea sick. I should get her [?] a bed and paid 3 shillings for it but I did not feel it no more than if I was on my bead at home. We came to the Depot. There we met our comerades and you might think it was out of the heavens we came to them. Michl. Gready Patt McGrath and Bridget Neylon were as glad as if we Gave them a thousand pound for we being along with them. I hope we will have luck please God. [69]  We had a good friend Dean Armstrong long may he live. He tried every Experiment to have us along with our Comerades and it did not fail him. What ever way the wind blows I am glad of being along with my Neighbours.   Michl. Gready Patt McGrath and Bridget Neylon and I my sister Joins in sending our best love and respects to you and remember me to my loving Neighbours and I bid adiu to Ireland for ever more. No more from your loving children   Bridget and Michael Normile  Lochinvar November the 5th. 54   My dear Father   I take the liberty of writing these few lines to you hoping find you my Stepmother Brothers and Sisters in a perfect state of health as this leaves me my Sister and Shipmates in good health thank God.   I am to inform you that I have more of my old Neighbours here along with me than what I thought. Patt McGrath Mcl. Gready Bridget Neylon Ellen Ford Honra McDonough I and my Sister is Convenient together. I got a place for the two last girls that came out. We are in good health and it is a mirracle to have good health the place being so warm.   Harvest is commencing to be cut down. Labouring men Expects good wages - they Expect a 1£ day. I have no harvest to cut this year and it is happy for me my master let the Farm and got a first rate team of horses. I do be drawing goods from Maitland all kinds of Stores. I go to Maitland twice or three times a week for a Load. The Settlers comes in here to buy Sugar Tea Salt Brandy Rum Gin and all kinds of goods. I go once a week around the Settlers or Farmers distributing the goods they buy. My work is when I am at home is weighing Sugar tea Salt and Metal Iron cheans [chains] Measuring all kinds of Liquir. I have a first rate place but one thing I will tell you there is no Comfort here with they Scorching hate. When I am walking on the road here a warm day it would burn the Soals of my feet. I would not give my chance for the best Farmer in Derry.   Let me know did Mr. James Shannon get married as yet. Let me know how is Mr. Patt. Let me know how is Martin McDonell Senr. or how is he geting on with the Russians. Let me know how is all my nearest and dearst relations - I will write home in short. Bridget Neylon wants to know how is her Father & Mother. She is in good health. Remember me to all my comerades. [70] Let me know had Johny Lenane the garden this last year. Send me a news paper if you can. I think my Pmaster send you one.   I will conclude by wishing you happiness   Micl. and Bridget Normile.   I hear that Thomas Conway got married.   Melbourne Feby 2d 1854   My Dear Brother   I have written to yo[u] about eight weeks since and sent a draf[t] for thirty pounds. For fear of a disappointment with the first I now send you the other part which you will understand is for the same sum the first was for if you received it. You were mistaken in regard to the thirty eight pound you were of opinion my wife sent some time ago. She sent the ten pounds and the other part was sent by a friend unknown to her or me untill your letter reached here. I would have sent more money but I am told and glad to hear it that you are doing well and not in want of any thing. The times here are more uncertain than home. A person with a family [m]ust keep a reserve for fear the times might change as they have often done.   I have made all enquiry about John Dwyer but Could not hear anything of him untill lately. Instead of Coming here his vessel was put into Morton Bay. Both me and Mick English are endeavering to learn of some of them who Come from there where to direct a letter to him and are both willing to pay his passage to here as soon as we Know where to write to. [171] If you hear from My Brother James send me word. I might have an oppertunity of writing to him as there are a great many vessels from here to America. I have seen the two Terry Ryans one from Moon-Voan and Ter from Bun a rea. They are both Gone to the deggings. Ter of Moon Vane was with his Brother John in Vandiamens land. He has a big family and doing well. Margret Callaghan is married and doing well about forty miles from here. She told me she meant to send money to have her sisters come out. If they are-Coming out you might send a letter by them along with one by post and then I am sure to get either.   Yours &c. Michl Hogan Direct to the Care of Mr. Maurice Feehan friend in hand Little Collins Street for me.   Mr. Mathew Hogan  Cooper Cappagh White Tipperary Ireland  I sometimes feel that I shall never more see you all: I feel as though I were transported for I work hard from 5 in the morning until 9 in the evening. I then sit down in my tent wearied and tired: hard work little for it. I smoke a few pipes and begin to think of you all at home [...] I say to myself often that I am now suffering for my recklessness at home and I feel that I am justly suffering: it is now that I feel the loss of you all and of a home where had I been what was required of a son I might be now happy in that home without any care anxiety or laborious work all of which are now my only companions. This Australia dear mother is most falsely represented: there are ministers in this colony who are working on the roads breaking stones and thousands come thinking to get a fortune in a few months but alas what a mistake they make and the gold fields again which contain so many thousands what are they doing barely making a living [...]  April 6th 1850  The mountainous southern coast of Van Diemen's Land! It is a soft blue day; soft airs laden with all the fragrances of those antarctic woods weave an atmosphere of ambrosia around me. As we coast along over the placid waters passing promontory after promontory wooded to the waters' edge and "glassing their ancient glories in the flood" both sea and land seem to bask and rejoice in the sunshine. Old Ocean smiles - that multitudinous rippling laugh seen in vision by the chained Prometheus. Even my own sick and weary soul (so kind and bounteous is our mother earth) feels lightened refreshed uplifted. Yet there to port loom the mountains whereunto I am to be chained for years with a vulture gnawing my heart. Here is the very place: the Kaf or Caucasus where I must die a daily death.  It must have been on these mountains that strength and force bound the victim Demigod - for did not Kratos say unto Hephaistos "We have come now to the utmost verge of the earth"? Where was that but at the antipodes? - however the limited geographical knowledge of the poet was unequal to his inspiration. Would that I had committed the godlike crime and gathered fire from those empyrean urns whence the stars draw light - then might I hope to Possess the godlike strength also of the Titan crucified! Oh! Divine Aether! and ye swift-winged winds! ye gushing river-fountains! and thou boundless endless multitudinous chorus-laugh of ocean waves! [36] Oh! Earth mother of all things! and world-seeing circuit of the sun! - No answer; but enter convict-servant with a mockery of dinner. Eating or sleeping is not for me these three days past; partly from severe illness partly from the excited expectation of once more at the end of two years seeing the face of a friend. There amongst or behind those shaggy mountains wander Martin O'Brien Meagher each alone in his forest-dungeon. Surely I shall contrive some means of meeting them once.  This evening we entered the inlet known as D'Entrecasteaux Channel which runs up about twenty-five miles on the west side of Bruni Island and divides it from the mainland of Tasmania. On the east side of Bruni spreads out Storm Bay the ordinary approach to Hobart Town harbour; but this channel adjoins Storm Bay at the northern extremity of Bruni; from whence a wide estuary runs many miles farther inland. We are becalmed in the channel; but can see the huge mass of Mount Wellington ending to the eastward in steep cliffs. In the valley at the foot of those cliffs as they tell me bosomed in soft green hills bowered in shady gardens with its feet kissed by blue the ripples of the Derwent - lies Hobart Town.  But as we lie here becalmed between lonely wooded hills the land seems virgin yet as when La Perouse sailed up the same channel of old startling the natives from their kangaroo flesh-pots on the shore. These woods are all of evergreen trees; and even from the deck I can see the long streamers of bark peeling off their trunks and festooned from branch to branch; for all this tribe the Eucalypti shed not their leaves but their bark. The trees seem almost all of great height; but on the whole the forest looks poor and ragged because the boughs and branches are so conspicuous in their nakedness; and the foliage is thin compared with the bulk of the trunks. This is certainly the first impression made on an eye accustomed to the umbrageous masses of beech and sycamore that build up the cathedral arches and aisles of our European woodlands. But I can scarcely believe that I am verily to set my foot upon dry land again.  7th  We made our way this morning to the head of D'Entrecasteaux Channel where it communicates by a narrow passage with the great Storm Bay - took a pilot on board at this passage a little dark man at whom I gazed as narrowly and curiously as ever did Abel Jans Tasman at the first Australasian savages he saw or they at Abel. But indeed our little pilot was a mere Carthaginian in tweed pantaloons and round jacket; and he came down to his boat from a neat white cottage on a hill with a greensward lawn sloping down from its door to the boat-pier and some sweet-briar hedges protecting and adorning its garden. [37]  Two o'clock afternoon  We are at anchor in the Derwent a quarter of a mile from the quays and custom-house of Hobart Town. Why should I write down here again what I see what everybody sees at every sea-port? The town slopes from the river to the hills precisely like any other town. Several church steeples of course; a small battery on a point; a windmill on a height; merchants' stores along the quays; wagons carrying merchandise hither and thither; and the wagons have wheels; and the horses are quadrupedal and solid-ungular. A good many ships lie in the harbour; and one Carthaginian frigate the Maeander.  Our bold captain and surgeon-superintendent have dressed themselves (and the latter in sword and epaulettes looks grand enough) to await the official persons; the official persons ashore with that deliberate dignity which becomes their high position move slowly and in their several convict bureaus prepare their stationery and tape that they may board us in due form. So I have time to dwell upon to appropriate and assimilate one of the loveliest scenes in all the world. The harbour is the broad estuary of the river Derwent. The town lies on the western side backed by gardens and villas rang on the slope of wooded hills and ravines which all lose themselves in the vast gloomy mass of Mount Wellington. On the eastern side which seems nearly uninhabited there are low hills covered with wood; and directing the eye up the river valley I see nothing but a succession of hill and forest till blue mountains shut up the view. I long to walk the woods and leave behind me the sight of the weariful sea.  8th  Some Hobart Town newspapers have come on board. O'Brien is still in very close confinement on an island off the east coast called Maria Island a rugged and desolate territory about twelve miles in length Where the gaolers keep one of their main strongholds. He has refused to accept their "ticket-of-leave" on the terms of giving them his parole not to escape while he holds it; and the convict-authorities are much irritated by his determination.  Evening  An official person was brought to my cabin door half an hour ago by the doctor and introduced to me by the name of Emmett. - - A convict official by the name of Emmett! He handed me a communication from an individual styled "Comptroller-General" informing me that instructions had been received from the Secretary of State to allow me to reside at large in any one of the police-districts I might select (except those already used as the dungeons of my friends) - subject to no restriction save the necessity of reporting myself to the district police-magistrate once a month. [38] This condition of existence is I find called "Ticket-of-leave". I may accept it or not as I think proper; or having accepted I may at any time resign it: but first of all I must give my promise that so long as I hold the same "ticket" I shall not escape from the colony.  O'Brien as I said had refused to give this promise; but Martin Meagher O'Doherty and the rest have done so. Some of them as I hear speak of surrendering their "comparative liberty" and of course withdrawing their promise so soon as their health shall have been re-established by a few months' wandering in the bush. I decide to do as the majority of my friends have done especially as Dr Gibson informs me that the close confinement of Maria Island would probably kill me at once. He seems indeed most anxious to get me ashore; and takes credit for bringing me so far alive after my ten months' solitary confinement in Bermuda and eleven months and seventeen days' cruising in the Neptune.  Wrote a note to the "Comptroller-General" and placed it in the hands of Emmett informing him that I would promise not to escape so long as I should enjoy the "comparative liberty" of the ticket: and on his suggestion and the doctor's I wrote another note telling the authorities I was very ill; had been ill for many months and was utterly unfit to be sent off by myself to one of the remote districts amongst entire strangers. The doctor is to back this with his professional authority; and he and Emmett say the governor will be sure to allow me to go up to a place called Bothwell where John Martin vegetates. So Emmett left me.  Hobart Town has quite an imposing appearance from the water standing out against its grand mountain background. Why should not I write a minute account of the town this evening as I have leisure and no prepossessions and no narrow personal observations to distract me? Sterne gave to the world a valuable directory of Calais upon that principle.  To my utter amazement I had a letter today from Patrick O'Donoghue who has been permitted to live in the city of Hobart Town informing me that he has established a newspaper called the Irish Exile enclosing me a copy of the last number and proposing that I should join him in the concern. Herein is a marvellous thing. How happens it that the convict authorities permit him to conduct a paper at all? Or what would be the use of such a publication here even if we were competent enough to manage it? The thing is a hideous absurdity altogether: but I am glad to learn that none of my friends have anything to do with it; though I suppose it assumes to be a sort of "organ" for them. [39] The Irish Exile is bepuffing me now most outrageously: God preserve me from organs of opinion! Have I sailed round the terraqueous globe and dropped in here in a cove of the far South Pacific to find an "able editor" mounted stiltwise upon phrases tall and blowing deliberate puffs in my face? Glady [sic] I would bare my brow to all the tornadoes and ouragans [sic] of the West Indies to the black squalls of the tropics to the heavy gales of the British channel and the typhoons of the China seas rather than to the flattering flatulence of these mephitic airs. I was tired indeed of the sea; but at sea there are at any rate no organs of opinion. Eurus and Boreas are often rude enough; but at least they blow where they list and pipe not their notes under the censorship of a Comptroller-General.  To be sure one may cite Virgil against me with the Comptroller-General Aeolus and his quos ego.  But what of this? I retire to my cot tonight in a black humour vilipending both sea and land.  12th  Sitting on the green grass by the bank of a clear brawling stream of fresh water. Trees waving overhead; the sunshine streaming through their branches and making a tremulous network of light and shade on the ground. It is Bothwell forty-six miles from Hobart Town from the Neptune and the sea and high among the central mountains of Van Diemen's Land. Opposite sits John Martin sometime of Loughorn smoking placidly and gazing curiously on me with his mild eyes.  July 22nd  Have had a serious consultation with John Martin as to whether I should at length allow my wife and family to come out to Van Diemen's Land. None of our friends except Mr O'Brien seem to regard my speedy release as a thing at all probable. I may have to live the remaining twelve years of my sentence here unless some chance arises of effecting an escape honourably. To escape otherwise that is clandestinely would indeed be easy to all of us at any time; but that is an idea not to be entertained.  It is grievous to think of bringing up children in this island; yet by fixing my residence in this remote thinly-peopled and pastoral district engaging in some sort of farming and cattle-feeding and mingling in the society of the good quiet colonists here we might almost forget at times the daily and hourly outrage that our enemies put upon us in keeping us here at all and enjoy the glorious health Which this matchless climate would be almost sure to inoculate our veins withal. [40] Several families (one especially in which I have grown intimate) express a strong wish to see my family residing with me here. I could devote a good deal of time also to teaching the children; and in short I do so pine for something resembling a home - something that I could occasionally almost fancy a real home - that I have written this day to Newry inviting all my household to the antipodes. Pray God I have done right.  Visit from Terence MacManus; he has ridden up the valley of the Derwent and Clyde from New Norfolk to see us by stealth. If discovered outside the bounds prescribed to him he would be probably placed in custody and subjected to some punishment. He came to our door in the evening and sent in his name (Dr Smith) by the little girl. We go up to the lakes again the day after tomorrow and have induced him to prolong his trip so far along with us though he will then be sixty-five miles from his dungeon; but the temptation of meeting Meagher and Kevin and of seeing an actual congregation of five Irish rebels together again (more than enough by law to make a "riot") is too strong for him to resist. When we shall have drawn together such a power we hope to be strong enough if not to make a revolution at least to shoot some ducks. The lakes swarm with a very fine kind of duck the "black-duck" besides the "mountain-duck" a small kind with splendid plumage; teal musk-duck not to mention jet black swans which swim either in pairs or in fleets of five or six.  30th  MacManus made some days pass pleasantly for us but he is gone home - that is to his dungeon district. We have ridden about twelve miles north west from Bothwell to see the Shannon. All the way the country the trees the hills have that sameness in figure and colour which makes the island so uniform - valley and bluff perpetually repeating its own features and every wooded hill mirroring the wooded hill that stands opposite. On all the road we passed but one house; a piece of Tudor barbarism in yellow stone lately built by an eccentric settler in the dreariest spot he could find within many a league. At last we arrived at the brink of a deep valley beyond which on the western side the hills rose more wild and mountainous. The valley spread just below us into a grassy plain with a few fine "black-gums" dotting its green floor; and as we descended we soon heard the murmurous dashing of a river hidden yet by the trees. It is the Shannon a rushing whirling tumultuous stream that derives its water from the "Big Lake" a noble reservoir some thirty miles farther to the northwest lying high on a desolate plateau of Tasmania. It is the greatest lake in the island and is said to measure ninety miles round. Through the whole of its course this river runs very rapidly having a fall of two thousand feet in those thirty miles; and like all the other Van Diemen's Land rivers it is icy cold. [41]  All my life long I have delighted in rivers rivulets rills fierce torrents tearing their rocky beds gliding dimpled brooks kissing a daisied marge. The tinkle or murmur or deep-resounding roll or raving roar of running water is of all sounds my ears ever hear now the most homely. Nothing else in this land looks or sounds like home. The birds have a foreign tongue: the very trees whispering to the wind whisper in accents unknown to me; for the young gum-tree leaves are all hard horny polished as the laurel - besides they have neither upper nor under side but are set on with the plane of them vertical; wherefore they can never never let breeze pipe or zephyr breathe as it will never can they whisper quiver sigh or sing as do the beeches and the sycamores of old Rostrevor. Yes all sights and sounds of nature are alien and outlandish - suggestive of the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle - save only the sparkle and the music of the streams. Well I know the voice of this eloquent river: it talks to me and to the woods and rocks in the same tongue and dialect wherein the Roe discoursed to me a child; in its crystalline gush my heart and brain are bathed; and I hear in its plaintive chime all the blended voices of history of prophecy and poesy from the beginning. Not cooler or fresher was the Thracian Hebrus; not purer were Abana and Pharpar; not more ancient and venerable is Father Nilus. Before the dynasty was yet bred that quaffed the sacred wave of Choaspes "the drink of none but kings" - ere its lordly namesake river in Erin of the streams reflected yet upon its bosom a Pillar Tower or heard the chimes from its seven churches this river was rushing through its lonely glen to the southern sea was singing its mystic song to these primeval woods.  Oh! Sun-loved River ! wherefore dost thou hum  Hum hum alway thy strange deep mystic song  Unto the rocks and strands? - for they are dumb  And answer nothing as thou flowest along.  Why singest so all hours of night and day?  Ah! river ! my best river ! thou I know art seeking  Some land where souls have still the gift of speaking  With Nature in her own old wondrous way!  I delight in poets who delight in rivers; and for this do I love that sweet singer through whose inner ear and brain the gush of his native Aufidus for ever streamed and flashed: - how some perennial brook of crystal glimmered for ever through all his day-dreams! how he yearned to marry his own immortality with the eternal murmuring hymn of that bright Bandusian fount ! Wisely too and learnedly did Clarence Mangan discourse with the rivers and attune his notes to their wondrous music. How gloriously he interprets the German Moerike and his melodious theme! -   What on cold earth is deep as thou? Is aught? [42]  Love is as deep Love only is as deep:  Love lavisheth all yet loseth lacketh naught;  Like thee too Love can neither pause nor sleep.  Roll on thou loving river thou! Lift up Thy waves those eyes bright with a riotous laughing! Thou makest me immortal ! I am quaffing  The wine of rapture from no earthly cup!  So too with Mueller; he delivers himself and you up to the entrancement of the Naiad: - There danceth adown the mountain  The child of a lofty race:  A streamlet fresh from its fountain  Hies through the valley apace.  Some fairy hath whispered "Follow!" And I have obeyed her well:  I thread the blossomy hollow  With my pilgrim staff and shell.  On on behold me straying  And ever beside the stream  As I list its murmurous playing  And mark how its wavelets gleam.  Can this be the path I intended?  Oh ! Sorceress what shall I say?  Thy dazzle and music blended  Have wiled my reason away!  No mortal sounds are winging  Their wonted way along;  Oh no ! some Naiad is singing  A flattering summer-song!  And loudlier doth she flatter  And loudlier loudlier still -   But behold plump into the water just under the bank tumbles a Platypus uncouth amphibious quadruped with broad duck-bill; and shrill from a neighbouring gum-tree yells the "laughing-jackass" - a noisy bird so named by profane colonists.  My DEAREST ANNIE  I wrote in great haste by the Boomerang the other day and I dare say you would be all no little surprised by it but I hope that now you do not think me quite unadaptable - I have very long considered the matter over and have spoken to one or two people about it all have come to the decision that it is the best thing I can do. It has been a very severe trial giving up all ideas of going home for at least several years but from what my sister says in her letter about things at home being so depressed by the [war?] and the very bad state of colonial commercial affairs I have thought it only right to stay and try to do something here and I think that with a little money to start up as a farmer in a humble way and not being afraid of work I might manage pretty well after a time. I am very sick of doing nothing and all this uncertainty often makes me very low spirited. I see people all about doing capitally but dont [sic] seem to see my own way clear - I dont [sic] want to spend my life with a lash as an overseer and yet without a foundation one wont [sic] build even the smallest house. However if you think that I had better return home I will do so directly I hear from you - till then I shall try and get something agricultural to do so that I may at all events learn something but it is so difficult to find for a few months just what one wants how happy it would be if we were all quietly settled down on some pleasant place here - all of us I mean - I am sure my father and Charlton must often long for the splendid weather we have here. If it were not for you dear ones I could adopt Victoria for my home without a pang - the country is improving and people expect that all things will be in a more healthy state before long. Metalled roads have been made up to most of the diggings bridges built and everywhere land is being enclosed the stride made in this respect during the last twelve months has been immense I think you must pretty well understand my [illegible] and that I am quite ready to do whatever you may in consideration think best. I have never heard a word from Austin which in itself would have prevented my going to Madras. If I returned home I do not see what I could do there and as for being any one's clerk I would a thousand times rather turn bullock driver and be my own master. However if nothing else could be done I should not mind taking any appointment in some part of the world - I should be quite indifferent Borneo or anywhere but I would rather either return to stay in England - with those I love but in that being out of the question remain here and turn tiller of the soil -  [47] I was at Toorak the other evening at the birthday ball and a queer affair it was as you will see by the papers - colonial swipes in common earthenware jugs and small decanters of horrible stuff supposed to be wine on the supper-table then with Eau sucret and such like constituted the drinkables - no not drinkables for no one was able to do more than taste them - parched with thirst I drank part of a glass of swipes and felt as if I had taken some indescribable physic - I never tasted such a flavour and the wine was excruciating - the covered approach to the hall door from which the carriages set people down was illuminated with tallow candles in tin lanthorns and two sentries kept watch over the haystack lest common men might appropriate the vice regal hay to plebeian horses Having made my bow to their excellencies I joined some people I knew in watching the various modes of making bows and the whalebone inclinations of their excellencies. The queerest object there was Mrs Chisholm a perfect guy with her unfortunate miserable of a husband with her Neither Sir Charles nor Lady Hotham danced with anyone and only the last dance with each other and behaved in such an extraordinary manner to their guests that everyone is disgusted. Sir Charles is more universally hated here than I really believe any colonial governor that ever lived. However I had a very pleasant evening despite the supper as I knew a great many people there and had dancing to any amount. I went outside an omnibus taken by the officers - the only seat I could get up to the eleventh hour and a very messy and noisy omnibus full it was with a lot of little boys running after us hurahing at the redcoats and goldlace inside. I dare say you will see all about the ball from the papers which have been full of absurd things about - some of them tolerable clever - I have half an idea of collecting the Hotham Anecdotes for Joe with explanatory notes - they are endless and most ludicrous and many of them not all to their credit.  I should fancy that Sir Charles must feel 'considerable mean' now but he doesn't seem to be - though he was received with a shout of 'swipes' the other day. He says he does not care on his own account but that he is sorry for Lady Hotham who spent a fortnight in trying to please the Victorians. Murphy was so chaffed about his "Murphys entry" that he is said to have started for his station at Colbinabin the day after the party - I hope you admire the picture at the beginning I think it is very natural I choose to believe it very early morning just before sunrise when one of the travellers has got up to see that all is right and make up the fire. The two others are curled up to get a little warm before they wake up and there is a hazy kind of look about the country that reminds me of an early morning before sunrise. Remember me very affectionately to Joe and tell Joe particularly that I shall write very soon to him but that I have not felt up to writing any more than I was absolutely obliged to - I shall write a good gossiping letter to all next time With dearest love believe me dearest Annie  VERY AFFEC YOURS / AWH  My DEAR NEICE  Yours of July 16th was received with others Dec 22nd and I assure you it pleased me much for I did not expect it. I will try and answer it to the very letter. In the first place we never have had what you call a Fog we have the rainey and the dry season. The rainey season commenced about the middle of April and ended in September. We commenced Stageing the 11th of October and have had only two storms sence and one of them was the day before yesterday it lasted about 4 hours and came down by the bucketsfull.  You say Fruit is scarce in Lynn but if you were here you would say 'Lynn folks had a plenty' even if they had none. All our fruit comes from Van diemans land 600 miles. I have paid 75 cents a pound for cherries and [illegible] that 1 / 6 or about 37 cents for a fresh cucumber and 25 cents per pound for apples which was none of the best. You can travel 300 miles and not see a fruit tree not original this is a great country for comfort and ease where grows nothing but Possums Kangaroos and Gum Trees. I have seen about 200 Kangaroos in one drove some of them seven feet high and what is more Ive [sic] eat them and considered the finest flavoured meat I ever eat. As to the manners and customs of the people you must know the People are from all nations China included. and of all grades from the Gentleman with his Fifty thousand a year down to the pauper pensioner who can hardly get his mutton and damper some make money others lose it. But the most independent are the Yankees. those that dont like the country curse it and leave for California or some other place where a White Man is as good as a Nigger. There is one thing certain the americans get credit for their enterprise here. When they first came they found a cool reception among some classes but that class were mostly convicts Old Lags and Ticket of Leave men. As to the manners of the people I must say they are rather hoy esk [?] everybody is for himself and the old gentleman for them all.  JAN 1ST 1855  The folks with whom I board at Caliban are of the real Old English stamp I like them very much. It seems like boarding with Mr Hunting as they have a daughter about 18 years old and she plays the piano and sings first rate. [58] I have been teaching her card drawing etc for amusement.  The Hotel at Keiler Plains is rather different here the folks think more of a mans shilling than they do of him when I stop here I generally go to sleep for the reason there is nothing to keep awake for.  I am glad you took so much interest in Helen. I hope James will give her as good advantages as you have got. You ask about Agriculture thriveing. There is but very little here at present owing to the high price of land and the want of water water in this country is very scarce. People in citys have to buy it out of carts at the rate of one dollar and fifty cents for 150 gallons.  You say your [sic] a great horsewoman hope you wont get hurt but if you were here I would soon show you how we do it. Perhaps you worl like to know how we drive. I'll tell you. Each driver drives 40 miles and has 8 teams to do it some 4 horses and some 6 horses. My rout is from Keilor Plains to caliban over the worst road I ever saw. The Black Forest is the worst just immygeing a man driveing a 6 horse Coach from the High Rock over the range of hills through the woods between trees and stumps over rocks etc and you have a slight idea of our driveing in this country. I have to drive at the rate of 16 miles per hour over some parts but in the Forrest which is 9 miles long it takes me one and a half hours to get through. In other parts we go at the rate of 10 & 12 according to the road. It is something never attempted in this country to go from Castlemaine to Melbourne in one day but we have done it in 9 hours and now we have 2 oppositions but none can come up to our time for the simple reason they have got English instead of Yankee drivers and they dare not follow us. Think not I'm boasting but we have had more Presents and more complyments than all the drivers in Australia and well do we deserve them for we do what they dare not nor could if they dared. Tell Robert I am glad he is doing well it is my worst wish to anybody and should I chance to drop in to his shop unawares I hope he will ask me to take a cigar and walk into his loafing room. Tell Helen God willing I shall come back to see her tell Mother and Grandmother I often think of them although I do not write. Give my respects to all inquireing and believe me still to have some love for you I remain  YOUR UNCLE FRANK  You must excuse me from writeing more for when I arrived at Keilor Plains after the Ostler unhooked the horses they all Bolted viz run away and I have been 4 hours in the Saddle looking for them. They gave me a hard chase but we finally got them minus some harness. I feel very tired but must close this for mail tomorrow.  My DEAREST WALTER  I have only a little time before retiring for the Night to write to you dearest for we have been so busy all day a house full of company that I have not had time to begin to write to you before. I received your dearly prized letter on Wednesday but was sorry to hear that you had caught a cold You must take great care of yourself or you will be ill I think it is my turn to talk to you now. I was thinking of yesterday when we did our walk to the Cave we had a very pleasant one indeed & we all climbed up those high rocks & stood & admired the scenery just where you & I stood but I think I looked more at the scenery to day than when you [were] with me I could not see that day but I blame you for it I was sorry you did not see Ted when you went to White Horse Gully but am glad you enjoyed your walk I am sure when you have time (when I come to Ballaraat) I shall only be to delighted to take the same walk with you & then we shall both be able to enjoy it together Harry Bannister is down he is staying here. William will be up at the latter end of next week I will send a short letter by him I have not asked him what you told me at present about being down in August perhaps I may but I dont much like saying it to him do you not think it would be better for you to do it but I will if you wish me particulary You ask me if I have read the ceremony over indeed dear Walter I have not neither shall I perhaps you will think me superstitious (well I think I am a little though I try to break myself of it) but they say you have 3 years bad luck so I will not read it for fear so please do not ask me. I like those verses very much indeed they are very pretty. I am indeed very fond of poetry though as you say I cannot write them. I will indeed dearest Walter write to your dear Mother if you wish I am sure nothing would give me greater pleasure if you think it would please her I wish I could see her but I can fancy & I am sure I should love her l would do any thing to make her happy if she will but let me & I will do all I can to make you happy dear Walter but as you say we all have our faults & I am afraid mine are very numerous but I will do all I can to become better & you dear Walter must help me I am afraid you will find me rather awkward at first but you must bear with me. You say that if I can do without society &c - indeed & I can I am one that cares very little about & besides what shall I want when I am married but you dear I am sure you will be enough I know no one scarcely but Mrs Bradshaw's family for I have been here so long that I am known as Miss Bradshaw so there will only be my Brothers & sister Rebecca up at Ballaraat. We all feel very fatigued after our long walk this afternoon so you will excuse me writing this so badly & my headaches dreadful I have not been well all the week I have had an attack of Influenza so I do not feel very well just yet I think it will go round the house I think Mrs B. has it she seems very poorley. You made a very good excuse for Brooke but I do not know what you will say when I tell you that he has not written yet. [64]  Now what excuse can you make for him? If you should see or hear from him Just you ask him how he would like to see poor Polly wasted sulky & pale fretting about but he must expect it & to see the looks when any one comes from town the anxious have you any letters "No Miss" how would he like it I wonder? I am glad to say that Mrs Jeffs have returned Ellen has written & ask's whether Mary has had any more letters from Dr. R. & if she answers them if so to give her kind remembrance to him so I send it I have not answered it yet but must to morrow Dear Polly & Tilly send their kind love also Mother & hoping dearest that you will excuse this scrawl I must think of saying Good Bye but not before I return you many thanks for what I asked you for the lock of hair I prize it very much I hope I shall hear from you on Wednesday & with very best love & kisses Mary  BELIEVE ME DEAR DEAR WALTER TO REMAIN / YOUR SINCERE & LOVING / MARY  Sceth of an emegrants Life in austrailia  from Leiving England in the year of our Lord 1841  as maney pepole leving home for new south wales and Port philip sent gloing accounts of the country both for good wages and no scarcity of work and the healtheness of the climate my husband having a sister hear [heard reports of the place] her husband was a soldier but he had bought his Discharg and got a publick house in the country and [was] making money fast so the news to us was from them that we shold come out  we had 4 yong children we sould our house hold furniture gathered up our effects Paid our Dets and got an order to come out by Paying two Pounds each for the 4 children 8 pound we left manchester for Liverpool October 4 1841 and pased the bord of comishonars on the 6 and whent on the ship ship urainia and set sail on the evening of the 7 of october 1841  thair was about two hundred souls on bord the ship named urainia Omens and smith of Liverpool owaners we was all in good hopes that we was coming to beeter our selves tho sorry to leve our friends  we had not sailed long before meney was sea sick but not all for some was singin and some roughs was bawling nex my galley the Poilot had left about half an hour as near as i can think we seamed to be goin very smothley and some was in bed others preparing for the night as we had maney famyles with chilldren and meney was sick my little ones 3 was sick but i had got them in bed and was sit near them to attend on them feeling anny thing but comfortable when sad to tell the vessell struk about half past ten o clock she struk on the sand bank i shall never forget it the srikes and screams [of] wemon and chilldren and some of the men was terrified they did not know what they was doing. [240] [241]   i was in an upper birth with my four chilldren my husband ran on deck to see what was the mater i saw him no more till Daylight all the passengers tryed to go on Deck the Captain ordered the hatches to be nailed down but it was no use the vessel kept striking with the waves till 3 o clock us poor passengers expectain the ship wold break up and i believe had thair been a storm i shold not have been hear to write this it was comparitiveley calm i heard the mate say to the captain we was 6 nots out of the right way that was before we struk  direckley affter the ship did strike the mate offred to take the vessel throu the irish chanel if the captain wold allow him but he wold not and it seems the captain did not understand wat he undertook as soon as Daylight brok the Life boats came and took us off the wreked vessel and landed us at a smal vilage caled hoy Lake and we remained till annother ship was ready the ship brok up on the 14 we had nothing but what we stood up in till the ship broke up and then we got two boxes of the least vaule of som of the passengers must have got some off our other boxes as i saw some of my chilidrens close sold by auction in sydney at a sale room in Georg st i claimed them but my husband wold not allow me to force them to give them up  wile we remaind at hoy Lake i went to church the first sunday the minister took for his text st Pauls ship wreck the chapter of acts vers 43 44 and well he laboured to instruct us he seemed to me to be a sincere cristain i have never forgot his kindnes and work of Love among us how he exorted us and strove to comfort us his words has struk my memory in the wild bush like an eacho and i have ever resolved that shold [i] visit my native home i wold go to hoy Lake and see that minister if he is still alive  affter we had [been] at hoy Lake a few Days i whent bak to manchester as my Parents was living and my husband had not a pair of shoose to put on he had taken them off the night we ware wreked and he never got them again he lost 2 pair besides what was paked up i whent to Liverpool and Mr Smith gave me a pas on the railway to manchester it was eigh o clock at night when i got to my parents and a great maney of my old neighbours and friends came to see me and shewed me much kindness but i did not wish to stop in manchester we had broke up our home and lost all in the wrek  i did not wish to begin Life again in old England i wanted to make a fresh start in a new country my husband was a cabinet maker by trad and he used to suffer with the sick headach almost every week i had to work very hard my self to keep our familey and i found my strenth getting very low i concluded the best to try a new country. [242]  on the 27 of october 1841 we went on bord the Champion of Glasco - eigh hundred tuns burden - and set sail a second time it was very rouuf in the bay of biskay after we got through the vessel rolled a good deal  on the 8 of November in the morning about eigh o clock a yong woman was coming down the hatch way with some gruel to her mother and she was pitched off the Lader i was siting in my birth with my yongest little son on my knee one year and eigh months old named Albert her gruel splashed on his head and down his ear and scalded him so severely that he died on the tenth of November just fourteen days affter we had set sail a second time  this was a more sever tryal than the ship wrek i cold not cry one tear i was stund the yong womans name was Ema Patmore and a good yong [woman] she was aged about fifteen she was like myself she cold not cry but in one short month she died and was buried in the sea sad it was to me  i had what was caled purmature labour and that babe was throne in the sea i was almost Dumb with grief i thought my tryals was heavey but i cryed unto God to help me for my chilldrens sake i had no one to comfort me in all my tryals for my husband seemed indifferend affter the ship wreck his kindness seemed to be all vanished and [another] spirit might have [taken] position of him he [would] go on Deck or about [his] own pleasure i saw [it] and felt it too but [said] nothing some of [my] ship mates was [very good] to mee and when i [was] able to go about [again i] returned it to them again i must make myself usefull i felt happier if i was Doing some good for some of them but i had a sore hart but i battld hard against brooding over my tryals  we had a good comander in Captain John Cockerin a schoth man and two Dockters Heuuet was the name of one i hav forgot the name of the other they was very kind to the passengers generley [thair was] maney different tempers abord a emmigrant ship. [we] mustred about three hundred souls but i think [we had] as orderley a vouage [as aney] that came out at [that] time for the captain [did] have a system strict and orderley [because] he looked affter it him selif and if thair was anney complaints brought to him he wold make all inquieres and put the passengers to rights as far as he was able. [243]  wehen [we] was passing the cape of good hope we had a rather sever storm it was on the 31 of December and lasted till the 3 of january one of the wemon was confined on the first of january and i went on deck to get somthing cooked and a wave came and washed me under the Long boat and washed part of the galley away but i was not much hurt and the poor woman had had nothing warm to eat so i got on some dry cloaths and tryed again and did my best under the curcumstances and made her as comfortabi as i could but a few days after i was taken very ill with a sever cold and i got a sever blow on one of my legs i thought it wold be nothing but it began to inflame and i was not well [for] some weeks affter we landed it is a very trying time to be pent up on bord an emigrant ship for 4 months we was all very glad when 'land a head' was caled out  the next eveining about 8 o clock we cast anchor in Port jackson Febuary 13 1842 just as we saw land Mrs Patmores child infant died and was buried in sydney buring ground that was two she lost during the voyage her Daughter Emma and her infant they was about a ten deaths during our voyage out to sydney  when we landed in sydney thair was not a house or roome under ten shillings per week but the government Provided tents for the Poor Pepol  [a] great maney emmigrants coming in so close togather and sydney was but thinley inhabated at that time that was the cause [of] house rent being so high wages was about 8 shillings per-day but in two months time they was reduced to 5 and work scarce my husband soon got work but instead of beeter wages [than in England] he got less he was very Dishartend for he wold not turn his hand to annything els but cabinetmaking  i was very ill for the first three months affter we landed my left knee inflamed very much and when my knee got beeter my right arm began [to swell] from my finger ends to above my elbo it was very bad and the muscatos did play up with my face  i suffred very much and got very weak at last i went to a friend of my Fathers and told him who i was and what i wanted meddical advice as goin to a docktor was out of my Power i cold get no advice under one pound and i had no pound for my husband did not earn more than 5 shillings per day  he got Dr bland to perscribe for me and got me the medicen and Dr bland brought Dr Cuttle to visit me as he said it proceded from my blood being so poor and my liver was out of order i soon got beeter under his care so i could go about my house work and do a little sewing but i was still weak. [244]  as we cast anchor in sydney harbour one of our docktors burst a blood vessel and died a few days affter and he was buried in surry hill cemetary sydney he was a fine yong man about 28 years of age one of the Pasangers a yong man about 25 died a day or two affter we landed he was coming out as a Farmer bringin his Plow with him and five hundred Pounds in money and he was a free emigrant to this country he was a single man his name was Flanagan who got his money i never heard  he was rather gentlemanley and did not seem to have aney real aquantance on bord but as soon as it was known that he was ded two or three wanted to claim his goods i never heard who got them  Wee was but a few days in the governments tents when i met an old neibour from home her familey had been in the tents 4 weeks when we landed so we took a two roomed house at fourteen shillings per week i [and] 3 children and she and [five] her husband was a tin smith he seemed to get plenty of work and seemed to get well Paid for it but he spent a great Deal in Drink the rest of the familey was very good and strivin but they soon left sydney for Adalaid but he still remaind a Drunkard as far as i ever herd thair names was Atherton  we then got another house near the hay market at a place caled cockle bay the rent was 15 shillings per week roomes we let two down stairs for 5 shillings per week so we [had] two uper rooms for 5 shillings per [week] with the risk of geeting the tennants the first house we had we could count the [stars as] we lay in bed and when it rained we could keep nothing dry but the weather was very warm but it was very uncomfortable we was poor beg i could not but the second house was weather proofe but it was along way for my husband to go to work but he did not keep in work long i think about 4 months out of 11 as we onley stopt in sydney 11 months work got scarcer and wages lower sydney at the time was badly regulated i believe most of the Police men was what they caled 'old hands' they did not like the emigrants  when pepol went to market home fashion they must call at the wine shop a very bad Pracktice [to] allow and when they got a little wine it made them talkative and mery they wold very likeley get josled and if they resented it they wold very likeley get knocked down and taken to the watch house and thair market basket took from them with thair weeks grocerys and get confined from saturday night to monday morning then fined one shilling but no basket or groceres returned to them. [245] [246]   i went to buy some groceres one eavening tuasday and goin up George st met two of these Poliece taken Mrs Patmore to the watch house i stopt and asked the reason a sarjant of the Poliece coming up at the time ask me if i cold identfy her  [four pages of Mrs Davenport's account are missing here] we may never meet again in this world but i trust i shall see a good number in the beeter land i have seen but two since we left sydney  wile we lived in sydney a lady that lived near us her husband was gon to England to have a boxing match with the champion of that time in London she had four chilldren 3 boys and a girl he did not leve her in very good curcumstances she had a law suit about some Property but one [page] of parchment was mising her yongest son between 4 or 5 years of age had got it and 'planted' it as they call it hidind hear and neither coaching nor threats nor Punnishments wold [persuade] the yong child to tell what he had done with them his Mother spoke to me about it this was on the saturday and the tryal was coming on the next week  she did not know what to do we knew he was affaraid of the blaks i thought about it so i said to his Mother when you strip him to wash him let me know i will try a plan accordingley when he was striped i went in to the kicthen it was a sellar kicthen stone built i tryed to coax him: but no he wold not tell me and [he] clapend his little sides for he was naked [as] much as to [say] 'i will not tell you' i got some blaking and a brush his name was roland  'now rolly i will black you all over if you do not give your mother that parchment and i will give you to the blaks' he looked at me we was by our selves no he wold not 'hear gose' i begon to blak his boddy [he] did scream 'tell your Mother' said I 'or i will give you to the blaks'  he wold he took a peice of morter out of the wall and pulled out the parchment so yong and yeat so art full fear made him do what nothing els wold his mother won her law suit  my husbands sister came to see us and seemed very kind to us we wrote to them as soon as we landed and told them of our misfortunes they wrote to us very kindley and sent us a five pound note i thought they ware exceding kind but it was years to pay it back they came to see us in august as they was moveing further up the country they had a slab house built for a Publick house as things was getting worse in sydney they said we might do very well in the bush i took all that was said to be tru and soon consented to go up the bush and as a bullock dray was coming from that part we wonse more brok up our home and prepared to go up when the bullock dray arrived the bullock driver had got other loadding [247]  but he recomended another to us and we shold have to Pay him so we wrote to brother in Law of the curcumstances he said when we got to Yas thair was a bank and he wold send the money to the bank in Yas as we had to go throu that township the parttys name was harrison that had charg of the bank the bullock driver agreed to take us to Yas he said if he got Paid he wold thake us further as brother in Law had promised to meet us part of the road we started on a journy of four hundred miles under rather uncomfortabi curcumstances however we stardted January 18 1843  a few of our shipmates went [with] us the first day we onely went a few miles to what they caled the accomdation paddocks to arange the loding for a regular start we joged on till we came to a place caled Liverpool and thare we camped near a Publick house the driver whent into the publick house and stoped in all night they was a lot of ruffians and he was affraid of being robbed as he worked for him self the dray and bulock was his own we made our beds under the dray the tarpouling fourming a rude tent and our beds was on the ground  they was a great deal of bad languag used among them and fighting one among another and they was for pulling poor me from under the dray for thair own brutal purpose we never spoke to them but we armed our selves my husband with a small axe and me with a carving knife i felt determined to defend myself we was in that Position till Daylight i believe they wold have assallted me but one more humane resisted them that was one cause of thair fighting at last i heard them make up a robbery for the next night so they dispersed at that i hartley thanked god for preserving me from violance  nothing more ocured till we reached Berima and thair we lost one of our bullocks and my husband lost him self endeavouring to find it but meeting someone he got home by sundown after travaling miles in serch of the missing bolock he was a bad bush man i offten had to go with him in affter years we had to start again with out the lost bolock as it could not be found  we traveled very slowley i think we was about 20 days goin to Yas about one hundred and ninety miles we arrived in Yas on the saturday and camped about 2 miles out side the township my husband whent into Yas to the bank expecting to get some money [248]  Mr Harris or Harrison told us my brother in law had an account but he had no orders to give us anny   we was stuned our Provisions was done we wanted to Pay the man hear we was strangers in a strange land the bullock driver must have his money we both felt sick we knew not what to do i looked about me and knowing our chilldren must have somthing to eat i saw a larg store that is for the place i whent in and asked for a drink for i felt faint i found they ware our own country peapol i told them our case they caled my husband and told him to bring our things to his store and they wold advance the money till we heard from our friends and that we could have provisions a mail was goin out on monday we shold have returns by thursday we very gladley accepted it  on the saturday night as we was returning [to camp] i picked a smale tin case up and i opened it it was a prisoners tiket of leaf as they [are] caled but i did not understand them but we had not gon far when we saw a man and woman looking up and down i asked if they had lost anny thing   they said a tin case it was moon light so i could not read the names i shewed the one i had found they seemed glad and asked ware we stoped we told them and went on our way to the camping place got our suppers   the next morning the man we gave the tin box came and brought us some cabbages and cucumbers and took ourer chilldren to thair garden and gave them some grapes it was a treat -   we passed sunday as best we cold and on monday came in to Yas and settled with the driver with some difficulty we got a roome from 'jemey the flogger' as he was caled he could not speak a dosen words without an oath for anything els he was kind as far as i ever saw   my husband soon got work then his employer had to give his word for his tools it was 3 weekes before we heard from our friends and then they was in a hurry to get us up so me and our 2 boys whent with the dray   my husband was to follow us in a short time and bring our yong Daughter aged 9 years i had been told we had beeter stop as our friends was not a fit place for us I looked on thair kindness as genuine i thought if they was not good to others they had been kind to us and i considered we was in duty bound to go on els we could have soon returned the money our friends had advanced about six pounds on i think about the i of march   me and our two boys started to go to undes as they was in glee to be thair   the first days journey I had to go into a creek as my youngest son was thrown off the dray and nearley being drowned [249] i jumped in and got him out we stoped that night at a place caled Jugelong a publick house kept by a mail contractor named Green i soon changed my sons claus and my own when we got thair & then had to go by another dray transfered again i was ready to turn back a distance of 20 miles but this other dray was a man and his wife and chilid so i concluded to go with rather misgevines thair names was Cuningham Poverty wat pain it causes we set [out] with this dray and a spring cart very comfortable for a day or two   the second day an aged genteel man came up to us leading a lame horse as i perfered walking as the roads was so rough we soon got in conversation this gentleman and me i soon saw thair was a kind of awe or restrain manefest among our traveling company i could not tell why we chatted away upon religion history and other things till we camped at night at a farm house i think thair name was Redman the lame hors was put in the stable and the gentleman was put in the best parlour as we had traveled togather all day i must go and have supper and my 2 little boys with i did very willingley but i was surprised to hear them call him reverend it was the reverend Terry he traveled with us till mid day next day i was sorrey to part with his company as while [he] was with us thair was peace   apperentley that night thair was quarreling the man and his wife did fight and made things very uncomfortable no one seemed to like Mrs Cunningham wat ever habation we' came near no one wold have her in thair place' neither publick nor private i cold not think wat it was for but it seems she got a man hanged some years before i did not know that till affter they had the manegment of a station on the Billebong affter they had quarled the husband wold not lett either her or me sleepe in the spring cart so i was a sufferer throu thair quarrels but if we came near aney Dwelling i wold shelter if i could   one night they ware fighting she wold have throne her child in the fire if i had not caught it and then she wold go and drown her self that she wold in the river for we ware camped on the banks of the murimbugee river it was dark i had her child in my arms no one cared to stop her i thought as she knew the way thair she wold find her way back as i saw she wanted a fus and she did find her way back in about two hours her baby was asleep and then she began to up braid me for not stoping her i told her i was minding her baby and did not wish to drown either it or myself as i did not know the road to the river as i had not been thair before and it was dark when we camped as she knew the road thair she cold come back if she chose and if she had drowned her self her husband had the best right to see about it she was sore pusled with my cooleness. [250]   the next night we camped near a publick house thair was a blak smiths shop and a shepards hut i asked the blaksmith if he could lett me have a room to sleep in as the night looked thretning and was very cold he said he wold but i must not lett that woman in if i did he wold turne me out i thanked him and tooke my bed in Mrs cuningham began to up braid me and said i was no good to go and sleep in a batchelors house it was an inner roome so i put my little boys to bed under a cover and was making all snug for the night when the shepherd came in he knew me as he came from the place i came from before i was maried his wife came to see me in the morning and gave me some provisions for the road as cuningham was to find me and my 2 boys with food for the jorney but we shold have been very short but for kindness we met with on the road one woman that was a stranger to me gave me 4 loves and some other things and the news whent before us how unkind they was to me and my two chilldren -   the next night we came to kiamba smiths place or station he was noted for being very near to travelers but he had heard of thair bad con-duct to me and as soon as we 'camped near his place he came down and took my two boys and gave them thair supper and got some of the men to go and sleep in a empty hut as he said it was not fit for me and i cold have the [dormitory] as the night was likley to be stormey and so it was stormey thunder and lithning and heavey rain. Mrs cuningham wold not come in [from] the dray at first so she stopt out till the rain drove her in and then she wold have my- dry bed but i wold not allow it she scolded very hard about it but i was firm as she cold have come in at first but she wold not the next night we reached thair station my brother in law was waiting for us with a two hors cart i felt glad to be away from that coupple when she saw my brother waiting for us she turned and said she was sorry to part with me o deaciet! when we got to thair station on the Billebong our brother in Law was waiting for us as i said before so the next morning we started for the Ovens and got thaire in three days i was very tired with the rough traviling and hoped to [be] happy among friends tho i had left my husband behind and my daughter i expected they wold soon be up with us i had not been more [than] 3 weeks before i found i [was] in the wrong place and i [sent] a letter to my husband not to come as I wold returne to him as soon as i cold i was near my confinement but he never got the letter as the Pos office was kept at [our relatives'] house i expected a letter in return but none came. [251] [252]  in about six weeks i was confined of a Daughter but about 2 days befor my confinement my husband came up to us but he left our daughter i was sorley grieved at this but as his sister was goin down to Yas to get thair licence renewed she wold bring her up with her as she was taken a shay cart i tryed to mak myself as content as possiabl i was confined while she was away as she started the day my husband came to us it was very wet in the beginning of May and was weat till August i was very uneasey in account of the roads so maney creekes to cross and maney a prayer i put up for the safe return of my sister in law and my child in about a month she did return but without my chilld i was stund with surprise i was sick at hart i asked the reason i got no proper answer but was told it was my own fault i asked my husband what [the] reason [was] he had been told [he] shold not like the [place] so he told Mr & Mrs [J] not to lett his sister [bring] her up without his written authority as they told him his sister was fond of drink for they knew her well he thought he wold come and see us if he found it so he wold work till he had paid them [the] outlay and then [return] had he got my letter [he would] not have come but [would have] sent the money -[for us] boots and shoos was [the] artical [we needed] on the Ovens at that tim and as thair was a sale in Yas my husband laid all the money out in boost and shoes thinkin it wold Pay for what we had he brought me a pair of boots but i never got them as he laid them in the store they sold them for a pound [what] they cold take from us [they] did i had a preasant [sent] me of a robe for [the] new born babe and a dress Peice for my self i did see them but did not even know they was sent for me till 2 years affter as i never got them the doner asked me had i received them i said no they was sold i never knew [they was] for me she said [she gave] them to my sister in law for me and i believe she did when we had been about six months we begun to be very bare of does and both me and my husband worked as hard as we could we did our duty he put all the windows and doors and mad the house look tiddy in his [spare time] he began to whant som things for him self but they told us we was in thair det still i told them to make out thair bill as my husband had sent them a set of drawers and a pembroik tabl on pillar and claw both worth about £12 and the boots sold for £12. [253]   at lest our six months labour for them [was worth something] and it was labour some times throu drink day and night to watch the Mrs to keepe her from insult and from being insultd and then caled fools because we wold not take advantage of the drunkard and take all they offered when they did not know what they was doing we neither of us cold do it i was disgusted with that way of geting rich the sister wold say 'you must throw a sprat to catch a mackerel' i did not understand that [she] wold boast of her riches [and] her cleaverness and tell i was no good and how well [we] might do if wee wold do [as] she told us she made me speak out to her one day for she had told her husbands Mother had come out and brought a few hundred Pounds and it helped them as the old woman but lived a few weeks i told her it mad a diffrence bein hellped her father had been laid up for nearley 4 years and i had worked hard to mak him comfortable it had cost us a few hundreds that we might have laid by but that was nothing but it lowered her dignity and i believe she hated me for telling her of it but it was truth i wished my self away from that place when they came to see us in sydney they called at a place on the road a farm house old friends of thairs and asked to see the Master - the Mrs made them wellcome but Master was not at home but some things transpired the husband had been murdred about this time by his wife and her paramer as it came out affter sister had to go to Berima nearley 300 three hundred miles as she had to go throu Yas she wold bring our daughter i did not wish her to do so as i was determind not to stop the summer over on the Ovens this was the later end of July i had never been well from my confinement but worked as hard as i cold but i did not complain i had got a sever cold in my left brest i fainted with the pain of it some times she said it was because i wanted brandy a thing i did not like but when she came bak from her journey with out my daughter she did storm both at me and her brother it was saturday when she got bak i spoke kindley to her she stormed and moked me her husband hellped her i thought this cannot last long on the sunday morning it was wors thair was a publick house [on] the other side of the river and the owners Mother had attended me in my confinement [we] had great respect for her news soon whent acros the rivier that it was worse than it realey was and it was bad enough we had no money i had a pound as i had [been] given at diffrent times but they had borrowed it for change as - they said but i had kept account as i saw thair wold be a parting before long wat thair motive was for treating us so badley i cannot tell to this day we was with them six months i began to be bad i had a larg abses in my left brest i was bad with it about 4 months but it was very bad a long time but i began that i could do my houswork and a little sewing i could not do hard work such as washing or scrubbing thair was but one publick house in Aulbury at this time and the mail was kept thair it was kept by a Robert Brown they was quit diffrent to our relations to us for if they was goin on a visit for a few days i must stop in the house and they paid me well and wished us to stop and i believe they gave my husband all the work [he could do] and got him work at other stations to do but he wold not turn his hand to rough carpentering els he migh have done beeter joynering or cabinet work was all he wold do [254]  at last he put up a bark hut for us to live in i kept toiling on in hope of sumthing beeter we had offers to go on stations but my husband wold not eacept them for thair was bad tales told of the settlers Licentiousness and we had sen a bit of that at our relations i wished to either go back to Yas or go to melbourne - i was very much tryed for the first year that we was in Aulbury by men that wold pretend to want to befriend us under a disguise they wold offer to mak me preasants but i had- learnt what these was for i wold have non of them tho low in curcumstances i had a honest hart and i looked to God for guidance and none never looked to him in vain he sustained me blessed his name for ever if anney was- sic i wold help them and read to them and make - them as - comfortable as i could but i could not join in thair drinkin bouts they caled me proud i was too proud to do wrong or encourage it they was nearley all old convicts or convicts children that lived in Aulbury at that time - i saw colonial life as the phrase is you may be sure what a life it was sunday was very little thought on but i could not forget it they said if they had forgot what day it was they wold come to Davenports hut we was put poor but we was respected affter we had been thare some time my husband trusted a man with some money to bring our eldest daughter up six pounds much against my will for i had a bad opinion of the man tho i wanted my child bad enough he was as i- thought him he did not sen her up and we neither saw him nor the money since well my husband got an order for some furniture to be made of cedar he entrusted his money again with a man to bring it up on his dray as he was goin down we never saw him anny more neither money nor cedar. [255]   well our chimbley wanted reparing we got some stones to mend it and we kept good fiers the stones was full of mica it looked much like goold we washed some having seen some goold dust in Liverpool we put some in a paper and it turned it red as gold leaf dose well we thought we had made a grand discovey we tryed it again it was still the same but how to test it we did not know we knew no one in mellbourne that we cold send it too and we did not wish anney one to laugh at us and we had been ronged by trusting money in what we thought [honest] carriers hands.   this was in 1845 we had not yet got our oldest daughter with us yeat so my husband concluded to go to sydney and have it tryed and bring our daughter up with him so it was setled at that he took all the money we had and went on the mail his fare was i believe about seven pounds he took what he thought wold bring him bak and our daughter i was quite pleased to think i shold see my child soon as he promised to be back in a month at the latest he started at the begning of september i shall never forget with wat anxityetie i counted the days and nights as i used to close the door of our bark hut and put the chilldren to bed then i wold sit and sew for hours wondring if all was well with my absent ones and Praying for God to Protect them - he had been gon about 20 days it had been raining a little but nothing to make me uneasey as the river had not rissen much i put the fire togather and put a good back log on as i shold [want] a fire in the morning when i awoke at day break i lifted my head to see how the fire was i saw no fire i wondred what was rong i got out of bed to asertain our bedstead was a bush beadstead rather high about 2 feet from the ground i was 18 inches deep in water and the water rushing past the house a little distance what a fright for the moment a sheet of water all round me and the river about one hundred yards off what was i to do i must get out as quick as i cold the nearest place. was about 50 acres from me i put a few close on and i tied my infant on my sholders and my two boys i tyed one on each side if one was lost we shold all be lost for no one was stiring and i knew the- water was rising i thought it was the river but it was a creek that was over flowing its banks however i led my chilldren across-the water in safety i caled the firs neigbour up that i came [to] his name was hopgood he was as suprised as i was and i think more frightned he was some time before he cold do annything and then he got his horse and dray to fetch some of our things i caled annother man to help him and i made a fier to keep them warm till i cold geet them some dry cloas the yongest was dry so i put her in bed they brought our beds and bed cloaes and a box the water rose and remaind for some weaks the neigbours put me up a bark gunia and a bush temporary bedstead that is tent fashion instead of canvas it was bark as none had a roome to spare and i perfered it the river was bank high on the side we was on it was the higher side on the other side was two miles all covered with water all trafik was stopped for about seven weeks i got no work and wat i had done i cold not get paid for our Provisions was done thair was no weat on the township we had a little rice and i got some milk from a neighbour but the children was not satisfied they wanted bread i had no money and them that wold have given it to me i could not geet near them for the water i began to be uneasey for it had got November and no word from my husband a man came one day and asked me to give him a breakefast i told him i had nothing to give him as all my provisions was done and the tears came in my eyes he said I thought so you gave it me when i was hear before and i whanted it then your chilldren tooke a peice of bread from charley. [256]  the punt man that he gave them so i thought i wold come and see he went but soon returned with some beef and a bag of vegatables tea and suggar but he cold not buy weat for money  the grog was all out at the publick house so thair was no drunkeness this was in November 1845 at last the river began to go down very slow  a dray started to go to Mr Dights station as he had kindley promised to send me two bushells [of wheat] i was very thankfull his wifes Mother was to have sent me six that was paid for but the flood coming prevented it for we had to grind our own weat for bread by hand as thair was no flower mils near at that time the dray that started to go for the weat was seven days it was seven miles to Mr Dights the roads was so bad and [the wheat so heavy that they only made] two miles a day  thair was some cheuring when he came back with the weat and then the mill was bunged   thair had been no mail for some time as they was nothing to cross the river the water was so high on the lower side for two miles thair was a punt but it was oneley to cross the river however a man whent a cross . - with a bark conow he took the mail and brought the mellbourne mail - he crossed 5 times in one day as they was some drays had been waiting a long time to cross but culd not for the flood so he brought some suplyes and some grog all seemed to be geeting over the tryals of the flood but i had no letter from the absent ones still i was earning enough for my familey we was not in want of provisions but we had lost all our boots and shose thare was none to be had till they ware made. [257]  it was reported that my husband was drowned in the murimbege river but i did not hear of it till his return as they that brought the news was told to keep quiet and it must be told to me in a few week if he did not return it was very kind of them a settler came one day and asked me if i wold like to go on his station as my two boys was geeting big enough to mind a flock of sheep and we shold be on the home station i looked at him in supprise and said i cold not go away till my husband came home  he said no more but it was soon known that he had made the offer for one or two asked about it and said it was a good offer as he was a man that bare a fair reputation i said i tooke it very kindley but i shold not move till my husband came [in] a few days he did come but with out our daughter as he had been robbed on his journy and he had been deturred by the floods  i felt sorry she had not come and glad he was returned safe  it was then that i was told why Mr Brown had made the proposal that i should go to his station as soon as [my husband] had recovered from the fatigue of his journey he went to work for Mr Dight about 7 miles from where we lived  my husband had done some work for a settler but not got paid seven pounds [the settler] had been away for months he was at a publick house and a woman was scolding him for money he was angry at her asking for it so i believe it was to vex her he said he wold pay me what he owed my husband if i wold sign my name for it i wold willingly do that  a friend of ours the mail contractor was going to sydney and coming bak i asked him to bring our daughter up i gave him also a written order for my daughter in about fourteen days i had my long lost daughter restored to us she was like a stranger for some time but we was all together once more  we now decided to go to mellbourne as soon as we could get a little money to pay expenses for we saw no way of bettering our conditions in the bush and we wanted schooling for our children i had taught them to read and spell but i could get neither slates nor copy books i had sent several times by parties goin to melibourne but he forgot to bring them. [258]  we worked hard when we got anny thing to do and were very careful with wat we did get in August 1846 we started in a bullock dray for melibourne we were sixteen days on the journey to mellbourne we took a small cottage we put our boys to school we soon got plenty of work i got washing and soon got things a little comfortable about us but where my husband worked they did not pay him his wages regularly he worked for five shillings per day sometimes he got ten shillings and sometimes he got nothing at all and this is at one of the head shops he worked about four months in that shop that was thwaites when he left they owed him twelve pounds he would not work for them anny more till they paid him then he went to work for a Mr Moody who asked him why he left thwaites he told him that he did not get paid his wages when he worked for them and that he would not work for anny man that wold not pay him  this shop was in Bourke St west he did piece work there and earned about two pounds five shillings a week he got his wages regularly  in March 1847 i had another little son my husband worked at the place for about fourteen months we got things pretty snug he made me a mangle i made fair money with it then he was taken with a sever illness in his head we had a little money in the bank it all went except five pounds for doctors and medical bills just as he was recovering and able to do a little work Mr Moody gave his cabinet shop for a publick house in Elizabeth st  [here a section of the diary is missing]  our money was nearley all gon but this time both of our sones was to go [to the goldfields with their father] one 15 and the other 13 they whent by the steamer to Geelong and walked from thare to Balarat carrying a tent that i had made of some bedticking and pick and spade and blankets billes and food so they was well loaded and so yong but they ware willing they got thair safe and got diggin for goold and got a very little as my husband had never been used to rough work his hands blistred and he began to swell very puffey he was  a man that i had been a friend to named torn had a spring cart he had been to Balarrat came down to take some pepol up he wanted a few more to make a load but i was not aware of this and thought he wold not come with a falshod to me he came and said if i wished to see my husband alive i must go at wonst it was sunday i did not know what to do for a little time he wanted three pounds to take me up i had not ten shillings i whent to a neighbour and asked her to lend me three pound. [259]  she said if i wold wait till tuesday she might now i had lent her more than that a few times i knew she had it by her as she had drawn 30 pounds on the saturday i said that wold not do for me as i shold go by the steamer to geelong and take the coach as thair was non i could get in melibourne all was bespoke about half an hour affter she came to my house and brought annother woman with her and some half and half in a large jug and a bottle of brandy for me to take with me and the half and half was to drink in my house i said i did not ask you for that tak it away when you asked me to lend you [some money] i did not insult but lent it to you go i said and learn beeter you shall not come in my house with that stuff' so i sent them away  we got our tea and my eldest daughter and Mary and Wille our two yongest my eldest said 'mother how happy you look as happy as if you had the money in your poket to go to father' i said 'some one will bring it me wat i want' i did feel as calm and assured that som one wold bring me something we read and sang some of the Psalms when a nock came to the dore and two weomun came in the repport of my housband had reached them they came and said one 'i know you cannot have much money you have been kind to us and if 3 three pounds will do you anny good you are weilcome to it' i said 'that was the sum i tryed to borrow of Mrs Leay' and i thanked them and i said i wold send it down as soon as i cold and i thank God for his goodness  well on the monday morning i whent on the steamer [to Geelong] at 6 o clock thinking i shold be in time to take the coach at half past twelve  the wind was against us it was half past one wen we got in i was too late for that day but i got booked for the next coach that started paid my fare i had about four shillings left  i did not know what to do i whent to the hotel nearest to the coach office i asked the lady of the house wat she wold charge me for a bed as i had not much money i thought i wold pay for that she looked at me and then went with me up stairs and shewed me a snugg bedroom she said 'put your things in hear they will be safe and come down and get some dinner' 'i told you i have not much money i must know what i have to pay' 'nothing wile you are hear so corn my husband whants to see you and have his dinner' this was one that we had befriended and well they treated me as they had heard of our misfourtains by the fire  [the next 4 page section of the dairy describing her coach trip is missing]  we got to Balarrat by dinner time just as the digers was goin to thair dinners i soon found my husband and sons they was pleased to see me and yeat surprised till i told them wat torn had said it was then it came out he whanted to make sure of me for a passinger affter our kindness when he was in distress i had but been a few days with them when my husband seemed all right as i made things as comfortable as i could thair was a great deal of ruffans thair and they seemed to be the luckes but they drank and fought each other we ware not molested tho suronded by them we was making about one ounce per day before i went they was making about 2 ounces per week. [260]  word came one day that mount Alexander was the place such a rush tooke place many a time in my quitate momeyts [sic] i think of that day when the word cam such paking up all was bussel a party that was camped near us had cleared thair claim thair [was] 5 of them 2 was rowdays 3 was what we may say stead men so they devided the 2 went away and 3 stoped and was a party and very good neighbours 2 of the three whent to looke for another dame one stoped at the tent a man that had done well and wanted a spree came and offered his horse and cart for sail as he was afraid it wold be taken if he got too drunk he whanted sixty pounds for it the man that was left in the tent came and asked me if i could lend him a few pounds to secure it and he wold take our things if we wanted to go on the cart on that understanding i lent him a few pounds and i looked affter the hors myself for 3 days for my husband wanted to go [to Mount Alexander] but he did not know how to get thair such tales was told of goold being got by the hundred weight and tru it was in some instances  he was quite pleased when i told him what i had done and baegan to make preparations for the journey  these 3 men was what [was] caled 'vandamoinans' som of thair old aquaintances came and wished them to take thair things so one told my husband he must get someone els to take us it allmost made him mad i said 'make your self content if that hors and cart gose it must take our things' 2 of the men began to bluster and wanted to frighten us i said 'i paid the money for that what is paid and our things must go if it gose' the party that wanted to go in our place was strong men my husband was quite nervous they saw it and took advantage of it but when they was loading i put some of our things [on] and they put them off i looked at them 'now' i said 'i bought the hors and if you do not tak my things i will just brake one of his legs i am a woman of my word you cannot hurt me i bought it' they looked at the receipet and found as i said so they put our things on. i should not have been so perseveary but my husband seemed so exiteted and i did not wish him to be disapointid [261] [262]  we had not travaled maney miles before one of the 3 men said he thanked me for he did not want the other partys with them but he could not refuse but throu wat i had done thair could be no ill will they was old friends and they [would] meet again but they was too fond of thair drink  we was four days traviling to Mount alaxander at nights when we camped one of us had to watch the horse all night for thair was plenty of hors stealing as some of the partis that got drunk and neglected to take that precaution found to thair los we arived safe on November 5 we looked for a quiet place to camp and put up our tents and got ready to dig for goold the next day they all soon began to get goold for it was plentiful my husband and sons got a pach and was making about one ounce a day the 3 men was making two  we had not been thair maney days when me and another wife whent a looking round the hills we had each a knife and a tin plate to get goold in if we shold find anny i picked up a bit and shewed it to her she [took it] out of my hand [and dropped it] i was not [able to find it] for the grass was both thick and high but i soon picked up a peice about a quarter of an ounce my yongest son came for the dinner and said they wold make two ounces or more 'tell father i will make three' for we had found a patch of surface we got a tub and pick and spade and washed one tub full we caned down to the creek to wash in a buket and washed it and finished in a tin dish [the] first tubful yealded about 3 ounces the next 4 we was in high glee when both her husbands party and my husband and sons came and to work they went and so we had to give in but we had made 7 ounces it was fryday  on the sunday it was very wet raining heavy but some neither minded the day nor the rain for goold was on the surface and it was very temting we [stayed] insed our tent dores watching them they laboured as if for very life and death and i believed some got coulds that they never got over but died throu that day for it had been very hot weather and it was very cold after the rain we started again on monday morning i say 'we' for i had to help my sons was yong and my husband was but weak so to encourage them i helped to wash the stuff for the goold  the troopers came one day and asked me to shew my licence i looked up at them for i was in the creek and they was on the bank of the creek 'have you got your licence?' i said 'my husband has got a licence and the Parson made us one he will be hear soon' [263] 'you must have one' i said 'the Parson made us one are you goin to devid us?' Mr Street was one of them he rode off lauging and the troopers foiled him  we was making about 8 ounces per day when we had got about seventy 70 ounces nothing wold do for my husband but he wold com down and down he did come i felt quite disapointed but was forced to comply we came down to mellbourne at the latter end of november we sold our goold for i belive two pounds sixteen shillings per ounce we paid all dets and bought a few things to make us comfortable wonce more and get reddy to go up again affter christmas  we had some money to put buy besides our out fit to go again  one of our neighbours bought a house and about a quarter of an acre of ground on collingwood flat he had got some what near the same quanitys of goold as we had but they must have finerey when he wanted to go up again he had no money so he tryed to sell his house again now he had suffered from poverty but when he got so much money they thought it wold never be done till it was done my husband offered him ten pounds more for his house and ground than he had given for it he sold it to my husband but as we was all goin up to the diggins in company he wold sign the deeds when we came back i objected to this but it was no use  the party he belonged and my husband had joined to buy a horse and cart i was grieved for i knew they was all too found of drink we took plenty of drink up with us as i thought to last for three months in a proper use of it but alas it oneley lasted three weeks no diggin in earnest whilst the grog lasted our party consisted of my husband and two sons and my self they was three strong men they was to have the cart and horse one part of the day and we the other part of the day but we was but a weak party and surface suited us the best but whare we could do annything they wold not stop ramble hear and thare i began to grow weary but i went and washed tailings whare thair was anney for i cold plainley see it wold come to a rupture very soon we had been 3 weeks the grog was done and i didnt think all the three men had five pounds among them what we had was what me and my sons had got it was about 12 ounces and we had sold 7 ounces my husband was tired and saw his error in not having had the deeds signed for the mans name was Walker he boasted he wold never sign them  my sons and husband whent to bendigo a prospecting and left me at castlemain in the tent near these three men they was away about 5 days while they was away a man came up from mellbourne and brought 2 or three 15 gallon caskes of grog up to open a shanty Walker was aquainted with him he came to me and asked me to lett the man put them in our tent and represented what lots of money we shold make we must keep it in our tent and they wold retail it in their tent i said no firmley but quiteley they bosted what injury they wold do if i wold not i wold not nor i did not and then they asked me to lend them 5 pounds i said i wold lend no money for grog they thought i had non. [264]  as soon as my husband and sons returned and told them the news they proposed to part company from us and we must either buy the cart and horse they made the proposal 'agreed' said my husband 'i will pay you off' they was surprised  Lochinvar April 1st 1855   My dear Father   I am to inform you that I received you welcomed letter on the 25th. March dated January the 1st 55 which gave me and my Sister an ocean of consolation to hear that you my Stepmother Brothers and Sisters are in good health thank God. As for my uncles and Aunts [erased: you never mentioned a word about them but] I hope they are in good health too - at Same time this leaves us in a perfect State of health thanks be to our Blessed Redeemer for his goodness towards us.   I am to inform you of the present State of the Country. The Climate of this Country is far differant to home. The winter is coming on with us now it is beautiful weather the same as home summer. The summer we past was dreadful hot the natives felt it warmer than they did many years before. The hate from the Sun is not the worst but hot winds blowing off the land from the Northern Countries that lays N. or N.E. We had a few days of hot winds after Christmass. I heard that some [erased: new] people got sun struck in fact I was a day and I would give a mouthfull of money for a mouthfull of fresh air. I thought it was Strange to See Such hot weather in the month of December. You would See for Miles around the Bush in fire and some time there do a great deal of accidance happen such as wheat stacks burnt and wheat fields too. These hot winds I mention does a great deal of harm if they happen to come on the wheat fields before they are cut. If wheat be as green as a leek [erased: growing] after a regular hot wind for one day you could burn it at night and if it's ripe you cant toutch it for they heads all drop the Same as if you cut them that is if you go to reap on the Middle of the day time.   I mean to inform you of the fertility of this Country first. If a man has a Farm of land he can do very well. He sows wheat on the Month of April and it grows first rate wheat. After Cuting the wheat he ploughs it and put in a crop of Indian Corn. He has that off before he wants the soil for wheat that is two Crops in the one year. They grow two Crops of potatoes in one year. All the Crops pays very well wheat from 11 to 15 Shillings per Bushel of 60 lb Corn 9 to 11 Shis. per Bushel. So a man having Land free can live very happily. When a settler has good crops and has the luck of geting them in his yard or Barn he has a gold Crop - in fact every thing he grows pays him well but they have not plenty hands to work the Land. [71] The same as home if a man grows hay in all his Farm Such as Barley or oats it is no good but cut it whilst it is green and make hay of it. Barley and oats is kept cuting here the same as Clover at home if comes rain favourable. Some years they cut the hay I mentioned four times. It grows as rank as ever you seen it growing at home and even they wheat if it is sowed early and comes rain favourable you must cut it when it is starting out on the air and then it is as good as ever. It shoots out a second crop and grows not as rank as the first then it is all right. This last year it was not Cut in many places for the weather being so dry for a long time. They have another kind of hay they call Loossom [?lucerne] much the same as clover. They cut that too 5 or 6 times a year. Hay pays a man very well in this country. It is from 12 to 16 £ per ton. This Corn they grow pays well for it grows very numerous. They give it to their horses or sells it to town people for their Horses. All these crops I mentioned and many more besides is grown on this country without Manure. The Manure of this Country is if their comes rain favourable.   I Seen this last Summer 4 months without a drop of rain and all that time hot scorching weather. You would See cattle strewed dead in water holes or along the roads fine working Bullocks all for the want of water. There was no grass the weather being so hot it burnt down to the very clay. We have plenty rain from the month of Febuary last which renders the winter crop to look delightful. The grass is nee high in every place even on the roads.   You will get land here for Sale as much as you like from a 1000 Ac. down to 1 acre or otherwise you will get land here your rent the same as home. There is no poorrates or taxes but your rent to pay. You will get first rate land here for 1 £ an acre yearly rent that a pair of horses will work the Same as home. If your take a clearing Lace [lease] you will get it 5 or 6 years free to clear it from Timber and if you built a house on it the owner must pay you for all improvements. A man wants a good Team of Bullocks to plough New Land and after it's ploughed once or twice with Bullocks a pair of horses will work it after.   A man coming to this Country he is nothing but a real fool for the first year especily Irishmen for it is all the English system they have for working. If an Irishman goes to drive horses or Bullocks here after he comming out from home he might as well go whistle a gig [jig] to a milestone as to speak to them. I Seen Some people in this Country drive 10 Horses in a Team without ever a Bridle or rane to them. But a wissper just speak to them the Same as a commanding officer would to his soldiers and they would go here and there every place he wished or even 12 Bullocks they do the Same.   This country is populated by every class and race of people. There is Irish English Scotch Chineas Germans Yankees Natives and Blacks - and amongst all these there is no Employer so good as a Native. [72]  A man in the way of earning Such as a Labouring man must be handy for many differant works. It's not the same as home. If he is he has work every day in the year such as splitting timber for Fincing and making houses for all the country houses are made of timber and many of the Town Houses are built of wood too. The split the timber whilst its green for the Timber gets so very hard in a few days of the cuting that no Axx or Saw could cut it. The roofing is cut 18 inchses long. They split them wide and narrow the same as slaiting and put them on the same as slaiting. They are called Shingles the Timber they are split out of is called Ironbark. So a man must be handy to handle an Axx crosscut Saw and Adz. When harvest comes in he is sure of 3 or 4 £ a week if is a good reaper and able to plough. If he is that he is Sure of a good living amongst the settlers.   There is Some men in this Country and when they work for a week or two they go and drink their wages whilst it holds. A man having a comfortable living at home with his Family Convenient to Chappel and market and a good Bed to Lye on I would advise him to stop there for he has many ups and downs to encounter before he has a comfortable home in this country. A man convenient to Mass at home and comes here goes up the Country for perhaps he may not get a place that would suit him convenient to the Towns. He wont See the Face of A Priest but once or Twice a year that is in Chrs. and Easter that is a Man with a Family.   A single man or woman is not to be compared to him for they are young and healthy to work and go about until such time as they can get settled in some kind of business for themselves. I would advise a young man or woman that has to work hard at home and has not much by it to come here - although wages is coming down for their is such numbers of people Emigrating to this Country from every part of the world.   If A man is a good horseman he is sure of good wages to go Stockdriving. A Stockmaster has 3 or 4 of these chaps along with him. This man has likely 4 or 5 Thousand Acres of Bush land. He has to go muster his Cattle Twice a year to Brand them. He goes for months riding about himself and his men Collecting his Stock to the Stockyard to get them Branded. He has A horse with a pack on to carry some flour and a water cagg [keg]. At night when he thinks to rest Lays down his Saddle as a pillow and throws a Blanket over him. Before he does that they make a fire down cuts a piece of Bark off with his Tommyhawk and makes a loaf of bread on it what they call a damper and makes his tea and has supper and what catle he has mustered all day generally stops convenient until morning for they give a good dressing of the stockwhip to them. Perhaps he comes once a week to his stock yards with what cattle he has young and old. He brands the young and takes the Fat cattle to Market. Every thing is sold here by Auction at Market such as Horses Cattle sheep pigs and Land too. [73]  It would take me too Long to let you know how people makes money in this Country. There is some of them that adores money before the Almighty such as them that thinks to make a fortune in a few years and go home. They go hundreds of miles to Diggins and every other place for money and the never think they are to Dye. A man cant make a fortune here so very quick if he minds his Duty to God and keeps convenient to Chappel and keeps clean and regular cloths on which I mean to do please God.   Whilst a man keeps from Liquir in this country he is liked well and does well. You should pay 3d for every glassfull of spirits much the same as poison. I did not take much Liquir in this country since I come there that did me no harm - but one day that was Patrick's Day I drank plenty that Day in Remembrance to the old Shammerick Shore. There is Colloniel wine sold here very cheap at 2 shillings a gollon first rate drink. There is extensive Vinyards in this country from 20 to 50 acres. There is beautiful gardens that grows first rate fruit all round this neighbourhood - and keeps growing fruit from one end of the year to the other.   My dear Father I am glad to hear that you are in good health and in good circumstances and all your neighbours the same. I expect you will keep my Brothers at Shool as well as you can For I never will forget you for what education you gave me. There is plenty Swells in this Country that is worth thousands of £ that dont know the letter B from a Bull's foot.   I am to inform you that I received two letters from Michl. Carrigg and I send him two. He and his Family is in good health. His wife has got a young native a few days after Landing a daughter named Susan. He informed me that he sufferd a deal of hardship after landing and along the voyage his wife being very sickly. He is earning 2 guineas a week. I will shortly have him here along with me plase God. I was sorry for Misses McMahon [erased: loosing] I heard she had a young son and dyed in a few days after. I mean Mary Neylon. They are in good health. Now I wrote a letter to Richard McMahon the day I recived yours and to Michael Carrigg. Bridget Neylons and My letter came together on the 25th. of March we recived them. We had great pleasure in reading them Concerning yea being in good health and to hear of these young men that got Married. Both Bridgets are in good health and liked very well by their Employers and so is Ellen Ford and Annora McDonough. The latter is growing to be a cleaver girl. They swear they must get Married since the heard of these that got Married at home so I must look out for them.   Dear Father  I am to inform you that I wrote a letter to my Sister to America 3 weeks after writing to you. I received no Answer as yet. I am expecting an answer every day from them. I would be very thankful to you if you send me Sinon Nunan's address in your answer to this. Patt McGrath and Michl. Gready is gone to Melbourn.   Let me know how his the Revd. Dean Armstrong and Family Mr. James and Patt Shannon. [74] I hope they are in good health. Let me know how is Misses Lysaght and Son and not forgeting my old hero Martin McDonel You will let me know in your answer to this how was the potatoes crop the last year. Let Me Know how is Mr. O'Loughlin wife and Family Dennis McMahon wife and Family Martin Neylon wife and Family. I hope you will let me Know how is my uncles and Aunts or did John get Married yet I was sorry for to hear the death of Mr. O Connors: but it is all our fall to dye. It would be too long for me to mention all the neighbours one wit another so they must excuse me for not writing their names here but at the same time I wish them all an ocean of happiness for I had no bad Neighbour during my time in Derry. I know Margy Kean I would blame me if should not ask how is she. Mr. Browns Sister that Send you that Newspaper you shall get more of them if you fancy them. I can tell you that send I my letter before that Newspaper whatever delayed it.   Dear Father I had to pay 12 £ for my passage and every other man The Females had to pay but 6 £ that is the first £ 6. The other 6 £ they had to pay in 12 months time was Cancelled. I had to buy some Colloniel cloths and Boots which takes away a good deal of money. I must conclude by wishing you all the happiness this life can afford and etternal happiness in the next. Belive this to be the constant prayer of your beloved Son and Daughter   Michl. and Bridget Normile  We join in Sending our best love and Compliments to you our Step mother Brothers and Sisters. I wished to God you came to this Country when you was young and able to work as you were a good while ago. You would be a happy man.   Dont forget in sending the children to shool and I will find a bette place for them than to stop in Derry.   West Maitland Novmr 11th 1855   My dear Father   I take the liberty to inform you that I received your Kind letter on the first of this month bearing date July the 7th. which gave me an ocean of Consolation to hear from you and to find you all in a perfect state of health and in a way of prosperity thank God as this leaves me at Same time and my Companion in a perfect State of health thank God for his kindness towards us.   I am to inform you that I received a letter from my Sister Susy at the Same time I got yours. She informed me that She and her family were in good health and doing well. Her sister Bridget is gone to her before I got your letter. [75] She left Maitland on the 3rd. ultimo and I got no answer from her as yet. I expect a letter from them every day.   I am to inform you that I worked 6 months for Mr Brown Lochinvar. He paid me what was due besides my Pasage Money. He was a fine young man and I licked him very well. In a few days after he went to Sydney for to buy some goods and Scince that day there is no account of him dead or alive. He owed some money to the Merchants of Maitland and when the came to hear of it they Said he turned insolvent and his Brother went in pursuance of him and got no account of him. After he returning the Creditors Came and took charge of all the goods after 40 days time they Sold all his goods be auction.   Then I left and came to live in the town of Maitland. This town is situated on the Banks of the Hunter River and is Soround by a deal of fine Land for Miles around and all the River Bank is Beautiful land for 180[?] [erased: Hundred] miles up the Country. There is a great deal of townships Situated on the Bank of the River too. The River runs very crooked you could not find one mile of it straight. River looks beautiful on the Banks all along grows a vast large oak trees always green.   My Sister Bridget stoped with her old Misses after I leaving and then She came to live to Maitland and Bridget left her and went away to her Sister to Mortenbay.   The Harvest is Coming in rapidly here we expect to have a very good harvest. The most of the wheat will be fit to be cut on the first of Decemr. Wheat and flour rateed very dear this las 4 or 5 months wheat was 25 shls. per 60 lb that is a Bushel. American wheat was sold cheaper. Flour is raiting from 40 to 45 shillings per 100 lb. at presant but it will shortly get a downfal with the Blessing of God. As far as old Experienced people think there will be plenty wheat to support the population on this year besides any Emports. There is no Starvation or anny thoughts of it thank God. Potatoes grew first rate these two last Crops I mean winter and summer crops. Farmers of this Country are too leazy. There is Hundreds of them that dont sow any potatoes they think them too troublesome a crop.   I work in one place Almost since I let Lochinvar with two of the strongest Merchants in the Town at 45 shillings a week without rations. There names are Solomon Vindin and Co. Millers and Store Keepers High Street West Maitland. I do be at work hard sometimes loading Teams for up the Country such as the diggings sheep & cattle stations sends out all kinds of Goods. Flour sugar soap tea Rum Brandy wine &. There is a great alarm about the Country at preasant Concerning a new diggings that was discovered of late within 100 miles of this Town and if these diggings turns out favourable there will be scarcely a man to cut the harvest.   You spoke of Bryan O'Loughlin in your letter to me that he had so much money as that he did not know what to do of it. If you believe me the most he could count for himself was from 200 to 250 £ and he reduced that before he gets himself to this Country back again. [76] I heard about Bryan not long ago he went home to try to get a fortune at home but that failed him. He thought he might get an estate at home that one of these rich swells of Burn [Burren] that has properties very extensive might give him a part of it and one of their daughters in Marriage. I dont mean to say annything to him but I would not like to say I had a pocket full of money and when I put my hand in it I could find none. I dont like to say to much concerning one thing but if I had so much money as he said he had and to go home nobody would ever see me again in New South Wails.   I am to inform you that I have a friend which I did not know she being in this Town until of late Michael Healys daughter from Ballanagun. She is in good health and doing well. Let her Father know of it. When I heard she being in this place I went to see her directly and she did not know me for a good while. You might think I fell from the heavens to her when she knew me. I am very glad to hear of Bridget O'Neills Marriage. I hope they are all in good health both uncles and Aunts relations and Neighbours.   My DEAR FATHER  I cannot go to the University on Sunday. You must have noticed that I evaded giving a direct answer to Dr Woolley's invitation; simply because I determined that I would not go if I could avoid doing so. My reasons are that tho' I know that "the sabbath was made for man and not man for the sabbath" yet I also know that it is "the Lord's day on which we may not think our own thoughts or speak our own words" and from this I gather that I am not excused in doing any work but the real acts of necessity and the labour of worship (if it is such) on that day and I am quite sure that my going to the University would be neither one nor other. Besides it is communion Sunday and could I overcome the first objection I could not the second - that it would interfere with my receiving the Sacrament. Imperfectly as I may and do perform the perfect will of God I do not deliberately and determinately disobey Him - and so I wish to refuse this invitation.  And now my dear father will you be angry with me for this? Shall I tell you how my own wishes are all panting to go how I long to tread the halls which will be trod by great men here-after? Shall I tell you how I fear your anger and how I paced backwards and forwards for hours hesitating before I boldly determined to take this course and refuse to go? [65]  You must not be angry with me for I still read in the Bible which I strive to make my Guide the command 'Obey thy parents' and so if you still wish it I will go and cheerfully tho' not willingly.  I REMAIN / YOUR'S AFFECTIONATELY / MENIE PARKES  "MANDELSON'S HOTEL GOULBURN.   "May 25th 1856.   "MY DEAR MISS IRONSIDE  These lines in themselves will furnish evidence that I have not forgotten you - amid all the anxieties and the multitude of petty business details connected with commencing business as a legal practitioner in a country town you will perceive that my friends though 'out of sight' are by no means 'out of mind.' I had you will recollect promised myself the gratification before leaving town of showing your excellent mother and yourself Mr. Claxton's pictures. Circumstances which to make use of the common phrase I had 'no control over' and which necessitated my departure for Goulburn at an earlier period than I had calculated upon prevented this. A day or two prior to my quitting town however I called on Mr. Claxton and mentioned your name to him as also my hope that I should have the pleasure of introducing your mother and yourself to him. As my leaving Sydney was at a notice so short as not only to prevent this but not even to permit my bidding you farewell I do my best under the circumstances and rather than you should my dear Miss Ironside lose such an advantage as seeing a collection of really fine pictures and in the presence of the Artist himself I forward you herewith a note of introduction to Mr. Claxton. Very very deeply interested do I feel in the development of the finer faculties of your mind - those which are fed and nerved and strengthened by acquaintance with and loving study of the beautiful. May I therefore my dear Miss Ironside beg that you will make use of this note of introduction? [6]  "I have quitted Sydney somewhat reluctantly for a double purpose-the benefiting my health and the improvement of my worldly affairs. The former is I fear seriously shaken and the latter are from more causes than one by no means what they ought to be in this Age of Gold not however the 'bell eta dell oro' that Tasso so sweetly sung. I am anxious to live for my poor country's sake for God knows she cannot afford the loss of one true son fallen so low as she has these many dreary seasons. Make money I fain would too because I am conscious and I have learned the bitter lore at the best of schools that without a certain amount of worldly wealth a man can do nothing for his country or his fellows. And rather than live without the hope of doing somewhat of the sort I would gladly welcome the coffin and the roses that are to wither and crumble about my shroud before the midnight coming. In Goulburn there is a very good prospect of succeeding as a legal practitioner and I have every hope that I shall ere long return to Sydney with my finances in a more satisfactory condition on the van of an opposition that will I trust scatter to the winds the present corrupt and imbecile Administration - an Administration that has apparently done its level best since its accession to power to degrade and drag into contempt the great institution of popular government.   "This is a queer letter for a lady; but my affection for you my dear Miss Ironside is so mingled with respect for the soundness and strength of your feelings and your intellect as to justify it. I trust your amiable excellent mother will enjoy Mr. Claxton's pictures - you yourself being introduced by the enclosed note can in turn introduce your mother. I think a capital task for you would be writing out descriptions and records of what you felt on the pictures and thought about them. I should like to see such a paper from your pen. How do you like Schlegel ? Trusting you will often let me hear of your studies and yourself and with the kindest remembrances to your mother   "Believe me   "Yours faithfully   "D. H. DENIEHY."   "Miss A. E. IRONSIDE."   "GOULBURN July 16th 1856.   "MY EVER BELOVED ADA  As my letters to you are necessarily long ones I have on this occasion made choice of a full-sized sheet of foolscap to bear the burthen of what I have to say. Your dear letter reached my hands last night and here on Sunday in the solitude of my sitting-room I draw a little occasional table to the fire and jot down an answer as briefly as I may.   "When your loving missive reached me I had only returned from Springfields the princely seat of W. P. Faithfull Esq. late Member for the county of Argyle where I had paid a visit of three nights and two days. Mr. Faithfull came into Goulburn in his gig for the purpose of driving me out to his magnificent domain which is about twelve miles from this place and I was in fact forced to go. Very pleasantly I spent the time; nevertheless so intensely do I detest visiting that when the white front of Mandelson's Hotel came in sight as Mr. Faithfull brought me back to Goulburn I felt almost as if I saw home. Faithfull is a grand specimen of an Australian built on a scale of giant proportions but with a mind honest simple and gentle as a child's. Walking over the hills and spacious plains of lordly Springfields we spoke together even about his most private affairs as though we had known each other twenty years. His heart is entirely wrapped up in having his children mentally cultivated ; they have hitherto enjoyed the rare blessings of a home education the grandest training of all from their mother and aunt and he wishes if possible to protect their purity by obtaining for them a polished domestic tutor instead of sending them to school with the risk of having them spoiled and demoralised there. His eldest son is one of the noblest looking children I have ever seen. Mrs. Faithfull and her sister Miss Deane are ladies in the truest sense of the word cultured amiable and kind and though each has the reputation of being proud as Juno I got on with them charmingly. Now for something to startle your nerves. I Daniel Henry Deniehy poor as a church mouse and without just now one hundred and seventy shillings to my credit but who am nevertheless up here supposed to be well off because of my style and the company I frequent when I do go out - I the aforesaid Daniel Henry Deniehy during my absence at Springfields was victimised by having my name forged to a cheque on the Bank of New South Wales for £170. There is a very sad element in the business however. As these letters take the place of my home gossip for you dearest I shall give you the particulars of an affair which has utterly ruined the foolish and unhappy perpetrator of it. I have always and always will by precept and example stand up against the world's cowardly cruelty of 'throwing water on a drowning rat.' [10]  "This man Kean who had been tried convicted and punished for a forgery (you will remember I told you he was for some short period a client at Stenhouse and Hardy's) had been at Goulburn some time before me. I saw him striving and penitent enough a clerk here at the office of the Goulburn Herald.   "No one in the town but an official a kind-hearted generous man and myself knew his wretched secret that he was a Cockatoo Island expiree. One of the most ladylike and amiable young women in this same place a niece of Captain Hovell the Resident Commissioner for Crown Lands was foolish enough to set her affections on the stout broad-faced elderly person of Kean. I did everything in my power for him showed him every attention at my hotel and would eventually perhaps have been able to use my influence in pushing him on. But Kean is a hopeless drunkard and I may add also that his moral principles are like wax when temptation assails him. All his horrible sufferings have been insufficient to reform him. However I kept his miserable secret from my most confidential friends those whom as well as some of the most distinguished men in the country he had met in my apartments at Mandelson's. This unfortunate and equally wretched and unprincipled man while I was from town in a fit of drunkenness in his own language 'to raise the wind' drew a cheque in my name for £170 and obtained £2 on it from a tailor. For two reasons it did me no harm - firstly because I had no funds in the bank it was drawn upon nor God wot in any other in this universal creation ; and secondly even if I had the signature was quite unlike mine and the whole thing was so clumsily done that Heaven help the poor wretch it was like a child's attempt at forgery. The cheque was drawn in favour of my esteemed friend John O'Sullivan Esq. Manager of the Commercial Bank at Goulburn. The strangest part of the business is that the man who gave the two pounds to Kean on the cheque dropped it in the street some one picked it up who seeing Mr. O'Sullivan's name on it took it to that gentleman who knowing at a glance that it was a forgery hurried to the hotel to acquaint and warn me. I was of course absent at Springfields. But before I had returned the matter had spread over Goulburn and there is little doubt such is the opinion entertained of me here that had a bad use of the cheque been made amongst the storekeepers some seventy or eighty pounds' worth of goods might have been obtained on it. I heard all about it on my return; and as Mr. Faithfull could not drive back his lengthy road till late in the afternoon he of course dined with me. We met Mr. Francis Macarthur in the street and I asked him to join us which he did. At dinner Macarthur said looking very grave and uneasy 'Have you seen O'Sullivan ? If you have not go my dear fellow at once; somebody has been trying to play a very serious trick with you.' After dinner Macarthur and myself walked down to O'Sullivan's and there got the cheque. Kean I believe had no intention of defrauding me although he thinks me as well off as when he first knew me. [11]  "The talk about this matter has disclosed the existence in Goulburn of a man who had been a fellow-prisoner of Kean's at Cockatoo and the fact is now I fear pretty generally known in the town so that his chance here is blasted. Yesterday I met the miserable man on the promenade as I was walking to the Post Office. He came up to me agonised and white as a corpse. 'Oh sir' he implored ' save me save me from ruin.' I spoke sternly though I only felt the deepest sorrow for the unhappy creature. I said 'Mr. Kean for your reputation and your chances here it is too late; never mind what you have done or tried to do to me in the matter I have no feeling but pity with regret; what is it you wish me to do for you?' 'Oh' he exclaimed 'the legal consequences of my act the cheque which will bear witness against me.' I drew the fearful evidence of his guilt from my pocket saying 'Mr. Kean do you know that? do you not recognise there a proof of your own unworthiness and want of principle - did you not write my name at the foot of that ?' He clasped his hands and groaned 'Yes yes I did' 'Then' I said 'suffer not a moment longer;' and I tore the paper into a hundred shreds before him. I then told him how well I knew of all his dishonourable doings springing from his wretched craving for drink; how he had borrowed petty sums from the very waiters at my hotel ; how he had carried away liquor from the landlord without paying for it; I reminded him that as those things would not have been supplied him but for having been seen in my society I felt bound as a gentleman to pay for them; I trusted it would be the last time such things would occur. I told him too that rather than see him criminally prosecuted for obtaining money under false pretences I would pay the £2 he had received from the tailor on the cheque- I could do no less my wife since I had known him in better days- but because of his disgraceful conduct our acquaintance must then and there cease. The end of this miserable story has brought me to the end of my sheet. I will write again to-morrow. [12]  "Ever my Ada's   "D. H. DENIEHY.   "MRS. DENIEHY."   West Maitland August 3rd. 1856   My dear Father   I am to inform you that I receivd. your welcomed letter dated April the 5th. 56 which gave me & wife great consolation to hear from you & especily to find you Stepmother Brothers and Sisters in good health as this leaves us in a perfect state of health thank God for his mercy to us all.   I am to inform you that I received a letter from my Sisters from America. They told me they were in good health. Mary is Married. Hanora would like to come to me & she informs me that Mary is doing well. I got Lawyer to write for me to Captain Brown in Sydney that is the head Commissioner of the Emigration buisiness in this Colloney to try and get a [erased: free] pasage for my Sister from America the Same as we get from home I mean to say to pay her pasage but it failed me to do so. I got the answer of the letter to day from Mr. Brown. He informed me he could not do it Except she went home to Great Britian or Ireland. They have no Communication in the way of Emigration the same as we have from home to here only pay for their pasage from America to here which I am very sorry for.   I am to inform you also that I get a letter from my Sister Susy very often. Her Husband is in Hospital this long time with bad eyes but the last account I got from him she told me that he was geting better & I am frithened he never will get better of the same disease but the Almighty is the best Judge thanks be to his holy name. [77] Its a good luck to her that he left her a home that nobody can turn her out of it. This place is not like Derry when you buy a pice of ground here it's yours & yours after. She has a house & home of her own now thank God & would have good Deal more if the Lord God spares her Husband to her & leave him his eye sight for he was a good husband to her & no mistake.   I am to Inform you dear Father I get an account from Sister Bridget very often. She tells me that she is doing very well in Sydney & I cant tell you the reason she left me. She is coming to see us in Short. Sydney is only 170 miles from Maitland. The Steam Boats leaves Maitland twice a day for Sydney (Sunday except) & from Sydney the same way most of the pasage is a Beautiful river called the Hunter Riv. It runs in a zigzag way that is the reason they take so long going there.   Dear Father I am to inform you that I have a youngster a girl. She was born on the 25th. of March last our Leady's day therefore I called her Mary [erased: & she is a regular Mary] every way & especily she being called after the old Mothers. Dear Father we are doing well and living very comfortable. I have a house free & 104 £ a year that is 2 £ per week and many other percuises [perquisites] besides. I am with the same men scince I came to Maitland there adress is Solomon Vindin & Co. Millers & Storekeepers Maitland. My work is in the Store as usual. They like me very well & so do I like them. This store is a large shop of every kind of goods Drapery Grocery hoicery Wine & Spirits stores and they keep a large Steam mill too.   My wife is about Paying her Brothers Pasage to this Coloney. I wount say yes or no about it for he might blame me here after therefore I wont say annything about it. I know a man can do very well that keeps himself sober & steady & minds his work regular & at the other hand it will take him along time before he has a comfortable home. The feeble efforts of a stranger in this Coloney is weak & delicate for a long time. There is good wages & as for eating & drinking it is of the best but as to say this Coloney is as healthy as home it's not nor annything like it. Winter time is very pleasant but summer time is too hot.   There did a new digings open of late about 250 miles from Maitland Where the give it the name of the Rockeyriver diggins New England. It's the same as home climate in N. England there is plenty snow & frost there at this time. It will be the best part of the Coloney in Short for they are going to run a railway there. These new digings I mentioned to you it would surprise you to see how people were rushing there in hundreds & there is a good deal of them coming back again for the want of plenty capital when the went there but them that had plenty money they are doing well. [78] The sinking was very heavey from 70 to go feet deep & about 20 or 30 feet of that Solid Iron Stone and they dare not blast it onley work it with a pick & shovel underneath the Gold lays. Therefore people going there without money cant work for themself & they dont like to work for others for any payment especily the natives they dont like work at all.   Bridget Healy got married here not long ago to a neighbour of her Fathers at home. His is one Markaham.   This Country is Curious dear Father its onley in its infancy as yet. There is no roads. No Bridges cross the rivers. The Mail that goes up the Country to N. England perhaps should stop for days or weeks through bad roads & floods in the rivers. I mean to inform you about the native Blacks of this Coloney. They are an ugly race of people they go about in numbers from one place to another. They have a King for every tribe or district. He wears a badge of honour a pice of Brass with his name engraved on it. When they come in to the town with there gins & pickenannys they go about cadging for the price of drink or tobacco they dont work. His Excellency the Governer in Sydney has to give them Blankets once a year & he dont like they should be disturbed. Shuch as them that shoeses to run away from there Tribe and goes to work for a settler he dare not go back again to his tribe or any other tribe they would speer him dead. They never sleeps inside doors always sleeps in the bush. Some there are fine horsemen or can drive bullocks very well. They never will let a white person see where they buyrey their dead. As for the American Blacks they are of a nice complection and very good worksmen & all of them roman Catholicks & very industrious. I will let you now more about them in my next letter if I go up the Country.   I mean to inform you that I received the note that came in Patt. Ford's letter. He & his Sister is in good health & doing well. So is Annora McDonough. There is a great deal of the neighbours about this Town. I am very glad to hear that my Cousin Bridget O'Neill is doing well & especily to be increasing her Family also my uncles & Aunts are in good health. I am very much rejoiced to Hear from you & to find you in good health also all your Family. I hope I never shall dye until I see yea. Expect you will have help of your own in short please God. Let me know has John my uncle any notion of geting Married as yet. Let me know how Mr Shannon & Brother Misses Lysight & son. My uncle Ned you never spoke of him. Let me know of him. I hope you & Martin Neylon will be good neighbours as usal & a little better now. Dont ye be frightend about us. Although we had but a weak bigining we might be happy enough yet.   Dont forget in keeping my Brothers at School. I mean to conclude by scending my blessing to you My dear Father & Family. Likewise My Wife & me Joins in Scending our love & respects to my Stepmother Brothers & Sisters & all friends neighbours & relations it would be too teadous to mentin. [79] Good by. I remain your loving Son   Michl Normile   West Maitland I forgot to tell you about a fitt of sickness I had last summer. There is carcely any person coming new to this coloney but gets a little or much. I was sick for a month very bad. I had very good attendance. My Master youst come once a day to see me & gave me my wages as well as if I worked for him during that time & plenty wine to drink.   I hope Martin McDonell and Family is in good health for he would be angry to me..   July 5th. 1856 Adelaide   My dearest Matilda   After the Silence and separation of seven long years I at last take the oppertunity of writing to you for I feel very ancious to here from you & your dear little ones. It was a very painful shock to me and all of us to here of your severe trial. May the lord support you under all. He will be the Father to the Fatherless and the friend of the Widows. Can it be posable that He is gone. I can carsly believe it sometimes but I am afraid it is to[o] true. My onely hope and trust is that He has made a Change for the better and may we all meet where separation shall be no more.   Aunt Elizabath received a letter from her Father which told us. It was a great blow to us knowing the misrable[?] way which he was living in before we left home but I hope and trust he had reformed air long he went to his long home. [113]  Dear Matilda who should hav thought the many changes that would take Place in so short a time in the Wyly family as there has.   I suppose you hav herd before this of dear Aunt Fanny & Uncle Roberts death. The were but 3 Months in Melburne when dear Aunt Fanny died and dear little Charly & the little Baby which was only 3 weeks old were all laid in the one tomb and a very short time after their Uncle Robert came to Adelaide to see us and to make arrangements to come and settle alto[ge]ther in Adelaide and returned to Melbourne agen to setle things there but it pleased-the lord to remove Him also so the dear Children were left to do for themselfs. Tomas and Alaxender were with Aunt Elizabath for a long time but Alax has got a Situation in a drapers Shop now and Tom remains s[t]ill with Aunt. Henry is sill in Melburn in a good Situation. Ruth is Marryed and has got a dear little Girl. She is very happy and has made a very comfortable home.   What changes and I suppose there has been just as many at home. It does not seem home to me now all seems to hav gone either to their long home or to others Parts of the world. We hav herd of the death of dear old Grand Papa and Grand Mama also of Uncle Charles Miridith. What a change for Poor Aunt Lucy to be nocked out of a comfortable home.   Uncle Alaxander and family tha[n]k God has been blest with helth and strength since the hav been in Austrilia altho the have not been so Prospers as many that come here and the hav had a great difficulty to get on with his large family for every thing is so much more expensive here that it is atome so the hav had a grand struggle to get on but I hope the will see better days. Aunt Elizabeth has been blest with a dear little son which is now just 6 months old. He is a beautiful Boy and the Pet of the home so the hav great reson to be thankful when the look at the affliction of other branches of the family. Robert is getting quite a young Man in his 17 year and in a drapers Shop getting on nicely. Fanny & Hinriata & Willy ar all going to Chool Alexander Peel is getting a great big Boy.   I suppose I should not know dear Edward or little Susan. I should so like to see them. I expect the quite forget the ever had an Aunt Isabella by this time but I never shall forget them. Perhaps you think it is out site out of mind with me but it is not the case for you all ar many times my evening thoughts for that is my only time time for thinking.   I hav told you litle of my own history as yet. I hav great reson to be thankful in fact I have no reson to regret my coming to Austrilia for I am much better of[f] than I ever should for[?] been atome. On my first arivel to Adelaide I felt a stranger in a strange Land which is now 5 years since I left home. I new no one nor had I a friend to take my hand but thank God I had Him who Never[?] has forsakeing. [114] He be my Father & Friend and I trust he ever will be if we look to Him.   A short time after my arivel I met a friend in Mrs. Capten Bagget which is well know[n] in West Meath. I had letters for her from Ireland. She received me very kindly and obtained a Situation in a drapers Shop. You know I new nothing about the buisnes but with an effort and a kind Master I got on and was receiveing 10S / Per week. In a short time after I received 12S / and then 15S / week and now I am in Posecion of £25 Per Ann. So you may think that was encourageing for a young biginer. You will say it [is] a great change for me for the better and I never felt more happy in my life than I do now that I am independent of everyone. There is no bread sweeter th[an] the bread you work for yourself. I should hav been a long time in poor old Dublin before I should show so well as I hav done here. I am very comfortable and happy and hav great reson to be thankful.   I hope Mrs. Bell is quite well. Please give my kind love to her. I soppose you are stoping in Newry now. Tell me all about it when you write for I am very ancious to here. I often wish you were with us in Adelaide. Aunt & Uncle seems so lonelly for want of some of her deer friends to be neer me and console her. She does not seem to feel it so much now as she used when she first came to Australia for she is getting used to it now and getting reconsiled to it. It is sutch a change from home where she could have You or Aunt Lucy or some friend to come and see her but here she has but Me and that is but once a Week. But we must be satisfied now we ar here for I soppose it was our lot or we should not have come.   I soppose you have herd of the Gold fields. It drove many from the comfortable homes some for the better as others for the worse. Uncle Alaxander went but did not suckseed in getting a fortion as many thought the would. He got very bad helth and would not stop to give it a very fair trial for it was a missrable Place to be sure. A great many came from Ireland on heering the news of Gold fields but nowon we new but Mr. O Gorman arived in Melburne. We have not seen him yet. I should think Ireland was nearly cleared of the Poor People for there has been so many Emigrants Ships arived here with Miserable[?] Irash. I expect it is very much improved for the better. Oh I should like to see dear old Ireland once more before I die. I hope I shall.   Ruth and Mrs. Shadget which is her name now intends going home shortly but I soppose that will be to England for he is Engelish. She is very much altered for the better and is quite a little Mother. Sutch changes. She has had trial enough since she left home. She had noone but herself when her deer Mama & Brother died and was left the deer little Baby which lived b[ut] 3 weeks with her. It was a great mersie it was taken[?]. Aunt Elizabath felt it very much that the were not with her that she could renderd her a little comfort in her truble but unfortionately the arived in Melburne. [115] Henry has never come to Adelaide yet so we have not seen him since his arival but he is doing very well.   Dear Matilda I seem to have sutch a deal to tell you and questions to ask you I am afraid I shoul try your Pations [patience] to read it but I hope our silence will not be so long agen. You do not know how delight[ed] we shall all be to heer from you. I shall be ancisly looking out for the next Mail. We have one every Month so we have every opportunity.   I will send you an Adelaide Paper. Please sen[d] me an Irash one for it is a treat to see the news we get one so seldom.   I hav had a great wish to get dear little Susans and Ewards liknesses. Tell me if you could hav an oppurtunity to get them for me. I should dearly like to have them. I hope and trust the will be a comfort to you now which I expect the ar and me [may] He who will be the Father to the Orphans keep them in the wright Path which leads to Joys Above and where all dear friends meets to sepperate no more. Oh that day was come. It would be a happy meeting woul it not.   Bein[g] limited to time as the Mail starts tomorrow I must bring thiss cribble to a conclution leeving you and your deer little ones to the care of Him who will never forsake tho all friends may. He will never if we do not forsake Him and if it should Please Him that we should not meet agen in this World may we all meet in the next where all truble shall be at an end around the throne of God in Heaven there to reign with Him forever. That is the enerest [earnest] and sincer Prayer of Yours ever fond and Affectionate Sister Isabella Wyly Joyned by all friends in Kindest love to you and yours & Mrs. Bell except the Same from   Isabella Wyly   Direct your letter to North Adelade South Austrilia. I enclose my place of residence. Excuse all in haste.   South Melbourne June the 22nd. 1856   Dear Brother   I have to inform you that I buried my wife on the 18th. of July 1855 may the lord have mercy on her soul. Dear Brother I have also to inform also that I have 5 Children 2 boys and 3 Girls and buried 2 more. I have also been very ill this long time with sore eyes but they are mending a little now.   Dear Brother I am most anxious that you and family would Come out here where I Can make a happy home for you and myself. This is the place where a man makes all for himself independent of any master for at once you purchace land here you have it for ever without taxes or any other Cess. So I Expect you will have no hesitation but Come out at once for the sooner you Come the Better which ever is the quickest way to Come out hear that is wat I desire. If you wish [me] to pay your way out hear I will do so or either to Come by Imigration. The most speedy way is the way I require for about paying for your passages I matter not. I want to have ye with me where we Can be happy together for ever and the sooner the better.   I also wish to Know from You have you heard from my Brother James who went to America for I under stant in your last letter there was no account from him in it. [172] I was very angry with him when he was about to imigrate that he would not Come to me where I Could make a happy home for him for ever and I dont see as my mother is dead why you should not Come out to me for whilst my mother was alive I should never encourage you to Come out here. But as She is dead I request of you to Come to me for as I have said or mentioned before this is the Country where we Can Enjoy ourselves with the Best of every thing independen of a landlor of the Galling Yoke of oppression. I also inform you that if my sisters son wish to Come out here Thomas Moore I will pay his passage.   Michael Hogan of Hospital who Came out here sends his best respects to Mathew Hogan an family. He is in Good health and doing well. John Hogan your aunts son went to Hobartown - from here I received a letter from him in which he mentioned that he was doing well. Daniel Ryans his wife Cousin was doing very well here. He went to the ovens diggins he told me that he would wrigh when he went to the diggins but he did not wright. Let James Hammersly tuam Know that his Brother son is with me this 12 Months sins my wife died and his sister is living Convenient to him and has 30 £ per year. He got a letter a few days ago from his Brother James from Sydney and when he got the letter he wrote to him. All persons Imigrating ought to try to Come to Melbourne not to being paying their passage to Sydney or Adelaide. Williams Hayes 3 sons were here they are gone to the deggins and their other Come out hear from America and is with them at the diggins.   Dear Brother I hope You will let me Know the names of your Children in your letter. The names of my Children are as follows Michael Ellon Mary James and Margaret Hogan.   No More at present But I remain Your Sincerely and faithfully   Michael Hogan  To Mr. Mathew Hogan Direct your letters as follows To Mr. William Ryan Carriers Arms Elizabeth street To be forwarded to Michael Hogan South Melbourne.   Dear Brother I expect an answer to this as speedy as possible. And let me Know whether you will Come or not.   Old Post Office Hill forest Creek October 7th 1856   Dear Mother   No doubt but by this time you will be begining to think that we have intirely forgoten you but as the old saying is it is better Late than never. So at last I volenteer to write a few more lines to inform you that we are all as yet alive and in the injoyment of good health thanks be to God for his continued mercys to us and we would fondly hope that these lines will find you still alive and in the injoyment of the same Blessings.   Indeed our good health is our best news at present although we have no great reason to complain as we still get plenty to eat and Drink with raiment to put on in decency but we are not laying up so much of fortune as we could wish to do. But I do asure you that it takes a good fortune to Keep so Large a family on these diggins but I think I have giving you a detail of provisons before and I am trying to make them as good schoolars as posable. We have three of them at the school at present and they are geting on very well in grammer geography in reading writeing spelling and in counting or figuering also and to Keep them fed and clad here to our likeing is not an easy task but we are still geting them Brought up as we hope to be of Some use but perhaps when they get up they will be of none. [211]  I doubt not but before you get this that you will be in the injoyment of your Small present which your grandchildren sent to you. Indeed you may not thank me for what I sent you but at the same time you may thank me for it as it was me that put it in adgation [?agitation] long before it was performed but I did only aply to the younger class of the boys as I think the older ones would have been above it. But Hamilton could not withhold his mite when the others was sending but when they did take the notion they took us very much unawares for Thomas was detemined to send I beleive five pounds. At any rate he would have made it £20. But as Thomas lives at a little distance from us and as I was down at the Back Creek as it is called Keeping the shop for Mrs John the time that they were at Castlemaine which is 14 miles from Back Creek where the money was deposited so Thomas did not get the opertunity at that time. No doubt but they would send you all the perticulars of who did send it but as I had not the plesure of writeing the letter I do not Know. At any rate I will state it here. Hamilton sent £5 James 5 Nathaniel 5 and Alexander the Remainder. I am also glad to Know that they have been sending you some little presents since.   This oppertunity we were very greived to have missed as we had some little presents which we would have been glad to have sent but we were taken by surprise. We did hear some week or so before that John Lackey was goeing home in the ship Red Jacket and we were resolved to have a little percle [parcel] made up with directions on each present. But the next word that came was that he had altered his mind and so we left off then. William Patton came up one day post haste on his way to Castlemaine for the money which they had in the Bank saying that John L was goeing off in the morning but we had nothing Ready. Our presents would have consisted of Gold and speciments. I do not Know whither the boys has sent you any speciments or not as Agness forgot to ask when she was down last week. A speciment is a mixture of Gold and Quartze or stone which is something like the little white stones that you will see on the shore beach from a burnt looking white till as clear as flint glass which is called Cristalized quartze.   Agness will be down to Back Creek in a few days again which is 10 miles as Mrs John McMillin now expects an adation to her family and as it is a custome in this place to have some woman which they call a nurse for the space of one month. So she thinks that none will suit her better than her mother in law and I do asure you that Agness does think her worthy of any serveice that she can render her so that you may please to let Mrs Regan her mother Know that she has got a doughter here that is no discredit to her. [212] She is a Kind open hearted and charitable woman she is ready to asist even a stranger which may chance to give her a call and she is Loving affactionate and Dutiful to us as the only parents she has got in this country and allways showing too much Kindness to us. Indeed I often wonder at her and I must say it again that she is a credit to herself a credit to her parents & a credit to her country or neighbourhood. As for my own part I do feel happy and at home when in her presence as much so as if she realy was my own doughter when I beleive that I never would be under the roof of my other doughter in laws were it not for the Kind and Brotherly hand which Hamilton is ever ready to extend to me when ever we meet which I state much to his credit. So you may tell Mrs Regan that she need not think of nor fret concerning her child as she seems happy and contented with us as a family.   No doubt but that you will be writeing as soon as you can find it convenient. We would like to Know concerning James how him and family is geting on and whether he is geting better in health and how Eliza and family and all our friends is geting along and perticularly when any deaths may ocurr amongst our old neighbours and do let us Know whether our old friend Jane McShane be yet alive.   I forgot to say that John & Thomas will send you some more money when nessacery and Agness does Request me to warn you to look to yourself as it might be that if your pocket was empty you might not have many to look to you. We wish to Know who is your most atentive friend as we might have an oppertunity of some person goeing home to near Grey Abbey yet. The children all joins us in Kind affactionate Love to you and we inclose a little of little Agnesses hair to you with a little of our young Colinst's [colonist's] Francis Edwards. No more at present but Remains your affactionate Son & Doughter   J & Agness McCance   "JOHNSON'S HOTEL CASTLEREAGH STREET Nov. 18th 1857."   "MY DARLING ADA  There is to be a call of the House this evening when all members not answering to their names are liable to fine still worse to forfeiture of their seats. The Land Bill the great measure of the session is to come on to-night yet Mr. Murray from whom so much is expected has not yet arrived.   "It is really too bad. I cannot express to you beloved how utterly sick and tired I am of being here. Sydney is to me a public man with abundance of society the 'miserable hole' I once to my burning indignation heard some one else call it. If I must feel it so how must others less pleasantly situated regard it? I am keeping very quiet in every way and indeed with the exception of my attendance at the House intend almost to bury myself in my room here at Johnson's. I shall not let anybody not even Dalley know of my whereabouts but make all appointments for and give all interviews at stated hours at the Sydney Club. On Monday evening next I lecture at the School of Arts on the Poems and Writings of Charles Harpur. The ordinary night for lecturing at that institution is Tuesday but as next Tuesday evening is set apart for the delivery of a lecture by the Governor-General the Committee to mark their sense 'of the honour done the institution by the Member for Argyle' have fixed a special night so as not to keep me waiting till the next week. I do not intend staying here more than ten days or a fortnight at furthest. If the Ministry - and I hope to heaven they will - withdraw the Land Bill this afternoon my delay will not be longer than a week. Are you better dear than when I left? God bless you beloved and my child the dearest creature to me on earth. Often in hours when the cloud and the storm are black and terrible about my soul when she whom De Quincey called 'Our Lady of Darkness' has laid her awful hand upon my heart the pure thoughts of May and you come like a pair of white doves athwart the gloom and reconcile me to all things. We shall be happy yet my wife. [21]  "Your own   "D. H. DENIEHY."   "SYDNEY 9th Dec. 1857.   "MY DEAREST ADA- Another year is drawing to its close and it brings with it for me one only joy-the hope that I shall ere long see another of my beloved's children. God bless you dearest and bring you as gently through your trial as may be and grant you a mother's happiness through all its depths. Politics here Ada are very disheartening and very disgusting. Mr. Flood is about to retire and Dalley talks of resigning. I expect to hear in a few days or weeks at furthest Mr. Murray's resignation of his office perhaps of his seat. There has been a great 'torchlight' meeting here lately to consider the Land Bill. Do not make images for yourself of a myriad flambeaux throwing their shadows and their glare upon thousands of upturned faces. There were a couple of dim very dim lights fixed to the poles of the platform and that was the whole strength of the illumination.   "But the fun was that all Members of the Assembly good bad and indifferent were roundly abused by the various speakers-coming men orators in train that nobody ever heard of before and whom nobody seems to know except Mr. Henry Parkes who is at the bottom of the whole thing. The affair has amused me greatly. 'Dalley' said one of the gushing orators "is turning into a petrifaction and little Deniehy is too spiritual too refined too far up in the clouds to care about the people's wants.' Now the best of the joke is that I in connection with Robertson before any of these humbug meetings were held moved and we are now endeavouring to have inserted in the Bill the very provisions these poor wretches spouting by the light of a tallow candle in the open air are clamouring for the right of selection before survey deferred payments and rule for residence and cultivation. [22]  "Adieu my love the end of next week will see me home.   "D. H. DENIEHY."   20th November - Commenced shoeing the horses and made preparations for a journey up the Victoria to reconnoitre the country previous to starting for the interior.  24th November. [...] At 2.0 p.m. left the camp accompanied by Messrs. H. Gregory Wilson and Mueller with seven horses and twenty days' provisions the object being to examine the country through which the exploring party will have to travel on the route to the interior; at 6 a.m. bivouacked at Timber Creek; in the principal channel of the creek there were many small pools of water and the grass was fresh and green on the flats. Except on the banks of the river and creeks the country is very poor and stony [...]  26th November. [...] At 3.0 p.m. reached the south-west end of the Fitzroy Range which is a narrow ridge of sandstone hills ten miles long and one to two miles broad; at the north end of the range we found a small pool of rainwater and having watered the horses pushed on towards the Victoria River at the base of Bynoe Range; but although the country was level we were so much retarded by the soft nature of the soil that the river was not reached till sunset and the banks of the river were so steep that the water was not accessible for the horses and we therefore encamped at a small hole of muddy rain-water. Our camp was about four miles above the furthest point attained by Captain Stokes and consequently in Beagle Valley which we had traversed for more than thirty miles the greater part of which was well grassed and openly wooded with box bauhinia and acacia. The Fitzroy Range is almost isolated and there is a level plain five or six miles wide to the south-east beyond which there is a high sandstone range surmounted by an almost unbroken cliff of sandstone near the summit and which appeared to be quite impassable. [...]  28th November. - Started at 6.15 a.m. and followed the river which first came from the east then south-east and south-west until 10.40 when we crossed to the right bank and halted. The valley of the river is much narrower and does not exceed half-a-mile and is bounded by cliffs of sandstone varying from 50 to 300 feet high. The waters of the river occasionally rise 100 feet as the marks of the floods extended to the base of the cliffs; the regular channel of the river is about 200 feet wide the water forming deep reaches often more than a mile long and separated by dry stony bars of shingle and rock. [327] [...]   29th November. [...] The valley of the river is still bounded by sandstone cliffs; but as the strata are horizontal and the bed of the river rises the shales are not much exposed and the alluvial banks reach to the base of the cliffs which are so continuous that I have not yet seen a spot where we could have ascended the tableland in which the valley is excavated. [...]  4th December. - About 5.45 resumed our journey up the river passing through wide grassy flats and over a sandstone ridge which was covered with triodia; from this ridge there was an extensive view of the country to the south and east but no hills of greater elevation than the sandstone tableland were visible and for twenty miles the valley of the river expanded into a wide plain thinly timbered with boxtrees.  6th December... As we had now examined the country sufficiently to enable the main party to advance a whole degree of latitude without any great impediment and ascertained the general character of the country and the nature of the obstacles to be encountered and on which the equipment of the party would in some measure depend we turned our steps towards the principal camp. [...]   15th December [...] The horses are now much improved and with the exception of three which are still very weak are now in a serviceable condition though few are capable of carrying heavy loads or performing long journeys; but as grass and water are now abundant for the first 200 miles of the route towards the interior I hope that by travelling easy stages the horses will improve and preparations are being made for commencing the journey early in January. The country being impracticable for drays and as the sheep cannot be driven with advantage owing to the high grass and reeds it is necessary to constitute the party so that the whole equipment can be conveyed by pack-horses to accomplish which the party proceeding to the interior must not exceed nine in number for which the horses are capable of conveying five months' provisions and equipment. [328] The remaining half of the party will have full employment in the repair of the schooner and care of the stores - points of vital importance to the Expedition [...]  3rd January [1856] - All arrangements being complete the party commenced their journey at 11 a.m..  6th January. - It rained continuously during the night with thunder and lightning. At 8.0 a.m. steered 160 degrees and soon came on a small creek with water-pandanus on its banks; followed it to the south-south-east; at 11. 0 crossed it and changed the course to south-east and at 11.30 encamped in a small gully; I then went with Mr. H. Gregory to look for a practicable ascent of Stokes' Range; having been successful in the search we returned to the camp at 6 p.m. [...]  7th January. - The day again commenced with heavy showers which lasted till 7 a.m. At 7.30 started on a course of 120 degrees; reached the foot of the sandstone range at 8.50 and the summit at 9.30 the tableland on the top of the' range being intersected by deep ravines trending to the south-west; we steered east till 11.40 when we came to a deep valley trending east-south-east; having made the necessary observations for elevation commenced the descent of the hills which was practicable in few places as the valley was walled-in by steep hills crowned by sandstone cliffs 20 to 200 feet in height with only an occasional break. At 1.0 p.m. reached the base of the hill and encamped at a small gully. The summit of the range is nearly a level tableland the undulations not exceeding 200 feet but is intersected by deep ravines with perpendicular sides which vary from 100 to 600 feet in depth. The upper rock is sandstone and the soil on it very poor and sandy producing small eucalypti hakea grevillia and a sharp spiny grass (triodia); this is the spinifex of Captain Sturt and other Australian explorers. The character of the country is similar to that of the interior of some parts of the western coast. [...]   12th January. [...] At 12.25 p.m. camped on a small creek between the Fitzgerald and Jasper Ranges; marked a gum-tree at camp No. 9. The general character of this part of the country is good and well suited for stock though not equal to the basaltic country to the eastward of the Victoria. [329] [...] 14th January. - Followed the river to the west-southwest crossing two large tributary creeks from the north-west approaching the sandstone ranges On the western side of the plain; the soil did not improve but became very sandy; the country is thinly wooded with box-trees and bauhinia of small size; grass is abundant and good. The continuance of fine weather and forward state of the grass led to the supposition that the wet season had already terminated though only two months have elapsed since the first rains. [...]   17th January. - Started at 7.5 a.m. and steered a southwest course till 10.30 a.m. passing over a level grassy flat the whole distance; but the soil became more sandy as we proceeded up the river; there is very little wood. of any description; the few trees that exist are white-stem eucalypti and a few acacia with pinate leaves; the horse 'Sam' is very weak and two other horses are lame and can scarcely travel; since the 3rd of January the distance travelled has not exceeded ten miles per diem; water and grass everywhere abundant and the loads not heavy yet the greater part of the horses appear to be unable to perform a greater amount of work.. 21st January. [...] The course of the river was from west-south-west the channel being bounded by sandstone cliffs 100 to 200 feet high. The general aspect of the country was wretched in the extreme as little besides a few small gumtrees and triodia clothed the rugged surface of the red sand stone. The weather continues fine with only an occasional cloud or flash of lightning in the early part of the night. The temperature is increasing being 104 degrees at 1.0 p.m. Some catfish and a small tortoise were caught in the river. [...]   28th January [...] As the valley was completely walled-in by steep rocks it appeared to be a suitable spot for a depôt camp as it would prevent the horses from straying; and from the rapidity with which the water in the creeks was drying up it became desirable that no time should be lost in pushing to the head of the Victoria while it was practicable to cross the ranges in which it was supposed to rise; but as many of the horses were quite unfit for the journey it became necessary to leave them in some convenient spot while a small party pushed on with a light equipment. [330]  29th January. - Preparing equipment for the party proceeding to the interior and making arrangements for the formation of the Depot camp; the party to consist of myself Mr. H. Gregory Dr. Mueller and C. Dean Mr. Baines remaining at the Depot in charge [...]  30th January. - Left the camp at 7.30 a.m. and steered an average course south-south-east till 10.20 over Stony ground at the junction of the sandstone and trap formation and camped at a fine running creek which came from a rocky gorge in the sandstone range to the west of our course.  1st February. - Steered north 160 degrees east from 6.25 a.m. till 7.0 across the basaltic plain then crossed a large creek trending east in which there were some large pools of water. We then entered the sandstone country and crossed several rocky ridges; at 9.10 we had a good view from one of the ridges to the north and east. Fine grassy plains extended almost to the horizon; to the south the country consisted of sandstone ranges and to the south-east large grassy plains and rocky ridges appeared to alternate with each other. Changing the course to south-east traversed a fine plain covered with grass beyond which was a rocky ridge and then a second plain in which we halted at 11.10 as I was unable to keep on my horse owing to an attack of fever.  3rd February. [...] Continuing an average south course at 10.10 a.m. came to the Victoria River; the whole channel did not exceed 150 yards in breadth of which only twenty to fifty were now occupied by water and the rest by dry rocks and gravel overgrown by bushes.  5th February. [...] The valley of the river has contracted to about fifteen miles and turns to the west but a branch seems to come from the south and a second from the northwest. The country is however nearly level and it is difficult to ascertain the limits of the valley as many portions of the original tableland exist as detached hills and ridges. Though the horses are well shod they are becoming lame and foot-sore from continually travelling over rough and stony country as more than half of the last 200 miles has been so completely covered with fragments of rock that the soil if any exists has been wholly concealed. [331] [...]  9th February.. [...] Taking advantage of the cool cloudy morning we steered south at 6.5 a.m. to ascertain if the water of the creek after spreading on the grassy flat collected again and found an outlet to the southward but found the ground rise in that direction; observed a slight hollow to the west for which we steered but found it terminate on the sandy plain and the country became a perfect desert of red sand with scattered tufts of triodia and a few bushes of eucalypti and acacia. At noon finding it hopeless to proceed further into the desert we turned our steps to the north-north-east and returned to our camp of last night. In returning to the camp we ascended a slight elevation from which there was an uninterrupted view of the desert from east to south-west. The horizon was unbroken all appeared one slightly undulating plain with just sufficient triodia and bushes growing on it to hide the red sand when viewed at a distance. The day was remarkably cool and cloudy; the temperature at noon 86 degrees. Though the rain at the camp had been abundant during the previous night it had not extended more than five miles into the desert which is more remarkable as the clouds were moving to the south.  10th February. [...] As there was no practicable route to the south and the sandstone hills to the north seemed to diminish in elevation to the east I decided on following the northern limit of the desert to the west till some line of practicable country was found by which to penetrate the country to the south. In selecting a westerly route I was also influenced by the greater elevation of the country on the western side of the Victoria and the fact that all the larger tributaries join from that side of the valley. It is also probable that should the waters of the interior not be lost in the sandy desert they will follow the southern limit of the elevated tract of sandstone which occupies north-west Australia from Roebuck Bay to the Gulf of Carpentaria both of which points are nearly in the same latitude as our present position from which it may be assumed that the line of greatest elevation is between the 17th and 18th parallels. [332] [...]  21st February. - As we were now three days' journey from the last water which could be depended on for more than a few days and the channel of the creek had been so completely lost on the plain that it was uncertain whether the marks of inundations near this camp had been caused by the creek flowing to the west or by some tributary flowing to the east I determined to attempt a south-west course.  South of the grassy plain the western limit of which was not seen the country rose gradually to eighty or 100 feet and presented an extremely level and unvaried appearance. It was evident that our only chance of farther progress was to follow the grassy plain to the west till some change in the country rendered a southerly course practicable it being probably that some creek from the north might join the grassy plain and that the channel which had been lost might be reformed. [...] We have thus been a second time compelled to make a retrograde movement to the north after reaching the same latitude as in the first attempt to penetrate the desert; but I did not feel justified in incurring the extreme risk which would have attended any other course though following the creek is by no means free from danger as very few of the waterholes which have supplied us on the outward- track will retain any water till the time of our return [...]  22nd February. - Leaving the camp at 5.40 a.m. followed the creek to the west-south-west and crossed a small gully from the south close to its junction with the principal creek; which we named after Captain Sturt whose researches in Australia are too well known to need comment [...]  25th February. - The small number of water-fowl which passed up or down the creek during the night indicated that water was not abundant below our present position and we therefore prepared for a dry country in which we were not disappointed for leaving the camp at 6.15 a.m. we traversed a level box-flat covered with long dry grass; at 9.10 a.m. again entered the usual channel of the creek which was now a wide flat of deeply cracked mud with a great quantity of atriplex growing on it but which had lost all the leaves from the long continuance of the dry weather. [333] The flat was traversed by numerous small channels from one to two feet deep but they were all perfectly dry and had not contained water for' more than a year; there were however marks of inundations in previous years when the country must have exhibited a very different appearance and had it been then visited by an explorer the account of a fine river nearly a mile wide flowing through splendid plains of high grass could be scarcely reconciled with the facts I have to record of a mud flat deeply fissured by the scorching rays of a tropical sun the absence of water and even scarcity of grass.  1st March. [...] Immediately below the camp the country beyond the effect of inundation changed to a nearly level plain of red sand producing nothing but triodia and stunted bushes. The level of this desert country was only broken by low ridges of drifted sand. They were parallel and perfectly straight with a direction nearly east and west. At 11.50 camped at a fine pool of water three to five feet deep and twenty yards wide. That we had actually entered the desert was apparent and the increase of temperature during the past three days was easily explained; but whether this desert is part of that visited by Captain Sturt or an isolated patch has yet to be ascertained and the only hope is that the creek will enable us to continue our course as the nature of the country renders an advance quite impracticable unless by following watercourses.  5th March. [...] As some low rocky hills were visible to the east we steered for them. At 2.10 halted half-a-mile from 'the hills and then ascended them on foot. They were very barren and rocky scarcely eighty feet above the plain formed of sandstone the strata horizontal. From the summit of the hill nothing was visible but one unbounded waste of sandy ridges and low rocky hillocks which lay to the south-east of the hill. All was one impenetrable desert as the flat and sandy surface which could absorb the waters of the creek was not likely to originate watercourses.  8th March. [...] At 12.15 p.m. camped at a shallow pool near which there was a little grass the country generally being sandy and only producing triodia and acacia. [334] Thus after having followed Sturt's creek for nearly 300 miles we have been disappointed in our hope that it would lead to some Important outlet to the waters of the Australian interior; it has however enabled us to penetrate far into the level tract of country which may be termed the Great Australian Desert.  xo March. [...] As the whole country to the south was one vast sandy desert destitute of any indications of the existence of water it was clear that no useful results could arise from any attempt to penetrate this inhospitable region especially as the loss of any of the horses might deprive the expedition of the means for carrying out the explorations towards the Gulf of Carpentaria. I therefore determined on commencing our retreat to the Victoria River while it was practicable as the rapid evaporation and increasing saltness of the water in this arid and inhospitable region warned us that each day we delayed increased the difficulty of the return and it was possible that we were cut off from any communication with the party at the Depot by an impassable tract of dry country and might be compelled to maintain ourselves on the lower part of the creek till the ensuing rainy season.  West Maitland April 8th. 1857   My dear Father   I received your welcomed letter on the first of April dated January 2nd. which gave me & wife Great Consolation to hear from yea & to find yea all in good health as this leaves us in a perfect state of health thank God for his mercy towards us.   I am to inform you that Michael Carrigg come down to Sydney for 3 months for the good of his health and is gone home again a great deal better. He was almost blind when he came but now thank God he is recovering his sight. [erased: His wife & poor Family was to be for an object observation of charity. I scend them a little help to assist them to ride[?] through their calamity.]   Dear Father  There is great deal Spoken off at home about this country but give old Ireland before it - for the people of this Colloney is neither Civilized or naturelized. I think every body changes when they Come to this Coloney you will not find them the same as @ home. I must let them alone and tell you about other things. There is good wages & the best of dite [diet] here for every person. Provision is cheap this year & every thing plenty. I will scend you a newspaper with the market prices on it. Belive my word dear Father that you cant pick up money here as quick as the people at home thinks it you have to work hard for it in some places. Besides if the Lord God scends you any sickness or trouble you have to drift money away like smoke. Doctors Bills is able to rob anybody - during the time I was sick that was two weeks & my wifes confinment come after the doctor charged me 15 £.  Let me know how is all they old Neighbours & remember me to them & especily to Mr. Shannon for often I think of him when I See a Kangroo hunt - there is no hares here.   The population of the Towns & country is in incresing very fast. There is in this Town 6 or 7 differant churches. There is more roman chatolics in the town than all the others & to put all of them together. We have a very fine Priest here Dean Lynch a Dublinner & I think a horse would not carry all the money he has. [80]  I got a letter last week from Susy. They are well & would be all right but for poor Mick being loosing his scight but I hope in God this trip he had to Sydney will do him every good. She tells me that Mary Carrigg is a fine girl and going to School every day.   I am glad to hear that Martin Neylon & Family is in good health & doing well. If I was at home now I could tell him some nice stories of a winters night.   A man having some land & help to work it convenient here it would pay him very well. He can grow good wheat & corn two crops of potatoes every year but you would want good capatial [capital] before you take a bit of land here - every thing is so dear.   I am very glad that you are not fealing [failing] in Circumstances. You will have good help in short pleas God. Remember me to my uncles & aunts. I am glad to hear that they are all well. Margret is a big girl now I Expect.   Sister Bridget is well she stops in Sydney. She come to see us the other day & went back again. Honora McDounough & Ellen Ford is well. My wife is surprised that she did not get a letter along with mine from her Father. Annora McDonough's letter & mine come together. I am in the same situation still & doing well. I conclude these few lines & we join in Scending our love & blessing to you all & God be with old Ireland. I have no more to say at presant but remaining your loving Son   Ml. Normile  I forgot telling you about my daughter. She is growing a fine child.   March 6th. 1857 Rundle Street Adelaide South Australia  My dearest Sister  I cannot express how deligh[te]d we all weare to hear from you for our connexion is so small the news so[o]n goes round. I often think if our friends in dear old Ireland knew the excitement and delight letters and Papers caused when we receive them here the would write much oftener than the do. [116] It is as I might say a painfull pleasure to me to begin to write a letter home for I seem[?] to have so much to say that it would take volumes to write all at wonce but I hope now as we hav commencd to corespond I hope we shall continue to do so untill perhaps we shall meet someday.   Altho I would never advise anny one to come here for most people finds it a difficulty to get on Just now perticular[l]y those who hav a large family. Poor Uncle Alexander often says He should like to be back in His old Situation on the Kees [quays] of Dublin agen. Every thing seems to go hard with him at times. Every thing is so much dear[er] than home. You could make £1 go fu[r]ther with you there than you could £3 here. It is not as it was in the Gold Diggans times when you would be Payed well for what you did. But there is and always was more said abou[t] Austrilia than ever was true but I am thankful to say I never have had one reason to complain yet. It is like a new world to me. Every thing seems to go well with me as it went ill with me at home.   Dear Matilda it was a great sorce of consolation to me to here of dear Thomas Happy end. It was more than I seemed to of had faith to look f[or]ward to but we see there is hope even in the eleventh hour which there was in this case. He had but a short time but thank God his time was not to[o] short for Him who will hav Mercy. He was like the rest of the Name taken when yong. We know our Fathers Hand prepares the Ark[?] and what He wills is best. I was Glad to hear you had Strength according to your day. You have had a great deal of Affliction but I trust you feel the hand of God was in it all & He will never leave or forsake the Widow or the Orphans. I can speak from experience for I am sure he has never yet forsaking me yet. For the older I grow the more I feel His helping hand & I trust He will still continue with us all untill that final day of rest will come that we shall be all cal[l]ed from this weery world of truble & Pain to reign with Him forever & where sepperation will be no more.   I cannot tell you how delighet I was to receive a letter from dear Edward. It was the first but I hope it wont be the last. Oh how I long to see them both agen & dear little Susan. I wance thought I never should hear from you or them agen but I am thankfull to say I have. I was glad to hear dear Edward was at shool and a good one it must be. I Judge of it by the nice descriptaition he gave of it. I read his litle Manly note with such atention and could carsly believe it came from him for he was such a little fellow when I saw him last. You do not know how ancious I shall be untill I get their likeness. I was sorry to hear dear little Susan was delicate but she always was. I trust she will be spaired to grow up to be a comfort to you. [117] Your 2 dear little ones ar the alike. I have to think visit[?] atome now I might say.   I am glad to heer you ar on friendly terms with Uncle Jo[h]n Gratten. It will be a nice change for Edward in his Vacations to go up to Dublin. When you write could you send me their directioners and I will write to them. Would you Give my love to them all and tell my reson for not writeing before & I will write when I heer from you agen. I should like to hear from Aunt Gratten so mutch. I used to think at one time I had no friend atome but I am trying to think diffiren now. Old friends seem to revive agen when hearing from them. Have you found where Aunt Lucy lives yet. If you have not when you go to Dublin agen if you call on Miss Condren Aunts Elizabaths Sister she will be able to tell you. She lives at Number 90 Renalagh Road & Please tell her all Aunt E's family ar quite well and send their love to her.   You say I told you nothing about the Climate but what with dust & Heat & hot winds & Flys & an Insect that the call Moskitoes we do not know what to do with ourselfs just now. We ar suffering very much from the hot weather. It has lasted just 7 or 8 weeks which causes much illness and [at] present we ar by the Thermometer 90 degrees in the shade. So you may fancy from that what it is but you could carsley believe what it is. The old colonists say it is much cooler now than it was 17 or 18 years ago but I cannot think people could live if it was much hotter. It is very pleasant in winter time unless some times we have very heavy falls of rain which makes our roads very unplesant for walking for the ar not paved as the are atome. We have had no shower of rain for the last 12 weeks but taking it all together the say it is a very Helthy Place. But for children it is mos difficult to bring them up. It is very trying for them. It makes me quite cold to think of winter[?] yet for just now we are all just Melted with heat.   I am still in the same Place as I was when I wrote last. The Shop is called The Times Drapery Mart. More & Co. is the firm. I have only changed Masters. My last dear Master is gon home to old England which you will see in the paper Alfred Spain. He has let his Shop for the space of 5 years. Then he will return. Ever[y]thing seems to go on the same just as comfortable. We open at 9 in the Morning & close at 7 a Night. I am almost I might say my own Mistress. I have a yong Person in the Shop with me which makes it the more comfortable. It is not like the shops athome nothing so Stif. I do not think I could live in a place of buisness athome after living here.   South Adelaide is about 1 mile from North Adelaide that is where Aunt Elizabath lives. I go over to see them generaly once a week or some times oftener. I do not know what I should do if I hadend them nearby[?]. It seems something for me to look fward to from one week to another going over to see them & the seem just as delighet to see me. [118] Altho ever[y] thing seems to go smooth with with me yet for all that it would be Nothing to me if I had not one to confide & to advise with which I always found dear Aunt E to be one of that sort.   Her dear Children ar all getting on so nicely and as I might say ar Helthy. Robert is growing quite the thin[g?] and getting quite a proficient Draper & Fanny I might say the same is getting quite the woman now in her 16 year. She is still at chool & Henryeta is at chool & getting on nicely. Willy is going to chool & I expect Alexander Peel will soon go. You may be sure Poor Uncle A finds it hard anough to give them all Schooling for it is so much more expensive than home. Dear Baby is runing about now he grows nicely. His Name is John Condren Wyly. He is now going on 14 Months he is the Pet of the house. Thomas is still with Uncle yet & I expect will be longer for they could not see him thrown on the world but he finds it very hard[?] with sutch a large family of his own. He is doing nothing just now or cannot get it to do & the salary that is offere[d] now would not keep a man with a large famaly. Ruth sends her love to you. She is not very Strong. She is Nursing Baby yet which is 18 Months old which makes her very weak this hot weather. The never speak of going home now but she says if she should go she would go to old Ireland. Baby grows nicely & runs alone & begins to chatter now. Henry is still in Melburn & I belive is doing very well. Alaxander is in a drapers shop 20 Miles from us[?] but is getting on nicely.   I often think of home and days gon by it all apeers like a dream to me. Have you herd where dear Aunt Nancy & family is gone I should like to know their directions.   Dear Matilda write by the next mail. I shall be looking out for it. Give my kind love to dear Mrs. Bell & tell her I do not forget her yet. I send a thousand kisses to your dear litle ones & all the children do the same & Aunt. I trust we shall all meet agen some day if not in this Vail of Teers I trust we shall in world where all shall be swept away & where seperation is not known. I hope I wont tire your Pations [patience] with this crible but I seem Not not to be able to say envoy[?] when I think of it going 16 thousand miles. But[?] I believe I have told you all the news I can [s]crape[?] together just now. What I leave[?] out dear Aunt E will tell you for I hav inclosed her Note. Tell Edward I shall write a long letter to him next time. I shall not have time to send by this mail.   Give my kind love to all friends & be sure you send me the dear Childrens likeness. I shall be anciously looking for them. Never mind the expence for I do not want you to be at the expence of them. If you send me the extract[?] the charge I will send it to you. Do not be offended with my plain speaking for I am sure every little is an obiject to you just now with your little family. [119]  I must conclude wishing you evr [every] prosperity both of this worlds wealth and also of the next which is most needed. While we have that we have all.   & believe me dear Sister your ever fond & Affectionate Sister   Isabella Alice Wyly   Though out of sight not out of mind. God bless you & yours.   Isabella encloses a little Box containing 2 pencil cases for the children. We hope they may get safe.   Archer St North Adelaide - Mar 6th 1857   My dear Matilda   We were greatly pleased to hear from you as I often wished to know how you were getting on with the dear children since poor Thomas's removal. We heard of it first from a family named McMinn who ha[d] it from their friends in Newry. I considered you would go to your Mother its well you had her. I am very glad to hear Susan is well & hope she may out grow her delicacy & I expect Edward has grown a steady boy. Say more about them in your next.   My six are thank God all well. Johnny the youngest is a very fine boy 15 months old. I am still nursing him. He does not take any food this hot weather except an egg. This climate is very trying to young children particularly when teething. He has got 10.   Your Uncle is with Mr Bagot the wine merchant at £2-0-0 per week. It's all he asked as business is bad but when it improves he is to advance him. I cant complain. I consider we have done very well to keep ourselves with a large young family. But God has done more for us to keep us in health & strenght. I assure I do a great deal to assist us in the way of keeping cows & poultry but I like it. Robert is on his 3rd year at a Drapers. He had £10 the first £20 the 2nd & £30 this last year & if he gives satisfaction (which he has done heretofore) he is to get £30 or £40 as a gift at the expiration. He is a very good boy beloved by every one who knows him. Fanny is nearly as tall as myself going to school as are the rest. But Isabella told you all that.   I like this place much better than I did & dont know should I go home now if I could not unless I took home plenty of money to keep me independant. I dont doubt you could do very well here if Edward was able to assist you but I should not like to induce anyone. Peoples opinions tast[es] & distastes differ so much. I never wished to come out but now that I am here I [am] contented & happy & with the blessing of Providence I trust as the children grow up we shall do much better.   Please give my very dear love to your aunt Lucy. Tell her I shall write soon. She is at Bakers in Johnstons place (a Quakers). Your aunt Nancy Mary Bessie & George went to New York. [120] Charley remained in Dublin. Isabella came up after tea so I had not time to write much after putting Baby to bed & she goes back tonight being cooler than the morng. Give my love to your Mother & kiss the children for me & ever believe me your very affectionate aunt   E Wyly   Excuse this.   He works in Mr. Shadgett shop for what he gets to eat. I do not like to see it but I cannot help him when he has his Brother and Sister but She does what she can and his Brother also.   Dear Sister I must tell you a litle about work. I am still in the same place only in a differe[nt] name I told you of[?]. The times hav changed. Now it is the firm of Gault & Scott. The ar from your part of Ireland. I expect you have herd of the Name. When our shop closed I had 5 weeks holidays and I had a letter from them to know if I would go back in the old shop again so I except the offer as I prefered it to a strange shop and it was to their advantage to have an old hand for I new all the costomers. We opene[d] the 15 December. I am as happy as ever. Things are going on just the same. I am quite my own Mistress none to dictate[?] to to me. I am all alone that is without annother female so I have my litle bedroom which I told you of all to myself. I should like you to see it.   I ought to be thankfull when I hear[?] those around me mourning and particularly my own frinds that is Poor Aunt Mary family which I will tell you a little of. I feel dear Sister Goodness and Mercys has followed me all the days of my life and I trust these Blessings and provviding[?] will never rise up in Judgement against me. God forbid but may the be the means of leeding me near to him who is the Giver of them. I think I told you before that I had become quite a Wesleyan I hope not in Name only but in heart. I have been one now for 4 years and I hope I shall Dye[?] one and I trust a Good one. But it does not mater what you ar by Name as long as you belong to that one church that is the church of God and I hope we are all united to that one.   I had a long and interesting letter from deer Mary Wyly in America but as usual I wrote to her first when I found her directions. She told me of her dear Mothers death and how happy she dyed. She never had her helth after she left home. Her constant ailing proved a decline something[?] in which caused her death. Poor things the have had their trubble[s].   She tells me she never herd of Charles since He left home. I believe that broke Poor Aunt Marys heart and Robert was a great sorce[?] of trubble to them he is at Sea[?]. [121] George is such a good Boy and in a Situation in draper[?] shop Bessy & Mary lives together. Bessy is in a Shop now and Mary goes out to Needlework. The found it very hard to get on. I believe the had a great struggle to get on. I believe by the strain of her letter Fanny was any thing but kind to them even to the dear Mother. It was her dying wish that she would not depend on Fanny do what the will but that. Bessy and Her lived with her till she dyed. Fanny is Married very well and shares her happiness with no one but her self and child. You will be surprised to hear that for I was. I always thought Fanny was the Modell of the family.   Mary asked me my advice about comeing here. I should like to have them very much for the would be such companions for me altho I never have been without one yet but the all get Maried and go off. I wonder Mary has not gone before this but she tell me she has put her self on the list of old Mades. I must tell you I have not quite done that but I never shall chance my name unless I do so for the better for I am very happy as I am. I can get [erased: plenty] many that will have me but I wont have them so you need not fear but I will Tudge well that is with other help. I trust I shall always look to Him who is the Strong for Strength to Gide my steps in to the right path and I am asured I shall never go wrong.   Dear Matilda I was surprised to here Aunt Lucy has not herd from me. Would you plase to tell her I have written twice and never got an answer in fact 3 times but the first I got returned. I inclosed one for her in Ruth to Aunt a to Nace [Naas Co. Kildare] as Aunt Jane directed but we got both returned. Tell her to write and send me her propper dire[c]tions and I shall be to happy to write again. Aunt E has written to her sevrl times and she never gets an answer.   I inclose you a piece of deer Thomases hair as you say you had not any. I thought perhaps dear Susan would like to have a bit[?] to put in a Brooch some day. I have a few[?] set myself in one. I also send her a Soverine as a little present if she likes to by one for my sake. I hope it will get safe. I shall register it. If it should get safe I shall send Edward one nex time Plas God if nothing perforce[?] ocurs to prevent. Ever[y]thing seems to go and come so nicely that we may send any thing almost. I only wish we would get home and back so easy. Aunt E liked her Collar so much. I am sure it was very kind of you but you do not know how we prize them. I thought first of sending Susan a Book but I thought that would be more usefull and she could by what she liked with it herself.   Please write by the next mail. I shall be anciously waiting[?]. We ar all so delighted to here from home the arrival of the English mail causes such an excitement[?] in th[i]s place. [122]  I soppose you did not understand my asking you for the Register of my Fathers Family the Births. If you remember Thomas had it and I new it would be no use to you. I should be Glad to have it that is if you should not want it.   Dear Sister I shall be anciously waiting and looking out for your & dear Thomas likeness which if I understood your letter write you ar going to send them by next post. I shall prize them much as you say it will be the family. I look forward to that day when we shall make one unbroken family in Heaven it is the only consolation we have on this side of the grave and with out it we should be misruble. Then dear Sister let me take currage and go onward with these lines   And what is all we suffer now  Or all we can endure below  To that bright day when Christ shall come   And take his weary Pilgrams home.   Then let me walk without complaint  The thorny route and never faint  Tho now by wearyness opprest  The end is everlasting Rest.  I hope dear Sister I wont tire your patience[?] with this scribble for I realy seem to have so much to say I cannot prevent my pen from racing[?].   I hope you will get this safe I cannot think how the other should get lost. I hope you have had it by this time. Please write by nex mail. I shall send you a News paper having told you all the news this time and has no time to Spare for the mail leaves Adelaide directly. I must conclude wishing you and yours all the happiness both in this world and the next and may the Lord Bless you and comfort you under evr [evety] tryal and trubble he may please to place you under and Give you His Grace[?]. That may be sufficient for you to see all things will work together for our Good. That is the sincere Prayer of your fond Sister.   Joyend by all Aunt Es family also Ruths in love to all except the same from   your ever Affectionate and dutiful[?]  Sister Isabella Alice Wyly  PS Kiss the dear children from me. Excuse this hasty scribble. No time to write.  South Melbourne March 1857   Dear brother   I avail myself of the opportunity of writing these few lines to you hoping to find you wife and family in good health as this leaves me and family at present thank god. I recd. your letter about the first of Jany. last and would have written an answer to you ere now were it not for I being paying Michl. Moores passage as required by you and I was waiting until I could mention all particulars to you about it. [173] I am Still under the care of Dr. Jacob and my eyes are mending only very Slowly.   Mathew Hammersley has left me and has gone to the harvest about 3 months ago and John Hogan is with me Since. Mathew Hammersley's Sister is in Service near me and we recd. a letter from him a few weeks ago. He and his Sister are well and in good health as are all the friends. In consequence of low wages being in adalede Dora ryan has come over to melbourne and has 36 £ a year. She has had the pleasure of reading your letter and paper. She comes to See me occasionally. Your friend danl. ryan has gone to the ovens diggins. He promised to write to me a letter but he has not done So as yet. Michl. hogan of hospitle and family are well and in good health. He is worth from 200 to 300 pounds of shared money.   John hogan requires if his brother could leave his parents to come to this country he would do well in this country. Whether he is married or Single he would press on him to come but he is Slow in doing So in consequence of how his parents and brother are circumstanced at home. I think he could Serves his parents or friends better in this country than in Ireland. Tell Mr Kilbride that I have got no account of his Son any more than that I heard about 3 years ago that he was then in Sydney. I would not Spare nor will not if I possibly can get any information respecting him Spare any trouble.   Dora ryan sees the hayes continually. One of them Jas. came over and borrowed 3 pounds of me and he going to the diggins and he never came near me since [?th]en. When parents dont give their children industrious habits they Seldom need expect them do much good afterwards.   I have paid Michl. Moores passage through the government immigration. There is living with me a Servant girl named Mary Leamy formerly of the parish of emly and a cousin of John Leamy's of Solohead and She being Sending for a brother and a sister of hers we considered it the best and cheapest to bring them 3 out on the Same form. If you go to paddy hogans house this girl formerly lived near terry higginsis and any of terry higginsis children will make them out for you.   As william ryan has left the carriers arms you have better direct your letter to Michl. Hogan South Melbourne.   No more at present from Your affectionate brother   Michael Hogan   Dunolly Sandy Creek Diggings July 6th. 1857   Dear John   I for the first time embrace the opportunity of writing you these few lines hoping to find you Lucey and the children all in as good health as this leaves Flory and myself at present thanks be to god. Also I hope Eliza and James & family are well. I always had information through Richd's letters how you were getting on as well as of his own private matters which was always gratifying to me to hear.   Dear John we have enclosed in this note to you the sum of fifteen pounds drawn in Dunolly [another hand: Maryborough] July 7th. on the Bank of Victoria No. 974 which I hope you will get with safty. It is not much but at the same time it may be some help as a little at home is better than a great dale here. There is no great dale of Comfort in this Country. Jack is as good as his Master and every man man must work for his livelihood even men better than 60 years of age and perhaps may have 4 or 5 sons men and not eased the more from being employed to make out his living. [183]  As for tradesmen there are as many of them on the diggings if not more than of any other class of people. Boot and shoemakers are little needed here to the exception of a few the generality of the people wearing English and American Work which is no more than something more than one third of the price of the colonial work. I dar Say there is not one out of forty wears colonial worked Boots or shoes. The price you give here for a pair of English Bleuchers [Bluchers] is 12 to 14s / - and Colonial 30S / - for Wellington Boots English made £1 or £115S- and for Colonial £3 / 10 to £4 / - also for Riding boots £5 / -. The Maker is generaly allowed half price for Making any shoes or boots Say for Bleuchers 30S / the Maker gets 1s out of it. There are very few dealing in this trade as in all stores there is boots and shoes kept for sale as well as any other article.   I am well acquainted with a chap from Macroom a closer by trade his name is Creed. Very likely Dan Sullivan Master W. H. [workhouse] knew his Father I beleive a Schoolmaster or if he did not the Matron of the W. H. did. He is doing very well keeps one or two men at work to make a pair for any man who may give his measure out of every 30 or 40 pair of English work that he sells and is chiefly employed in brushing off the dust of the work hanging in his place. You can judge how things stood when there was only him and three more Kept a Boot and shoe store that is living by the bare trade itself without Keeping any other goods where there was a population of 20000 or 30000 people on a large rush named Chinamans flat.   I would not recommend to Tradesmen or domestic Servants to come to this Country that is if there was any young or helpless family with them. Give me no male or female for this Country but the young and Strong Constitutioned persons that will be able to endure with hardships both rough and smooth when put to it and Moreover Men as their first resource to look to is the Gold Diggings and indeed they will not have the warm houses th[e]y have at home too. Let them say to themselves that they must be satisfied to live in a Tent 8 by 10 or what is considered a large Size 10x12 made of strong calico which is cold in winter and hot in summer mostly suffocating.   Dear John there is a letter with this to Richd. and a draft also for him for £35 drawn on the same Bank as yours No. 975.   Dear John you can see at any time more information in my letters to Richd - I am yours truly   Edward O'Sullivan   Mr. John Downing - Boot & Shoemaker Kenmare Co. Kerry Ireland  Will you be glad to see me come home once more for good and never more to roam: it has wrought a great change in me. I am quite changed [...] I am so excited to get out of this degrading country and join again the circle of society of which our home forms a link.   My DEAR Father  I have for some time felt that I should prefer earning my own living to being dependant on you as I now am and have formed a project which I think must meet with your approbation.  I will study pretty closely during the next twelve months the common course of an English education the rudiments of the French language and Theory of music; I would then open an infant School under 12 years of age undertaking to prepare them thoroughly for a higher school and to teach the elder children the stepping stones to Music French and Drawing (things which I know are very little attended to in other schools because the pupils must practice and so no time is left for theory but which is nevertheless very important).  I would charge for each pupil 2 Guineas per quarter and supposing I only had 4 pupils; this would amount to 32 Guineas the year (sufficient to clothe myself and one of the children but it is not improbable that I should have 12 or 15.  If my plan succeeded in a short time I might engage teachers for accomplishments which would further add to my own gains.  The school hours would commence at 1 / 2 past 9 and close at 4 as others do allowing me plenty of time to rest beside the periodical holidays so that you see I should not be overworked but find a pleasant occupation profitable.  If I gained enough I might be able to pay for Music Lessons for myself and Mary and of course I should continue to teach her as before.  Do not throw this aside as a foolish girlish idea for really I am in earnest and should feel very very much happier if I saw any prospect of rendering myself independant and do not think it would be any sacrifice on my part for I shall feel much gratified if you consent to my plan.  I should be in my 20th year at the time I mention  I REMAIN / My DEAR FATHER / YOUR AFFECTIONATE DAUGHTER / MENIE  My DEAR UNCLE  Allow me to congratulate you on your newly acquired senatorial honors and to hope that now the Upper House has received so strong a body of liberal numbers into its late exclusive and impracticable ranks it may be rendered more effective in advancing the interests of the state. I write to you at the present moment more particularly to make you acquainted with the proceedings of the Native Police Force in this district and of the inhabitants generally in reference to the Blacks; and I am sure you will not only be astounded but indignant and disgusted with the details that I have to communicate to you.  When I first arrived in this district the topic of general conversation was the murder of the Frazer family on the Dawson by the Blacks of that district and the hope was universally expressed that the atrocious actors in that tragedy would meet with condign punishment. I joined in this hope believing in good faith that no illegal nor dishonourable not to say barbarous nor inhuman means should be resorted to for that purpose. On my way to the interior however I was undeceived as to the proposed method of punishing the Blacks and I now know that nothing could have been more unworthy of human beings that the procedure both of the members of the Police Force and the white population than their horrid indiscriminate murders of the Blacks.  I learned from various sources that a party of twelve - squatters and confidential overseers - went out mounted and armed to the teeth and scoured the country for blacks away from the scene of the murder of the Frazers altogether and shot upwards of eighty men women & children. [70] Not content with scouring the scrubs & forest country they were bold enough to ride up to the Head Stations and shoot down the tame blacks whom they found camping there. Ten men were shot in this way at Ross's head station on the Upper Burnett several at Prior's Station and at Hays and Lambs several more. The party in scouring the bush perceived an old blind blackfellow upon whom they immediately fired sending a ball through his back another through his arm which shivered the bone to pieces and a third grazed his scalp. This old man had been for a long time a harmless hanger on at the different head stations and of course could have been in no way identified with the Frazer murderers. A black boy belonging to Mr Cameron of Conambula long employed by that gentleman in carrying messages & rations to his out stations and in going with drays to Gayndah & Maryborough went to Mr Prior's station on the Burnett and was shot there. A blackfellow was captured in the bush by an armed blackfellow in the employ of Mr Hay who supplied him with a carbine for the purpose. The black brought his prisoner to the Head Station tied him to a sapling in the presence of all the white residents and having addressed him in the broken English in the most cruel & disgusting manner placed the muzzle of his carbine to the helpless man's arm and broke it with the first shot he then addressed him again in the same strain as before & shot him through the head.  The Native Police say they have shot over 70 blacks. One of their acts deserves especial notice. They arrived at Humphrey's Station went to the Blacks encamped near the house bound two of the old men and led them into the scrub and deliberately shot them; the cries of the two poor wretches were heard by the superintendent's family at his house. I had supposed that these things although acted with seeming openness in the far interior and with evident impunity would not be tolerated in more civilized society and that the neighbourhood of Maryborough the Chief town in the District could not be disgraced by any such barbarities. I was mistaken however. On the evening of Friday & Saturday last the white police accompanied by some white volunteers proceeded to the Blacks Camp near Mr Cleery's homestead between the old & new townships of Maryborough and drove every man woman & child out of it then set it on fire destroying all the clothing bark tomahawks & weapons of the blacks and burning wilfully the Blankets which at no inconsiderable expense are sent out to the blacks yearly by the Government. The party of whites then followed and shot a boy of twelve years of age dead - a lad well known in town as a harmless helpless lunatic and wounded a man with a ball in the thigh besides. Yesterday the Native Police force under the orders of their white officers performed the same meritorious action for the Blacks in Maryborough setting fire to their Camp destroying their clothing & blankets and driving numbers of them into the river in sight of the whole town population. Not content with this the Native Police proceeded to the boiling down station about a mile from town and deliberately shot dead two old black men and a young one. I have witnessed no actual murder but I have witnessed scenes that I considered occurring where they did in the heart of town libels on the very humanity of the people a disgrace to its magistrates its storekeepers its fathers & sons & everything British in the place. [71] For instance the spectacle of a blackfellow endeavouring at the public wharf at eight o'clock last Sunday night to construct a frail raft of sheets of bark to carry over a river as broad as the Hunter at Raymond Terrace and twice as rapid a child twelve months old and another but ten days old and all this because he had been chased from his fire and threatened with a ball from a carbine by a ruthless wretch wearing the queen's livery. I may say that the current was so strong and the mother of the infant so alarmed for it that the black in mercy returned when half over the river and gave her her child. I thought that single act more eloquent of the wrongs of the blacks than a hundred lectures and I almost regretted I belonged to the same race as those who caused it. The Blacks must be protected. They suffer a hundred times more at the hands of the whites than the whites do from them. When it is found necessary to punish the blacks a rigid search must be instituted for the cause of the necessity and no indiscriminate selections allowed.  The whites punish & persecute without discrimination: is it to be wondered at then that the blacks following the example set them revenge their wrongs without discrimination too. Blood for blood is the only remedy I can see; if the Government will not institute a proper search protect the blacks and punish the whites; seeing moreover that the blacks conduct themselves properly and be made thoroughly acquainted with the laws of property & the consequences of infringing them the result of it all will be that some person will furnish the blacks with firearms and set them in the way of revenging themselves upon their oppressors.  Such interference on the part of the Government is necessary not only for the safety of the Blacks but for the security of all such persons as the members of the Frazer family who were made to suffer for the misdeeds of others. I suppose you have said long ago where are your magistrates. What are they all about. I reply our magistrates are all here and they might as well be at Jericho. They do not care a fig for either law or justice and in short knowing how matters stand they are as guilty of every act of cruelty as the actual perpetrators of them. They are traitors every man of them and unworthy the confidence of the people.  I do not mean to apologize for troubling you for you are public property now and you see I know it; but the fact is I feel so strongly on the matter that I deemed it necessary to write to save me from taking actual proceedings at once.  Hoping you are well & desiring to be remembered kindly to my aunt & Caroline when you see them and to my aunt Ellen. I remain your affectionate nephew  GEORGE D. LANG  There are two daily papers in the Town and Uncle had secured me a frame in either of them. I decided upon going to the Register and have had no reason to repent my choice. The work is very heavy. We go in during the day to distribute - generally between 12 and 2 - and commence to set at 4 o'clock tea between 6 and 7 and finish between 1 and 3 o'clock. The rate per 1000 [words of setting] is 1 / 4. My first week's bill was £5-2-8; the second £5-4. I was scarcely begun work when I was told that the men were anxious to drink my health. I asked the sum and was told 7 / 6. I at once paid it and was done with it. I was horrified at the quantity of drink consumed in the office. The least excuse is made for drinking and they drink Port Wine Sherry Brandy and all sorts of Ale. They nearly all smoke at their work but as the office has a very high roof and well ventilated the annoyance is not very great. The overseer - George Watson - served his apprenticeship in the North British Advertiser and there are one or two Edinburgh men in the office beside myself. I was astonished at the freeness with which the men spend their money. One of them will think nothing of sending out for 5 / - worth of drink and some of them often take a dog cart to the Bay on a Saturday afternoon which costs £1. I was also astonished to hear of the freshness of their intelligence as to home matters. Not a man nor a movement could be mentioned but the minutest particular connected with it was known. ... . It is curious to observe the difference in dress of the men in the office. While some of them are both very dirty and poorly dressed others are at the opposite extreme wearing white hats and rings and very few wear aprons and it is not the sober ones who are the best dressed. The best dressed man in the office being very unsteady being both a gambler as well as a drinker. But we are all very agreeable with one another and things go on very smoothly and pleasantly although we have occasionally a smart discussion about temperance v. drinking in which it is contended on the one side that moderation is the greater virtue and that they are all moderates. [168] Mr. Hulls the only other teetotaller in the office shut them up the other day by saying that in looking round the room he saw several men who would have been independent today if it had not been for drink. This was too sharp firing and irritated them not a little.  The greater proportion of the men in the office have been at the diggings and little wonder may be felt at their loose morality. Most of them have been successful but alas it is now gone. One of them was at one time so far up the social scale that he kept a riding horse but he is far enough down now. He has been a partner in all sorts of speculations - newspaper proprietor baker shoemaker and cab-hirer. Another of the men got £800 as his share in the first hole he dug and on the first day. Drink drink what evil and misery thou hast caused.  West Maitland Decmb. 8th. 1858   My Dear Father   I am to answer your letter dated July 23d which gave us great consolation to hear from you and to find you and Family in good health as this leaves us in good health thank God.   I am to inform you that I am in the same Employment as yet in this Town. Patt Neylon left it and is gone to a new Diggings a good way from here. He is to come home in Christmass [erased: I hope]. The harvest season is here now and is promising very good there is pleanty wheat through out the Colloney. There harvest is wheat and hay making. It is not so hot this year as it was last year. The Farmers ar frightend they will have a wet harvest for they would sooner have it a hot season.   Dear Father - I suppose my uncle John will Blame me for not Scending for him. [81] I am confidant sure it is better for him to stop at home. There is a good many here that would wish to be back again. It would become him very strange to do many things here that he would have to do - at one Instance there is many men that has to cook there own rations and wash their own cloths that I know John would not like. You asked me before to Pay Tom McMahons Pasage but I would not. I have sceen too many of that after People Paying money here for their Pasage and coming out here the curse them and scould them for bringing them here therefore I wount have aney thing to do with them. Its not in account of what I Pay for them - but havin seen so many examples I dont like to do so. Buisness is geting very slack here of late there is so many Emigrating to this Coloney. Belive my word it is not so easy to get gold here as yea think at home. A young man has to work here for his living before he can work [erased: out a living] for himself except he is luckey at diggings or some other Place.   I got a letter not long before I wrote this from Morten Bay. They are doing very well. Michl. Carrigg has lost one of his eyes but he is all right now thank God for he has his halth. He suffered a good deal with his eyes. I hope it is all over now plase God. He tells me in his letter that he is dooing very well. He has a house and Place of his own where nobody can molest him. Tell Michl. Healy that I did not see his daughter scince she got married. I know where she lives but I dont know her Husbands christing name. I know his sirname Markamy. If he writes tell him to direct his letter to . . . Markamh Reymond Terrace Hunter River via Sydney or to me if he likes and I will scend it to her. I think he knows his name himself.   Let me know all about home especily my uncles and aunts Martin Neylon wife and family. I hope they are all well. Give my love to all your friends and relations.   Dear Father I mean to let you know Something Concerning Some of the neighbors that come out here. I did act as a Brother to her when she come out here (I mean [erased: Honora McDonough]). I got her two or three good Places me & my wife. She has turned out the greatest tattler in this Town the Mean Slut not even the People that lives in the Town that she knows but people that is at home far from here. I concealed it in my last letter to you thinking that the Almighty might Put a Stop to her boundless tounge but no worse & worse she is geting saying every thing to do us harm we being so kind to her as to get a place for her at same Place as I work as House maid - I let you know more in my next letter.   I conclude to night for I am in a Hurry for the Mail. It goes on the 11th. Inst. the ship Collimbian. Wishing you and Stepmother Brothers & Sisters a very Happy Christmass & many new years I remain your loving   Son M. Normile   I got a letter from Tom Doolan of late. He and is sister are all right.   Rundle Street Adelaide July 7th 1858   My Dear Edward   I hope you do not think it unkind of me not answering your kind letters but I always have been almost to[o] late with my letters for the mails. I was delighted to hear from you. It proves to me you have not quite forgotten your poor Aunt the only one that is alive to you. I was delighted to hear you were getting on so well and was such a Good Boy. I shall not be able to call you that long for I soppose you ar almost quite a Man by this time. If you were here you would make me feel quite old. I wish you were and I should be able to look to you as my big Protector.   How would you like to come to Adelaide. How do you like your situation as a Station[er]. I expect when you ar out of your time and should you come here you would do well here. There are some nice Stationers Shops here.   I hope your dear Mama is quite well and dear little Susan. I speak of her as I left her a Baby in arms. I should so like you all here. I hope you will some day. I hope your dear Mama received my last letter I inclosed a half soverin in it for Susan as a little present. I hope when I hear of the safe arival of that I shall send you another but I did not like to trust another until I herd if that got safe. I sent one half sovrin to dear Aunt Lucy. She is so badly off Poor thing in her old age it is hard to see her want and she has been so good to others. I hope your dear Mama will go to see her and comfort her. I know she cannot do much but a kind word does a deal for some people. Do you ever see her. Do you ever go to Dublin. I received your likeness and was delighted with them. I Remember your face well I think it must be a good likeness. Your Mama dident say if the were good. I propose sending mine in return to you that is if you will except it. I soppose you almost forgot me.   The Children in North Adelade all sends their love to vou and Susan & Mama also Mrs. Shadgett and family. Robert intends writing and enclosing it in this so he will tell you all the newes. He has become quite a draper after 3 years apprentice to it. Alaxander Wyly that is Poor Uncle Roberts son is also a draper and doing well.   I soppose you herd of Poor Henrys death. I think I mention it in your Mamas letter. He would not be gided by any one but took his own way so he met with his end at last. He died alone in Melburne without a frind to soothe his pillow at leas[t] without a relitave.   Dear Edward I often think of the happy days in Rathmines. I soppose you forget all but I never will. There has been many changes since then but we cannot expect anything more in this world but changes. I trust we ar all looking f[or]ward to that day of rest that happy day of meeting when our trubles shall be turned to Joy and meeting will be to part no more and we shall make one unbroaken family in Heaven. [124]  I trust dear Edward you will be a comfort to your dear Mama as she has no one but you and your dear Sister to comfort her. I was delighted to hear you were all you your dear Mama could wish you to be since your dear Papas death. I trust you will still continue to be so.   I send you a scene of Adelaide about 10 years ago. I shall send you one of this years scenes by next mail so that you will see the improvement in the place. I thought you would like to see it. Tell me what you think of it.   You must excuse this horrid scribble for you will see it is horrid paper to write on and I am in great hast[e] to be in time for the mail. As one of the Children intends writing I shall say no more for I expect the will tell you more newes that will interest you than I can.   Give my love to your dear Mama. I hope I shall here from her soon. Kiss dear Susan one hundred times and except the same number for yourself.   Good by and God bless you my dear Boy and may He never leave you but may he direct you in all things and keep you from the evils of this wicked world. [125] That is the sincere prayer dear Edward of your ever fond and Affectonate   Aunt Isabella Alice Wyly  PS Joyned by all in kindest love to you exept the same from your fond Aunt  Bella  ON STONE BY S. T. GILL PRINTED BY PENMAN & GALBRAITH  VIEWS N ADELAIDE NO. I  HINDLEY STREET  FROM KING WILLIAM ST  Published by Penman & Galbraith Adelaide  [in Isabella's hand]  About 10 years ago.   I am quite ashamed to send this. If I had time I should write again but time wont permit.   Rundle Street Adelaide South Australia October 19th 1858   My dearest Sister   Your Kind letter and Parsel came safe to hand 15th October. I regreted very much not been able to answer it by return of post but the mail made some little delay in Melburne so that the Australian mail left before the English one arived.   I cannot express my delight when seeing yours and dear Thomases likeness they were so Good. Do tell me when the were taken and where. I can carsely believe after seven or 9 long years I was to see you once more. I hope for my sake I shall see the reality some day.   My dear Brother I fancy I see Him alive I cannot believe he is gone but I hope to meet him on a better Shore than even these Golden Shores.   Tell dear Susan I was delighted with her Collar. I have never seen one like it. I shall be so carefull of wearing it lest I should wear it out soon which would grieve me very much. Also dear Edwards present I have put it away for a particular ocation which I will tell him of some day. I intend writing to each one thanking them myself but please tell them I prize them more coming from them than if I paid 30 / - for them here.   I hope by this time dear Edward has read my note. I intend writing often if it is but a few lines and I hope you will do the same for it is cheering to think I have one Sister in the world thou[gh] far from me yet ever dear to me and your dear little ones also. Dear Matilda I intend sending my likeness per a Gentleman who is going home in december next. His Name is Mr. Charles Robin. I shall inclose his adress. He has promised to register the parsel in London so as to go safe. I thought it was a nice chance as I should hav to leave the end of the parsel open if I send it by Post[?] here or pay letter weight which would be more than all is worth but I should not mind that had I not this good chance. I send Edward a little Pocket Book with a letter and a soverin. He can please himself as to spending it. I have not thought yet what to send dear little Susan but She shall have some thing to remember her Poor Aunt Bella.   I shall write before you receive the parcel so I sh[a]ll then tell you the contents. I cannot think what I could Send you that you could prize. You have all the nice things and everythink won [one] could wish to get but here nothing is new. I hope I shall some day see dear old Dublin again and its splendid shops and every thing ones heart could wish for but it was not for me to be there when I was well off. All happened for the best. We cannot expect thinks to happen just as we like in this world. It would not be well for us if so for we should likely forget ourselfs and cling to[o] close to this Vail of Tears. [127]  I was sorry to hear your dear Mother was not so well. I think it is well for her She has you with her you do for her what no stranger would do. I soppose She is failing fast you cannot expect her to last many years longer. I do trust when her change comes it will be a happy one. It will be a consolation to those she leaves behind. Give my very dear love to her.   I soppose you would not think of coming to Australia while she lives. I hope times will be much better before you come. The never were much worse than the ar at present. There is such a dale of comp[et]ition that some times you think the People would not let one another live if possable. I shall alway be able to let you know how things ar getting on before then so you will be able to Judge for your self. For my part nothing I should like better in this world than to have you all near me and I have no doubt by industry you would do well but as I have told you before it is all chance work.   May God direct your steps which ev[e]r way he thinks best. He has guided me all through life and I am sure he will you if you trust to him altho alone without an earthly helping hand you have him who has promised to be the Husband to the Widow a friend to the friendless. I found a father and friend in him in a strange land and opend my private[?] wary way and when surround by danger and temtacion he was my shield. I trust my faith may never fail in him and may we all look to him who is the strong for Strength.   Dear Sister I am still in the Times Drapery Mart I cannot tell how much longer. Perhaps my next letter may say something. I cannot say any thing for sertain yet but as far as Gault & Scott are conserned I may stay forever for the would never give there consent to my leaving exept exept to better myself which I hope if I should it would be. I hope I would raise your curiousity but I shall tell you all in my next which I hope will be next Mail. I am just as happy as ev[e]r no care. I some times think it cannot always last but I must not look at the dark side of things. We are doing a very good traede I believe as Good as any in town.   The anser to your question you will be Surprised to hear. I have got quite a Profisent[?] hand at Milinery. I trim and make Bonnets. I trim plenty but I have so litle time to spare to make I give most Bonnets out. It is all left to me just as I like. I like to sit some times to sew for a change but I am continualy up & down serving customers. Mr. Scott has a Sister just come from Strabane in the North of Ireland it mak[e]s it much more plesant for me to have a young person with me. She is about 29 years of age and a very nice Girl just lik her Brother a Good hearted Irash Girl. She knows nothing of the Drapery buisness being brought up on a farm. There is a large family of this home respectable farmers.   Uncle is just getti[ng] on the same. I told you he got a Warrant[?] Situation at one hundred per Year which is the best thing that has turned up for him yet for it is perm[anen]t from 9 in the morning untill 5 or 6 I do not know which evening[?] and every Saturday at one the[y] close. [128] I hope he will soon get a raise as he anticipates. He has had a hard struggle to get on and bring his large family up respectably as he has done. The have Cows and Calv[e]s and Hens and Ducks and I do not know what all but I expect Aunt will enclose a note which will tell you all perticulars.   November 9th 185[8]  Dear Sister   I thought I woul begin another apistel as I had a little more News to tell you. I dare say part of my letter will raise your curiosity and as things have come to the point I must tell you I am engaged to Mr Scott you have often herd me speak of as my cousin[?]. Aunt E will tell you all about him rather I expect she will. I cannot Say more at present than He is one after my own heart and in short words he is almost perfection in my estamation.   If Aunt will not describe him I will when next I write. I promised to send you my likeness. I shall decline doing so Untill I send dear William and mine together. I know you will like to have them both together. Perhaps I shall still send them by Mr. C. Robin but I sh[a]ll say in what way I shll send them by next Mail. I shll have [a] litle to tell you by next mail for the changes which is about to take place here. I do not know whether we shll stay here or not it quite depends upon sercomstances. I shall write next month. I hope I shll hear from you ev[e]ry month also.   I did not intend writing much more but this affair having taken place within the last fortnight I thought I would gratify your curiosity. You were surprised to hear I was a Wesleyan but I soppose I shall s[t]ill be one as my dear William is an out and out one not only in Name but in heart and prinsable [?principle]. My only prayer is that I may never be a stumbling block in the way for him but that we may both go hand in hand in the name of Christ. It matters little in the Name as long as we ar named as the Children of God and even of the Guardians[?] of Heaven. I some times wish we were all together here but all is for the best I hope we shall some day.   Mr S and Sister ar from Drumclamph Co Tirone. I never met a nicer family since I came to this colony. You will see[?] I was determined to have my own country man. It is the first offer I have had from an Irish man but plenty of English which I expect Aunt will tell you of but as I told you before I waited untill Mr Write would come and he has at last.   I must not tax[?] your pacience with this scribble any longer. I hope my next will be a more interesting one. Please give my very kind love to Uncle John and Aunt and all Family when you see them. Please tell them all I am lon[g]ing to hear from them. I send them a Paper almost every Month. I receive his also which is very kind of him not to forget me. Tell him or Aunt to write. [129] I send you a paper also Uncle by this mail[?]. I send you a Gold Shawl Pin for your self with a Nugget of Gold which answers for a head[?]. I could not think what to send So I thought you woul[d] like some thing colonia[l]. If you will keep it for my sake as a token of love I sh[a]ll send what I promised by Mr C. Robin to Edward with Susan for I can send nothing that I shoul[d] wish to send by letter. I shll send Mr R adress by next mail. Please answer[?] this by return of Post.   Give my love to the dear Children and lots of Kisses. I soppose dear Edward will except this from his Poor Aunt. Give my Kind love to your dear Mother and all friends and except the same dear Matilda from your ever fond and Affection[ate]   Sister Isabella   PS May God bless you and yours and give you Grace and Strength under all your trials and trubles and bring you through all. That is the sincere Prayer of your fond   Sister Bella   Write soon.   Barton Terrace North Adelaide South Australia Nov. I gth 1858   My dear Matilda   I was very glad to hear from you and that you and the children were well. Isabella showed me their letters which were very nice and well done. We also saw your likeness and I was surprised to see so much change in you but it will soon be nine years since I saw you yet the time appears short it passes so quickly and you have had much care and trouble. I hope your Mother may long be spared to you.   You and your children might do very well here but I should not wish to induce anyone to come as many find fault with it at first as I did but I trust with God's blessing we shall do well yet. Education costs much. Fanny Henrietta William and Alexander's amounts to nearly £50 a year servants wages (one) 9 / - per week and 10 / - per week rent but I expect the children will be fitted for respectable situations and the money will not be thrown away.   I am sorry to say your Uncle's health is very middling latterly. He has not been able to attend to business this week he has a bad cough and looks very delicate that I am very uneasy about him but I hope it may not signify - he is very low spirited and you never saw anyone more altered in every way. [130]  We were glad to hear poor Lucy had got a comfortable situation. I suppose you go to see her when you go to Dublin. I intend writing to her soon. Isabella I expect will be married shortly the latter end of January or beginning of February to one of her employers Mr. Scott. He is from the County Tyrone a respectable steady sober young man. I don't know that he has got any money to boast of but he has a good business and there is every prospect of happiness. They have been long attached - she has refused 3 others within the last 3 weeks.   Ruth and hers are very well - her husband is a sadler and has property in houses and land and I believe are very comfortable but have it all to themselves - am never asked to spend a day. She did ask me once or twice but she had no dinner keeps everything for themselves - he does not go home till night from the shop. She charges her brother Aleck 2/ - for his dinner of a Sunday yet he often spends it with us.   Isabella has no idea of inducing Mary or Bessie to come out here they would only be a burden to her or us if out of situations. I know two young girls looking for places these months back and can't procure them. Business is so dull particularly at this season of the year just before the harvest. It will soon be in now and I trust a plentiful one. We have had a very favorable season. Till latterly it has been rather dry but I trust there has not been much injury done to the crop.   I don't make my own bread now it was so troublesome sending it out to be baked. We send our meat to the bakehouse no one here roasts it at the fire its too expensive and makes the house too warm. You think you could not bear the heat but it does not last long without intervals of cold - we have heavenly weather at times. This is the most disagreeable month many days so dusty that you should be quite astonished where it comes from but on the whole I don't find fault with the climate and believe it healthier than home.   Should you ever come you might get the situation of Matron to an emigrant vessel and you could have your children with you for a trifle but I should never advise you to come while you can live at home.   Dublin must appear altered to you. I suppose there is not a Wyly in it now. Was there anything heard of Charles? I regret dear Nancy and Fanny very much and when I heard poor Fanny was in Melbourne I thought I had her in my grasp yet she never was able to write to me and a few weeks after was in her grave. 5 of the family buried in Melbourne.   I am very glad Isabella will soon have a home of her own and not be serving for others. She has got very thin latterly but I expect she will get plump again shortly. You are too far off to send you any of the cake. She has got a fine stock of clothing a chest of drawers etc. etc. and a share in a Building Society and I am sure she will make a good wife.   I had to leave this letter so often it is quite disjointed but I shall take more time for the next. [131] Your Uncle and the children unite in dear love to you and yours and ever believe me your   Very affectionate Aunt  E. Wyly  Mrs. Wyly  Mrs. Bell  Hill Street Newry Co. Down Ireland  Chewton Forest Creek June 7th / 58.   Dear Sir   I would wish to write a few more lines to you but realy I scarcely do Know what to write to you as there is very little new here that I do Know or remember as this does leave us in our useual health Praise the Lord for His continued merceys to us as we are very unworthy of the least of His notice yet still He spares our very unworthy lives and bestows on us a good measure of hea[l]th and strength and a good many of His bountys and we trust that this will find you all as a family in good health also and now what shall I say. [213]  If I was till you of our own township how it is growing as if it were by m[a]gic and also our market town Castlemaine you would not feel much intrest in them. But realy the astonish me. As to our digging there is little new but likely I will send you a newspaper which will give you all the information of these Things. I sent you one by the last mail of the 15th may. I hope you may have got it. Our great railway is now all the talk but is not begun yet. It was to have begun on the first of June but oweing to the severe illness of a great ireish man a Mr Duffy it is put off till the tenth of June. There is a great many goldmining compenys starting up about this place I beleive five or six some of them so large as 2000 shares. It is causing work to get more plenty for those who is willing to work for wages and if our great railway was started I think there need not be many idle. But I think that wages will never be high again as there is still a goodly number waiting in hops of the same perhaps more Than will work when they get the chance. But now what shall I say more.   I wish I could Know what you would wish to Know but I will begin with our season. This is now the month of June and our white frosts are now set in. I have washed my face in icey water this last week. We have it nearly one eighth of an inch thick betimes but allways followed by a most beautifull day. We have a good deal of our garden seed sowen and above the ground such as the frost will not Kill. That is onions leeks parsnips carrotts lettuces cress Redish parsley celery and peas which are fit for stakeing at this time. Cabbage curley Kale culiflowers and all such like I have had sowen and all grew very well even the seeds which I Kindly received from you. But alas this blight with which we are so sorly perplexed pays no respect to seeds or where the come from. As soon as the plant gets its second or third leaf the blight lays hold on them and in spite of all our care it has Killed the most of them but still I have preserved a few of all sorts yet espeicly the curley Kale. I have also a little of all the flower seeds sowen which you sent but the are not up yet. But I intend to protect them from the frost by means of a square of calico and four posts which will furle up every morning and spread out every eve[n]ing.   Now sir supose I would turn to nature a little but realy I scarsley dare as I am no naturlist. But perhaps you might wounder what sort of things we may have here and I think I have hinted at our trublesome things. Our venomous Reptiles are very numerous. We have a great variety of birds more than I could now inform you of and some of most beautifull plumbage. If you would give me a hint of your desire to hear of them I would take down a list of them. We have some very nice butterflys of almos every hue except white as I have never saw a white one yet. I have seen no bees as yet either tame or wild although I beleive that there is some in this colney [colony]. Our bat is the very same as the are with you. They fly about very thick every eveining. Our swallow is much the same also. They remain with us all winter but there is more in summer. [214] Now I must tell you that we have lots of mice here although I think they are not natives and we have plenty of rats in severl places although I have not seen any on the diggings as yet. They have plenty in Castlemaine and they are awefull numerious in Melbourne a perfect plague. They are not natives either but indeed I could scarcely tell you what is natives. I have seen the Kangaroo and the Opossum the Kangaroorat about the size of a rabbit. The native cat is a prety thing. It is not so large as our cat is all spotted like a laopord withe spots about the size of buttons. I have never saw a native dog but I beleive they are very pretty alaso [sic] rather like a fox. Now I have told you what I have seen & must refer you to natural history for the others. I have never seen a hare but there [are] plenty of tame Rabbits and I belive there is some wild ones which has been let loose. I have never seen either pheasent or patridge. We have plenty of Quales and native pidgeons. But perhaps this will wearie you but what shall I say next.   I would ask you a very important Questin and that is as I Know that my father is not very plenty of ready Change if you would be so Kind (as I cannot doubt your Kindness) as to give him a half or whole Quire of letter paper ink pens &c. and every letter that he would bring in to you if you would back it and stamp it that is with postage stamps. By so doeing you would certinly very much oblidge me and it may be that I may get an oppertunity of some one returning home by which I may recomepence you. If not sooner I shall have a chance when Thomas Brooks des go and if I do not get any I shall not forget to pay you with intresst.   Now as I have named T. B. I must tell you that he is in good health and I have heard good accounts of his hole by Mrs John McMillin who is up with us at this time to stop a week or so. Thomas still lives with them. John Regan is in good health also and works in the same hole with Thomas. Mrs Boyce and all her family are well also. I supose you will have heard that her doughter Eliza is got married since they came. Hamilton lives up here now close to our garden fence. James McMillin still works at the work with me as I still work at the companys work yet but we have had no word from Nathaniel yet. Thomas & Alexander are still out in the bush at stations. I have never had the chance of seeing any aquentance of yous and may be I never shall unless they make themselves Known to me.   I still hold the Boomarang yet. I have just been showing it to Mrs McMillin and another young woman a Mrs McAnally from Bellfast who is up with her. She would wish that you would let her father & Mother Know that they are all well also but there is nothing new with them. They are still working at thair deep hole also that is Mrs John McMillin.   Now I do not Know what news to ask of you but you may let me Know of any deaths that may occour in the old neighbourhood with any perticular news that you may think right. When you write you may direct to myself John McCance Chewton forest Creek by Castlemaine Victoria Australia. [215] So I conclude with your friend & wellwisher   John McCance  I have not been one of the lucky ones in a pecuniary point of view. The year before the discovery of the gold mines not liking the immediate prospects of the colony I determined to reduce my establishment and pay off a mortgage on this property. I therefore sold two outlying leased stations with the stock on them wherein I committed a great error as since the gold has attracted so large a population property of that description has risen enormously in value [...] those stations which I sold for £3000 I could since have readily got £50000 a difference that makes a man rich or poor; in deciding which to part with the leasehold or freehold I naturally held to the latter which no doubt will be the most valuable in the end and is now beginning to improve that the excitement caused by this wonderful discovery is subsiding and people are dropping into the ordinary pursuits of life.  We have had another great cause of excitement that has retarded our prosperity as yet. The change in the form of our Government from irresponsible to responsible which has caused so much struggling between two parties to hold the power that the business of the country has been entirely neglected and a system of extravagance been sanctioned that has involved us in a considerable debt. [36] Although the resources of the colony are very great it will take both good judgment and considerable time to set matters to rights again. We have just gone through a General Election the results of which is that the Liberal Party have gained considerable strength but the country have no confidence in the men that hold the reins of Government and most likely at the meeting of Parliament this month they will be ousted. I take no active part in politics though strongly inclined to the Liberal side but remain quietly at home witnessing their bickerings and indulging in my favourite philosophical pursuits though last year I very near committed myself as a neighbour and friend who I have a very high respect for was nominated one of the Ministers of the Commission of Land and Public Works - who offered me any office in his gift and I was induced to accept his Deputy with a salary of £1000 per year but fortunately one of the many changes occurred and I was released; he has been again Minister but I would not accept. I have not very long to pass in this world and I prefer spending the time in peace and quietness when I may be better prepared for the next. I take considerable interest in all scientific pursuits going on in the colony and now and then put forth a lecture or launch a shaft against the terrible ignorance and extravagance that has been displayed in making our railroads.   Crawler forrist 6 / 6 / 59 Mr. Michael Normile   Dear Brother and Sisters  I received your kind & welcombed letter on the 28th. of May which gave us great pleasur to hear from you all being well and espeshly Dear Sister & her increace of family being well & I hope the will do well. This leaves sister & I in first rate health thanks be to the Almight God for his Mercy to us all.   Dear Brothers I mean to let ye Know that I have not disposeed of my crops yet but will in a month or 2. Markets is verry dull at present far inferior to last season but it is supposeed to have a rise after a bit. Sertan things has a rise at present. I have a verry fair crop it turned out verry well so far indeed however it does in the selling of it. I will let you know as soon as I sell it and what will be the return of it. I have a house to myself and a few head of cattle on the place none Milking but one for my on [own] use. I shant Keep the wheat no longer than 2 months more for I am not propperley sittuated at the preesent time. It will pay me well for time I got it will pay me better than to be hireed for since I have being oute hear I never yet worked as a hireed sarvant but the first 9 months. I can work when I like play when I like. I general works by the job or piece work. I and another man works as mates togather. He is a tradesman & quite deacent man. We are working for the one employer the 7 months. We can earn from 15s to £1 pound per day between us an the work is fencen. All fences is maid out of tember heir.   I did not spend much time with Crop. I paid for puten of it in and paid well too. We are about 2 mile from Kiama town that is a seaport town & that is 50 miles sought [south] from Sydney. The sea runs North and south. The land is all bought along the sea coast at first for it mor convenient. There is a town ship every 15 or 20 or up 30 miles from Sydney all along the sea coast wher ever Steamer can come in handy such a river or a nice beason. There is docks maid in a few pleess [?places] near Syd. This land that I purchesed is about 30 miles sought from hear. The naime of the place is Shoealheaven. Maney the man has traveled sought From hear right in to Melborn.   This is verry unleaveled [?unlevelled] part of the country but it is verry wholesom and airy with a fine view of the sea. You can see Sydney heades of a Clear day. If John Lennane did not start yet tell to be sure and write to me before leaves home and to let me Know the day of month and month he starts in & the name of the ship. So Now more at present from you affectionat Friends   Thomas & Hanah Doolan [83]  Excuse my Bad writing for I wrot this note in a hurry. I will write again verry soon please God. Hannah & I joins in sending you our loave and Respect Brothers & sisters and Children uncle and ants friends and neabours.   Adelaide May 17 1859   My dear Edward   I received your long looked for letter dated February 17th. I was sorry to hear the sad Newse of your dear Grand Mothers death I trust what was your loss was her gain. I was delighted to hear her end was a happy one it is the only comfort left for those behind we could not wish her back again to this world of sin and misery. I hope your dear Mama has been Given Grace to bear it with Christian Pacience[?]. I have no doubt that she will be suported under all Knothing [?knowing nothing] will be put on her more than she will be able to bare. It is har[d] to part bu[t] we must expect it some day or other as we know the lot of all men is to die. I trust dear Edward when our time comes I hope we shall have our lamps trim[m]ed prepared to meet our Sav[i]our.   Dear Edward give my kind love to your dear Mama. I hope by this time She has quite recovered. Is the Buisness left to her or is it a Partnership affair I shoul[d] so like to know. I hope all your Grand Mothers affairs were left square and that your Mama will have no truble but I hope to get on well. I have written 3 letters for the one you wrote. I hope she has received them for I sent a Gold Pin which I should not like to be lost and all the newse which you ar ancious to he[ar] I expect. I have also sent a Newes Paper containing the colloni[a]l events.   I must tell you I am as happy as the day is long and has all this world can afford to make me happy a dear kind good Husband which is better than all. We live in North Adelaide about 15 Miles from Town where Mr Scotts Shop is. I have told you what he is and all about him in my last letter.   His Sister is living with us. She goes in to buisness with her Brother ever[y] morning and returns in the evening. She is a dear Sister to me. I shoul[d] not know what to do without her. She is so kind and good. You shoul see us just now. We ar all writing to old Ireland round the table and a comfortable little fire in a comfortable little Cottage in fact it is a perfect little Picture of happiness. [132] I only wish you could transfer your self for a Month and then you could answer for yourself.   Fanny has promised to enclose a Note in this so I expect she will tell you all the newes. I live very near them and I see them some times. It is plesant to live near each other.   I hope dear Susan is well. I shoul so like to have her with me. Give my love to her and lots of Kisses. I expect she will take the shine out of all her cosins in education. I hope she will is she quick at learning. Does she take after her Poor Pappa I shoul like to know.   I intend send my likness by the first chance. You woul have had it long ago but I thought you woul[d] like to have my dear Husbands face with mine. I do not forget my promise. I shll send all togethr. I hope you will fill up a Sheet of Note Paper nextime as you forgot this time to do.   I hope I shll hear from your Mama soon. I shall be ancious to hear from her. Remember me to your Aunt Jane[?] I suppose she remembers me. Do you go home ever[y] Sunday. How long have you to serve before you ar out of your time. What ar you getting per week and do you live in the house. Excuse my questions but you know for what motive I ask. I like to know how you ar Getting on. Do you go to Dublin ever.   I am expecti[ng] to hear from Uncle John or some of them. I am so glad to hear from them. I have sent them cards and your Mama also. I get a paper from Uncle J nearly ever[y] month is it not kind. I hope you will pardon this long Scribble. The Mail starts tomorrow so I did not like but to accnolidge Yours at wonce. I hope you will be as punctual.   I must leave all the remaining newse for Fanny and conclude joined by all in kind love to you and your dear Mama & Sister & believe me dear Edward your ever fond & Affectionate   Aunt Isabella A Scott   Ps Write your letter the same. Gault & Scott. God bless you all.   Mona Cottages October 18th 1859   My dear Sister   I received your long looked for letter dated Augt 10th. I was almost begining to think you had forgotten me. You say you wrote to me acnolidging the Pin. I never received it I was quite ancious[?] untill I herd.   I was very sorry to hear of your loss but I trust it was your dear mothers gain. [133] It is a world of sepparation but there is one consolation. We may get to that world where parting is not known. Do you intend to keep on the Business or ar you in Partnership with Mrs Prescot[?]. I hope you will get on well. I know it will not be for want of exertion on your part.   I soppose dear Susin will soon be able to help you but it would be a pitty to take her from school as long as you could. I am so glad to hear dear Edward is getting on so well. I trust he will be a comfort to you. Give my kind love to him & tell him I shall write to him nex[t] time as I have left this within a few hours of mail time. I hope he has got my last by this time as I sent half of my promised present to him and also our likeneses which did not please me. I should have had them taken again only we had not time. I hope you will see they originals some day which you will say then that they did not flatter my dear William and they say I was not flattered either.   Give my love to Uncle John & family. I am lookin[g] out for a leter from them soon. I soppose Uncle told you that he Met Mr. Gault that is William[s] Partners Brother and his full cosin. There ar 2 of his Brothers living in Manchester. I expect if you ar going there to purchase goods you will meet with them. One of them knows dear Thomas very well also Uncle Johns sons. I was so Glad to hear they new some of my friends. They wrote to that affect to their Brother Robert Gault but after all there ar none of them like my dear husband. You will say & so I say but more than me can testify the same. I must tell you I am as happy as ever in our dear little cottage. I should so like you coul[d] to come to see us and Judge for yourself. There would be such a resepcion for you from a thorough out & out Irish heart.   I have had a serious[?] Illness since I wrote to you last. I soppose you will gess what it was when I tell you I had a Nurse & Doctor &c you may imagine what it was but thank God I am quite well again. I have much to be thankful for. Hilth & Strength happin[es]s.   Poor Uncle has been very Poorly indeed. He had an Apses [abscess] on his Back which had to be cut out which gave him much pain. I am afraid his cons[ti]tution is completely broaken. Poor fellow I feel so sorry for him but thank God he is now better again & able to go to busines again. Fanny is still going to School & all they others except Robert & they youngest. Robert has left the drapery busin[ess] & is learning to be an Architect and is only getting 10 / per week and he got 15 / - and his food in the drapery Shop which mak[es] a deel of difference in the week.   Ruth sends her kind love to you. She is quite well & has 2 little ones and the 3d expect[e]d. She is quite a little mother. Aunt said she would enclose a line with this but she has not sent it so I soppose I may send her love to you also all they family. She will tell you all the newes of her family that I have left out. [134]  Do you ev[e]r hear anny News of Poor Aunt Lucy. I shoul so like to hear from her. Dear William was so pleased to Get a paper from dear Edward. I should so like Edward would write to him. He would be very pleased.   Have you seen any thing of the revival of religin that is going on in Belfast. It seams to me as if all the North was in a confusion. I hope it is for we want to see the land of our birth converted to God & Perticul[ar]ly the dark benighted parts of it. I have made up my mind that the King is about to comfort the hole world for it seams as if he was passing out his Spirit upon all Plases & all Churches.   We have had a sad loss in loosing one of our dear devoted Ministers the one that Married us. He was a dear priest of mine one who always took an intrest in me a priest like a father but he is gon to heaven & who could wish him back. All I can say is may my end be like his. He preached 3 times the Sundy before he died twice in Chapel and once in the open air. He was very impressive[?]. He had a litle cold then but he did not mind that but it brought on fever[?] which caused his death in 5 days. He has left a wife & 2 Children to deplore his loss. She is a dear Christian. She can with all confidence say thy will be done. Nea[r]ly all the congregation was in morning and a Min[i]ster of almost all denominations were at His funeral what got[?] up with our respect.   I inclose a him [hymn] he sang with his little Girls hand in his 12 hours before he died & and almost out of his mind. He did go quite out of his mind before he died. I think you will say I am wandering from subject to subject but I was so fond of him I cannot but tell you of him.   I hope I wont tire your patience with this scrible as usual. Write soon & tell me all the newse. Give my kind love to Mrs. Prescot[?]. I soppose she cannot remember me. Kiss the dear Children for me.   Dear William & his Sister Unites with me and dear love to you.   Believe me dear Sister your ever fond & Affectionate Sister   Isabella Alice Scott   Write soon. Excuse haste.   Chewton Forest Creek Sep 14th / 1859   Dear Sir   I very gladly received your few lines addressed to me for which I feel doubly obliged and the more that you condescende to communicate with me. I am certnly very much astonished to hear of that wonderfull revival in your land and neighbourhood and I sincearly thank God for the Blessed news and I trust before you receive this that in place of tens you will have hundreds to record that is brought from darkness to behold the marvilous light.   It would be very shortly after the date of your last that you would hear of the Death of Robert Gibson which would very much surprise you all but Remember he is only gone before and this is the sure portion of us all and it is a loud call for us to be also ready. We were also very glad to hear of you and all your familys good health and to hear of all our friends being in good health also.   John & Mary were very glad that you mentioned her Father & Mother but John Reagen is working at some distance from us and I have not seen him since I got the letter. Thomas Brooks is also at a distance of 10 - or 12 miles from us towards the City of Melbourne working with William Patton and John Leackey at the Blacksmith work so I have not seen him since either. Mr. John Jeffery is still liveing at Fryerstown but he has never come over to see us yet although it is not far from us. He is Store Keeping there.   Mr. Robert Byers was a long time rambling about the country idle although we tried our utmost but however we did succeed in getting him a situation through the Agency of the School Master who is teaching all our children at present. He is with an uncle of his but as he tells me that he is for writeing by this mail so you will hear from him. But I am glad to inform you that he told me in his letter that he has joined the totle Abstainance Since he went there and I trust by this time that he will be a member of the Wesleyan body of which his Master is a preacher although he is a gentleman.   William Boyde from Bally Halbert is still working with John Regen and Wm Boyce. As for the others they have not left it in our power to mention them. Mr. Cowan is still in our neighbourhood but to recompence my Mrs. he tried to do her all the harm he could. As to Mr. Kerr we do not Know where he is or what he is doeing neither do I think he will do well. I have not heard of Mr. John Semple lately or whither he is removed or not. [216] I think Robert Byers is well fixed if he takes care as I think he will.   Indeed I have very little news to send but what you will get by these papers which I intend to send by this mail. Our railway works is still goeing on. They are working at them opisite our place at present but the wages is eight shillings per day and I have that where I am and less hours and easier work. I will be three years there on the 18th of this month.   I think I have often told you about our stage coaches. We have a good number on our road now. We have four day coaches. One leaves Castlemaine at six oclock in the morning with 6 horses one at eight with 4 do two at half past nine with six horses each. One leaves at one oclock with 4 horses and is it [at] Melbourne at eleven at night. At the same time one levies Melbourne at the same time as each of these meeting at halfway and runs through in a day. We have 2 at night. One starts at seven at night and the other at nine this is the mail and she arrives at half past two in the morning. So you may think we are not living in a wilderness or desert. On Sunday last one of these coaches (of Cobb & cos line as you will see by the papers) passed by this with fourteen grey horses or nearly white all a driveing in hand with about sixty men on and in her. It was a splended sight. This was a pleasure trip (as they do not run on Sundays). We have also about twenty of all sorts of cabs or busses runing to and from Chewton and Ca stlemaine and I ommited to say that one of Cob and Co's coaches runs eight grey horses all summer in a large coach and they are commenced today.   Now I think I have giving you all that I remember only what you will get in the papers. And as this leaves us all that I know in the best of good health I trust that it will find you and Father & Mother and Brother all continueing still to injoy your usual good health and wishing for your wellfare we all join in our Kindest regard to you and Mrs. wishes to be rememberd to your Mother in the Kindest manner while I remain your much obliged friend and wellwisher   John McCance  There has been a very interesting conference sitting lately in Sydney and another at Maitland (the two dioceses of this colony) and indeed the same has been going on all these colony somewhat modified - to establish a more effectual system of Church government one suited to the more liberal views of the present age. The members of the conference are composed of the representatives three orders the Bishop clergy and laity; two of the latter being appointed at public meeting in each parish; the body to meet whenever desirable to establish such laws as they may think desirable - the great point of interest that has lately been under discussion has been the framing of an Act to give the body legal authority in which there has been a very considerable difference of opinion as to whether the Bishop shall have the power of putting his veto on the decision the majority of the other two parties may come to; this point has been carried in favour of the Bishop and the Maitland conference has adopted the same views which I think is the best as I cannot conceive any good government without a supreme head though tis really a check should exist as all men are not pure in their motives. As long as the present Bishop (Barker) holds the See we are safe as he is a most excellent man but we may not always be so fortunate. Another point of great interest will be shortly decided in the Parliament i.e. the payment of the clergy. Hitherto there has been about £50000 granted yearly to support the clergy which sum is now quite insufficient from the increase of the colony and many clergymen are supported by voluntary contributions and as the money is divided between the Episcopalians Romans Presbyterians and Wesleyans according to their numbers other denominations think themselves aggrieved. The general impression is that the whole will be withdrawn as the present incumbents are removed either by death or otherwise and the whole Church be supported voluntarily and the present Government have promised to bring in a Bill to that effect next session. [37] The oldest incumbents are well paid and comfortably housed say about £500 per annum but the clergy are miserably provided for and many cases of real distress exist; therefore a change is much required. In the early days of the colony a large estate composed of the best land dispersed all over the colony was set apart for the purpose of supporting the Church and schools but as from the want of population to render it valuable it did not produce a sufficient annual income it was found necessary the Government should give a grant in lieu and it collects the rent and proceeds from the estate which is carried to the years revenue. It appears to me that this estate (which has now become [valuable?] should be again given up to its legitimate purpose but the great practical diffficulty would be in apportioning it to the different denominations. The matter will afford considerable discussion next year. Hitherto our church government has been under the control of the Archbishop of Canterbury which is found to be very inconvenient. [...]  Two months since young John Moore arrived here from Adelaide in South Australia. He has spent five years at the Victoria diggings without having accumulated any gold having worked very hard all the time. Finding he could do nothing there he went over to his cousin Charles Simeon at Adelaide in the hope of getting employment but not succeeding. Charles wrote to me begging I would give him my countenance or he would have to go to India to enter the army as a private soldier. I paid his passage up here and have given him employment on the farm at sufficient salary to clothe and keep himself respectable while he gains some farming experience telling him it will entirely depend on the ability he shows at the end of a year what more I can do for him. I would give him a share of the income if he is capable of managing the establishment. He has grown a fine young man and I am happy to say he has come out of that temptation unscathed both in manners and principles which is very much to his credit. I cannot do more for him as I have another gentleman here a son of the late Mr. Dowling of London who is my superintendent besides a farm overseer. I think you are aware I spent a good deal of time in [planning?] the establishment of railways in this colony and that my services were little appreciated at the time: lately they have been brought before the Parliament and a Select Committee of the House of Assembly have strongly recommended my remuneration by £1500 which I expect to get next session: irrespective of the money this is very gratifying to me.   My DEAR DR LANG  I received your letter dated August and I must say that I was exceedingly sorry to hear that you had brought my name before the Council as a claim upon Australia.  I wish very much that you had consulted me before doing so I am sure you did it with the kindest intentions but had you asked my opinion upon the subject I should have immediately said No. It is quite impossible to the uneducated in Art even to impress upon them Art's own intrinsic value either to a Country or the improvement of the mind of the People - Art requires a life education and constant intercourse with its refining and beautiful creations to be able to fully appreciate its wants - therefore how could the Legislature of a young country like Australia nurtured in the struggles of contrary factions be supposed to conceive that the Fine Arts would raise her in the eyes of the whole world as they would and will in time I trust most certainly do. My Country has every thing gifted of Nature wealth unbounded climate and the glowing warmth of a Southern Sun she is worthy of being the second Italy all save Italy's appreciation and call strong from the heart for the Beautiful.  I do not call upon my Country Australia must in time call for me! - the opinions of the few who do not want [illegible] other than the narrow wealth will not be eternal and I must beg of you my dear Doctor to tell publicly these Gentlemen of the Legislature that I should never have taken a fraction from them even had they granted it and I have wanted as a claim upon Australia.  The time is not far off I trust when they will see that I am not dependent upon Australia for my fame. I do not rank any longer with students I am now engaged upon a Picture which will make me Master of my Art and place me amongst its Professors. England knows how to appreciate and to reward the favorites of Nature. I shall never return to Australia until my fame is fully established in the old world and that will nor be D.V. long in coming - I see my way clearly before me. I suppose they would laugh at the idea of a little picture of mine a foot in width and 7 inches long being considered at a moderate price of 100 guineas! - In England pictures are valued at thousands of pounds and any price may be demanded and received when once an Artist has established his I must now beg of you dear Doctor to make this letter public acknowledging my utter ignorance of your kind intentions and of my stern disapproval of any such demand upon the Public Treasury of my Country. [75]  I shall write you a long letter about many things when I hear from you again - as to the news of Italy you know more than we do at Rome everything is shut up; even the telegraphs are all taken down from communicating with other parts. We can get no news of any direct movement of V. Emmanuel or of Garibaldi - they say that Garibaldi is within 20 miles of Rome or at the Ponte Mollo. I suppose we shall be bombarded soon. Come what may I shall go on with my Art and cry "Viva Garibaldi" with the Republicans! P. Gavvazzi is at Naples crying down with the Madonna & the Saints for worship - Christ only is to [be] exalted - only to be worshiped! Mamma unites with me in the kindest regards to Miss Lucy and family & yourself and believe me yours very sincerely  A.E. Ironside / AEI DE AUSTRALIA  The Bible is sold publicly in the shops and caffes at Florence - everything is being fulfilled of which the [illegible] speaks.  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. I  SUNDAY Dec. z6 1860. - The two horses having been shod and our reports finished we started at forty minutes past six a.m. for Eyre's Creek the party consisting of Mr. Burke myself King and Charley having with us six camels one horse and three months' provisions. We followed down the creek to the point where the sandstone ranges cross the creek and were accompanied to that place by Brahe who would return to take charge of the Depot. Down to this point the banks of the creek are very rugged and stony but there is a tolerable supply of grass and saltbush in the vicinity. A large tribe of blacks came pestering us to go to their camp and have a dance which we declined. They were very troublesome and nothing but the threat to shoot them will keep them away; they are however easily frightened and although fine-looking men decidedly not of a warlike disposition. They show the greatest inclination to take whatever they can but will run no unnecessary risk in so doing. They seldom carry any weapons except a shield and a large kind of boomerang which I believe they use for killing rats &c.; sometimes but very seldom they have a large spear; reed spears seem to be quite unknown to them. [350] They are undoubtedly a finer and better looking race of men than the blacks on the Murray and Darling and more peaceful but in other respects I believe they did not compare favourably with them for from the little we have seen of them they appear to be mean-spirited and contemptible in every respect.  Monday Dec. 17. - We continued to follow down the creek. Found its course very crooked and the channel frequently dry for a considerable distance and then forming into magnificent waterholes abounding in waterfowl of all kinds. The country on each side is more open than on the upper part of the creek. The soil on the plains is of a light earthy nature supporting abundance of saltbush and grass. Most of the plains are lightly timbered and the ground is finer and not cracked up like at the head of the creek. Left Camp No. 67 at ten minutes to six a.m. having breakfasted before leaving. We followed the creek along from point to point at first in a direction W.N.W. for about twelve miles then about N.W. At about noon we passed the last water a short distance beyond which the creek runs out on a polygonum (Polygonum Cunninghami) flat; but the timber was so large and dense that it deceived us into the belief that there was a continuation of the channel; on crossing the polygonum ground to where we expected to find the creek we became aware of our mistake. Not thinking it advisable to chance the existence of water a-head we camped at the end of a large but shallow sheet of water in the sandy bed of the creek. The hole was about 150 links broad and feet deep in most places. In most places the temperature of the water was almost incredibly high which induced me to try it in several places. The mean of two on the shady side of the creek gave 97.4 deg. As may be imagined this water tasted disagreeably warm but we soon cooled some in water-bags and thinking that it would be interesting to know what we might call cool I placed the thermometer in a pannikin containing some that appeared delightfully cool almost cold in fact; its temperature was to our astonishment 78 deg. At half-past six when a strong wind was blowing from south and temperature of air had fallen to 80 deg. the lowest temperature of water in the hose that had been exposed to the full effect of evaporation for several hours was 72 deg. [351] This water for drinking appeared positively cold - too low a temperature to be pleasant under the circumstances. A remarkable southerly squall came on between five and six p.m. with every appearance of rain. The sky however soon cleared but the wind continued to blow in a squally and irregular manner from the same quarter at evening.  Wednesday Dec. 19. Started at a quarter past eight am. Leaving what seemed to be the end of Cooper's Creek we took a course a little to the north of west intending to try and obtain water in some of the creeks that Stunt mentioned that he had crossed and at the same time to see whether they were connected with Cooper's Creek as appeared most probable from the direction in which we found the latter running and from the manner in which it had been breaking up into small channels flowing across the plains in a N. and N.N.W. direction. We left on our right the flooded flats on which this branch of the creek runs out and soon came to a series of sand-ridges the directions of which were between N. 0.5 W. and N.N.W. The country is well grassed and supports plenty of saltbush. Many of the valleys are liable to be inundated by the overflow of the main creek. They have watercourse and polygonum flats bordered with box-trees but we met with no holes fit to hold a supply of water. At about ten miles we crossed a large earthy flat lightly timbered with box and gum. The ground was very bad for travelling on being much cracked up and intersected by innumerable channels which continually carried off the water of a large creek. Some of the valleys beyond this were very pretty the ground being sound and covered with fresh plants which made them look beautifully green. At fifteen miles we halted where two large plains joined. Our attention had been attracted by some red-breasted cockatoos pigeons a crow and several other birds whose presence made us feel sure that there was water not far off; but our hopes were soon destroyed by finding a claypan just drying up. It contained just sufficient liquid to make the clay boggy. [352] At ten minutes to seven p.m. we moved on steering straight for Eyre's Creek N.W. by N. intending to make a good night's journey and avoid the heat of the day; but at a mile and a half we came to a creek which looked so well that we followed it for a short distance and finding two or three waterholes of good milky water we camped for the night. This enabled me to secure an observation of the eclipse of Jupiter's 1 satellite as well as some latitude observations. The night was so calm that I used the water as a horizon but I find it much more satisfactory to take the mercury for several reasons.  Thursday Dec. 21 [sic] [...] Our course from here N.W. by N. took us through some pretty country lightly timbered and well grassed. [...] We camped on what would seem the same creek as last night near where it enters the lagoon. The latter is of great extent and contains a large quantity of water which swarms with wildfowl of every description. It is very shallow but is surrounded by the most pleasing woodland scenery and everything in the vicinity looks fresh and green [...] There was a large camp of not less than forty or fifty blacks near where we stopped. They brought us presents of fish for which we gave them some beads and matches.  Friday Dec. 21 - We left Camp 70 at half-past five a.m. and tried to induce one or two of the blacks to go with us but it was no use. Keeping our former course we were pulled up at three miles by a fine lagoon and then by the creek that flows into it; the latter being full of water we were obliged to trace it a mile up before we could cross. I observed on its banks two wild plants of the gourd or melon tribe; one much resembling a stunted cucumber the other both in leaf and appearance of fruit was very similar to a small model of a water melon. [...] Up to this point the country through which we have passed has been of the finest description for pastoral purposes. [...]  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 2. Lat. 27 deg. to 25.5 deg. Stations 72 to 78.  Saturday Dec. 22 - At five minutes to five a.m. we left one of the most delightful camps we have had in the journey and proceeded on the same course as before N.W. by N. across some high ridges of loose sand many of which were partially clothed with porcupine grass. [353] We found the ground much worse to travel over than any we have yet met with. As the ridges were exceedingly abrupt and steep on their eastern side and although sloping gradually towards the west were so honeycombed in some places by the burrows of rats that the camels were continually in danger of falling. At a distance of about six miles we descended from these ridges to undulating country of open box forest where everything was green and fresh. There is an abundance of grass and salt bushes and lots of birds of all descriptions. Several flocks of pigeons passed over our beads making for a point a little to our right where there is no doubt plenty of water but we did not go off our course to look for it. Beyond the box forest which kept away to the right we again entered the sand ridges and at a distance of six miles passed close to a dry salt lagoon the ridges in the vicinity of which are less regular in their form and direction and contain nodules of limestone. The ground in the flats and claypans near has that encrusted surface that cracks under the pressure of the foot and is a sure indication of the presence of saline deposits. At a distance of eight miles from the lagoon we camped at the foot of a sand-ridge jutting out on the Stony Desert. I was rather disappointed but not altogether surprised to find the latter nothing more nor less than the stony rises that we had before met with only on a larger scale and not quite so undulating. [...]  Sunday Dec. 23 - At five a.m. we struck out across the desert in a W.N.W. direction. At four miles and a half we crossed a sand-ridge and then returned to our N.W. by N. course. We found the ground not nearly so bad for travelling on as that between Bulloo and Cooper's Creek; in fact I do not know whether it arose from our exaggerated anticipation of horrors or not but we thought it far from bad travelling ground and as to pasture it is only the actually stony ground that is bare and many a sheep run is in fact worse grazing than that. At fifteen miles we crossed another sand-ridge for several miles around which there is plenty of grass and fine saltbush. [354] After crossing this ridge we descended to an earthy plain where the ground was rather heavy being in some places like pieces of slaked lime and intersected by small water-courses. Flocks of pigeons rose from amongst the salt bushes and polygonum but all the creeks were dry although marked by lines of box timber. Several gunyahs of the blacks were situated near a water-hole that had apparently contained water very lately and heaps of grass were lying about the plains from which they had beaten the seeds. We pushed on hoping to find the creeks assuming an improved appearance but they did not and at one o'clock we halted intending to travel through part of the night. About sunset three flocks of pigeons passed over us all going in the same direction due north by compass and passing over a ridge of sand in that direction. Not to have taken notice of such an occurrence would have been little short of sin so we determined to go eight or ten miles in that direction. Starting at seven o'clock p.m. we at six miles crossed the ridge over which the birds had flown and came on a flat subject to inundation. The ground was at first hard and even like the bottom of a clay pan but at a mile or so we came on cracked earthy ground intersected by numberless small channels running in all directions. At nine miles we reached the bed of a creek running from east to west; it was only bordered by polygonum bushes but as there was no timber visible on the plains we thought it safer to halt till daylight for fear we would miss the water. At daylight when we had saddled a small quantity of timber could be seen at the point of a sand-ridge about one and a half to two miles to the west of us and on going there we found a fine creek with a splendid sheet of water more than a mile long and averaging nearly three chains broad; it is however only two or three feet deep in most parts.  Monday Dec. 24 - We took a day of rest on Gray's Creek to celebrate Christmas. This was doubly pleasant as we had never in our most sanguine moments anticipated finding such a delightful oasis in the desert. Our camp was really an agreeable place for we had all the advantages of food and water attending a position on a large creek or river and were at the same time free of the annoyance of the numberless ants flies and mosquitoes that are invariably met with amongst timber or heavy scrub. [355]  Thursday Dec. 25 - We left Gray's Creek at half-past four a.m. and proceed to cross the earthy rotten plains in the direction of Eyre's Creek. [...] We were surprised to find all the water-courses on the plains trending rather to the south of east; and at a distance of three miles after changing our course and when we approached the sand-hills towards which we had been steering we were agreeably pulled up by a magnificent creek coming from the N.N.W. and running in the direction of the fire we had seen. We had now no choice but to change our course again for we could not have crossed even if we had desired to do so.. The day being very hot and the camels tired from travelling over the earthy plains which by the by are not nearly so bad as those at the head of Cooper's Creek we camped at one o'clock p.m. having traced the creek up about five miles not counting the bends. For the whole of this distance we found not a break or interruption of water which appears to be very deep. The banks are from twenty to thirty feet above the water and very steep; they are clothed near the water's edge with mint and other weeds and on the top of each side there is a belt of box trees and various shrubs.  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 3. Lat. S. 25.5 deg. to 231 deg. Stations 78 to 85  Sunday Dec. 30 - Finding that the creek was trending considerably towards the east without much likelihood of altering its course we struck off from it taking a ten day's supply of water as there were ranges visible to the north which had the appearance of being stony. A N.E. by N. course was first taken for about seven miles in order to avoid them. [...]  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 4. Camp 85 to 90. Lat. 23.5 deg. to 22.25 deg.  Fine Country - Tropics  Saturday Jan. 5. [1861] - On Leaving Camp 84 we found slight but distinct indications of rain in the groves and a few blades of grass and small weeds in the little depressions on the plain. [356] These indications were however so slight that but for the fact of our having found surface water in two holes near our camp we should hardly have noticed them. At a distance of about two miles in a N.N.E. direction we came to a creek with a long broad shallow waterhole. The well-worn paths the recent tracks of natives and the heaps of shells on the contents of which the latter had feasted showed at once that this creek must be connected with some creek of considerable importance. The camels and horses being greatly in need of rest we only moved up about half a mile and camped for the day.  Sunday Jan. 6 - Started at twenty minutes to six o'clock intending to make an easy day's stage along the creek. As we proceeded up in a northerly direction we found the water-hole to diminish in size very much and at about two and a-half miles the creek ran out in a lot of small water-courses. At the upper end of the creek we found in its bed what appeared to be an arrangement for catching fish. It consisted of a small oval mud paddock about 12 ft. by 8 ft. the sides of which were about nine inches above the bottom of the hole and the top of the fence covered with long grass so arranged that the ends of the blades overhung scantily by several inches the sides of the hole. As there was no sign of timber to the N. we struck off to N.W. by N. for a fine line of timber that came up from the S.W. and seemed to run parallel with the creek we were about to leave. At a distance of about three miles we reached the bank of a fine creek) and containing a sheet of water two chains broad at least fifteen feet deep in the middle. The banks were shelving sandy and lightly clothed with box trees and various shrubs. On starting to cross the plains towards this creek we were surprised at the bright green appearance of strips of land which look in the distance like swamps; on approaching some of them we found that there had been a considerable fall of rain in some places which had raised a fine crop of grass and portulac wherever the soil was of a sandy and light nature but the amount of moisture had been insufficient to affect the hard clayey ground which constitutes the main portion of the plain. [357] The sight of two native companions feeding here added greatly to the encouraging prospects; they are the only specimens of that bird that I remember to have seen on that side of the Darling.  Monday Jan. 7. - We started at half-past four a.m. without water thinking that we might safely rely on this creek for one day's journey. We however found the line of timber soon beginning to look small; at three miles the channel contained only a few pools of surface water. We continued across the plains on a due north course frequently crossing small watercourses which had been filled by the rain but were fast drying up. Here and there as we proceeded dense lines of timber on our right showed that the creek came from the east of north. At a distance of thirteen miles we turned to the N.N.E. towards a fine line of timber. We found a creek of considerable dimensions that had only two or three small water-holes; but as there was more than sufficient for us and very little feed for the beasts anywhere else we camped. I should have liked this camp to have been in a more prominent and easily recognized position as it happens to be almost exactly on the tropic of Capricorn..  Tuesday January 8 [...] After traversing a plain of greater extent than the rest we at ten miles reached the creek proportionately large and important looking. The channel however at the point where we struck it was deep level and dry but I believe there is water in it not far off; for there were some red-breasted cockatoos in the trees and native parrots on each side [...] The mirage on the plain to the south of the creek was stronger than I have before seen it. There appear to be sheets of water within a few yards of one and it looks sufficiently smooth and glassy to be used for an artificial horizon. To the westward of the plains some fine sand-hills were visible nearly in the direction in which the creek flowed. To the north of the creek the country undergoes a great change. At first there is a little earthy land subject to inundation. The soil then becomes more sandy the stony pans in which water collects after rain; the whole country is slightly undulating lightly timbered and splendidly grassed. A number of small disconnected creeks are scattered about many of which contained water protected from the sun and wind by a luxuriant growth of fine grasses and small bushes. [358] We passed one or two little rises of sand and pebbles on which were growing some trees quite new to me; but for the seed pods I should have taken them for a species of casuarina although the leaf-stalks have not the jointed peculiarities of those plants. The trunks and branches are like the she-oak and leaves like those of a pine; they droop like a willow and the seed is small flat in a large flat pod about six inches by three-quarters of an inch. As we proceeded the country improved at every step. Flocks of pigeons rose and flew off to the eastward and fresh plants met our view on every rise; everything green and luxuriant. The horse licked his lips and tried all he could to break his nose-string in order to get at the food. We camped at the foot of a sandy rise where there was a large stony pan with plenty of water and where the feed was equal in quality and superior as to variety to any that I have seen in Australia excepting perhaps on some soils of volcanic origin.  Wednesday Jan. 9. [...] Traversed six miles of undulating plains covered with vegetation richer than ever. Several ducks rose from the little creeks as we passed and flocks of pigeons were flying in all directions. The richness of the vegetation is evidently not suddenly arising from chance thunderstorms for the trees and bushes on the open plain are everywhere healthy and fresh-looking; very few dead ones are to be seen besides which the quantity of dead and rotten grass which at present almost overgrows in some places the young blades shows that this is not the first crop of the kind [...]  Thursday Jan. 10. [...] I should mention that last evening we had been nearly deafened by the noise of the cicadae and but for our large fires should have been kept awake all night by the mosquitoes. A walk of two miles across a well grassed plain brought us to a belt of timber and we soon afterwards found ourselves pulled up by a large creek in which the water was broad and deep. We had to follow up the bank of the creek in a N.E. direction for nearly a mile before we could cross when to our joy we found that it was flowing not a muddy stream from the effects of recent floods but a small rivulet of pure water as clear as crystal. [359]  At about five miles from where we crossed the river we came to the main creek in these flats Patten's Creek.  Friday Jan. 11. Started at five a.m. and in the excitement of exploring fine well-watered country forgot all about the eclipse of the sun until the reduced temperature and peculiarly gloomy appearance of the sky drew our attention to the matter. It was then too late to remedy the deficiency so we made a good day's journey the moderation of the midday heat which was only about 86 deg. greatly assisting us. The country traversed has the most verdant and cheerful aspect; abundance of feed and water everywhere. All the creeks seen to-day have a course more or less to E. by S. The land improves in appearance at every mile. A quantity of rain has fallen here and to the south and some of the flats are suitable for cultivation if the regularity of the seasons will admit.  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 5. Camp 92 to 98  Lat. 22.25 deg. to 21.25 deg. Standish Ranges  Saturday Jan. 12. - We started at five a.m. and keeping as nearly as possible a due N. course traversed for about eight miles a splendid flat through which flow several fine well watered creeks lined with white gum trees. [...] As far as we could see in the distance and bearing due north was a large range having somewhat the outline of a granite mountain.  Sunday Jan. 13 - We did not leave camp this morning until half-past seven having delayed for the purpose of getting the camels' shoes on - a matter in which we were eminently unsuccessful. We took our breakfast before starting for almost the first time since leaving the Depot. Having crossed the creek our course was due north as before until at about six miles we came in sight of the range ahead when we took a north half east direction for the purpose of clearing the eastern front of it. We found the ground more sandy than what we had before crossed and a great deal of it even more' richly grassed. Camp 93 is situated at the junction of three sandy creeks in which there is abundance of water. The sand is loose and the water permeates freely so that the latter may be obtained delightfully cool and clear by sinking anywhere in the beds of the creeks. [360]  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 6. Lat. 21.25 deg. to 20.25 deg. Stations 98 to 105. Upper part of Cloncurry  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Field-Book No. 7. Lat. 20.25 deg. to 19.25 deg. Camps 105 to 112. Middle Part of Cloncurry  Sunday Jan. 27 - Started from Camp 105 five minutes past two in the morning. We followed along the bends of the creek by moonlight and found the creek wind about very much taking on the whole a N.E. course. [...] Palm trees are numerous and some bear an abundance of small round dates just ripening. These palms give a most picturesque and pleasant appearance to the creek.  Cooper's Creek to Carpentaria  Returning from Carpentaria to Cooper's Creek Field-Book No. 9. Sunday February  Finding the ground in such a state from the heavy falls of rain that the camels could scarcely be got along it was decided to leave them at Camp 119 and for Mr. Burke and I [sic] to proceed towards the sea on foot. After breakfast we accordingly started taking with us the horse and three days' provisions. Our first difficulty was in crossing Billy's Creek which we had to do where it enters the river a few hundred yards below the camp. In getting the horse in here he got bogged in a quicksand bank so deeply as to be unable to stir and we only succeeded in extricating him by undermining him on the creek side and then lunging him into the water. [361] Having got all the things in safety we continued down the river bank which bent about from east to west but kept a general north course. A great deal of the land was so soft and rotten that the horse with only a saddle and about twenty-five pounds on his back could scarcely walk over it At a distance of about five miles we again had him bogged in crossing a small creek after which he seemed so weak that we had great doubts about getting him on. We however found some better ground close to the water's edge where the sandstone rock runs out and we stuck to it as far as possible. Finding that the river was bending about so much that we were making very little progress in a northerly direction we struck off due north and soon came on some table-land where the soil is shallow and gravelly and clothed with box and swamp gums. Patches of the land were very boggy but the main portion was sound enough. Beyond this we came on an open plain covered with water up to one's ankles. The soil here was a stiff clay and the surface very uneven so that between the tufts of grass one was frequently knee-deep in water. The bottom however was sound; and no fear of bogging. After floundering through this for several miles we came to a path formed by the blacks and there were distinct signs of a recent migration in a southerly direction. By making use of this path we got on much better for the ground was well trodden and hard. At rather more than a mile the path entered a forest through which flowed a nice water-course and we had not gone far before we found places where the blacks had been camping. The forest was intersected by little pebbly rises on which they had made their fires and in the sandy ground adjoining some of the former had been digging yarns which seemed to be so numerous that they could afford to: leave lots of them about probably having only selected the very best. We were not so particular but ate many of those that they had rejected and found them very good. About half-a-mile further we came close on a blackfellow who was coiling by a camp fire whilst his gin and picaninny were yabbering alongside. We stopped for a short time to take out some of the pistols that were on the horse and that they might see us before we were so near as to frighten them. [362] Just after we stopped the black got up to stretch his limbs and after a few seconds looked in our direction. It was very amusing to see the way in which he stared standing for some time as if he thought he must be dreaming and then having signalled to the others they dropped on their haunches and shuffled off in the quietest manner possible. Near their fire was a fine hut the best I have ever seen built on the same principle as those at Cooper's Creek but much larger and more complete. I should say a dozen blacks might comfortably coil in it together. It is situated at the end of the forest towards the north and looks out on an extensive marsh which is at times flooded by the sea-water. Hundreds of wild geese plover and pelicans were enjoying themselves in the water-courses on the marsh all the water on which was too brackish to be drinkable except some holes that are filled by the stream that flows through the forest. The neighbourhood of this encampment is one of the prettiest we have seen during the journey. Proceeding on our course through the marsh we came to a channel through which the sea-water enters. Here we passed three blacks who as is universally their custom pointed out to us unasked the best way down.  Thursday Feb. 21 - Recovery Camp 6 R. - Between four and five o'clock a heavy thunderstorm broke over us having given very little warning of its approach. There had been lightning and thunder towards S.E. and S. ever since noon yesterday. The rain was incessant and very heavy for an hour and a-half which made the ground so boggy that the animals could scarcely walk over it. We nevertheless started at ten minutes to seven a.m. and after floundering along for half an hour halted for breakfast. We then moved on again but soon found that the travelling was too heavy for the camels so camped for the remainder of the day [...]  Friday Feb. 22 - Camp 7 R. - A fearful thunderstorm in the evening about eight p.m. E.S.E. moving gradually round to S. The flashes of lightning were so vivid and incessant as to keep up a continual light for short intervals overpowering even the moonlight. Heavy rain and strong squalls continued for more than an hour when the storm moved off W.N.W.; the sky remained more or less overcast for the rest of the night and the following morning was both sultry and oppressive with the ground so boggy as to be almost impassable. [363]  Saturday Feb. 23 - Camp 8 R. In spite of the difficulties thrown in our way by last night's storm we crossed the creek. We were shortly afterwards compelled to halt for the day on a small patch of comparatively dry ground near the river. The day turned out very fine so that the soil dried rapidly; and we started in the evening to try a trip by moon light. We were very fortunate in finding sound ground along a billibong which permitted of our travelling for about five miles up the creek when we camped for the night. The evening was most oppressively hot and sultry - so much so that the slightest exertion made one feel as if he were in a state of suffocation. The dampness of the atmosphere prevented any evaporation and gave one a helpless feeling of lassitude that I have never before experienced to such an. extent. All the party complained of the same sensations and the horses showed distinctly the effect of the evening trip short as it was. [...]  Sunday March 3 1861. - Eureka Camp 15 R. - In crossing a creek by moonlight Charley rode over a large snake. He did not touch him and we thought it was a log until he struck it with the stirrup-iron. We then saw that it was an immense snake larger than any that I have ever before seen in a wild state. It measured eight feet four inches in length and seven inches in girth round the belly. It was nearly the same thickness from the head to within twenty inches of the tail it then tapered rapidly. The weight was eleven pounds and a half.  Tuesday March 5 - Camp 17 R. - Started at 2 a.m. on a S.S.W. course but had soon to turn in on the creek as Mr Burke felt very unwell having been attacked by dysentery since eating the snake. He now felt giddy and unable to keep his seat. At 6 a.m. Mr Burke feeling better we started again following along the creek in which there was considerably more water than when we passed down. We camped at 2.15 p.m. at a part of the creek where the date trees were very numerous and found the fruit nearly ripe and very much improved on what it was when we were here before. [364]  Wednesday March 6 - Camp 18 'R. - Arrived at the former camp and find the feed richer than ever and the ants just as troublesome. Mr Burke is a little better and Charley looks comparatively well. The dryness of the atmosphere seems to have a beneficial effect on all [...]  Wednesday March 13 - Camp 25 R. - Rained all day so heavily that I was obliged to put my watch and field book in the pack to keep them dry. In the afternoon the rain increased and all the creeks became flooded. We took shelter under some fallen rocks near which was some feed for the camels but the latter was of no value for we had soon to remove them up amongst the rocks out of the way of the flood which fortunately did not rise high enough to drive us out of the cave; but we were obliged to shift our packs to the upper part. In the evening the water fell as rapidly as it had risen leaving everything in a very boggy state.  Wednesday March 20 - Camp 32 R. - Feasting Camp Last evening the sky was clouded about nine p.m. and a shower came down from the north. At ten o'clock it became so dark that we camped on the bank of the creek in which was a nice current of clear water. To-day we halted intending to try a night journey. The packs we overhauled and left nearly 60 lb. weight of things behind [...]  Thursday March 21 - Humid Camp 33 R. - Unable to proceed on account of the slippery and boggy state of the ground. The rain had fallen very heavily here to-day and every little depression in the ground is either full of water or covered with slimy mud [...]  Monday March 25 - Native Dog Camp 27 R. Started at half-past five looking for a good place to halt for the day. This we found at a short distance down the creek and immediately discovered that it was close to Camp 89 of our up journey. Had not expected that we were so much to the westward. After breakfast took some time altitudes and was about to go back to last camp for some things left when I found Gray behind a tree eating skilligolee. He explained that be was suffering from dysentery and had taken the flour without leave. Sent him to report himself to Mr Burke and went on. He having got King to tell Mr Burke for him was called up and received a good thrashing. There is no knowing to what extent he has been robbing us. [365] Many things have been found to run unaccountably short [...]  Saturday March 30 - Camp 42 R. - Boocha's Rest. Employed all day in cutting up jerking and eating Boocha.   Monday April 8 - Camp 50 R. - Camped a short distance above Camp 75. The creek here contains more water and there is a considerable quantity of green grass in its bed but it is much dried up since we passed before. Halted fifteen minutes to send back for Gray who gammoned he could not walk [...]  Wednesday April 10 - Camp 52 R. - Remained at Camp 52 R. all day to cut up and jerk the meat of the horse Billy who was so reduced and knocked up for want of food that there appeared little chance of his reaching the other side of the desert; and as we were running short of food of every description ourselves we thought it best to secure his flesh at once. We found it healthy and tender but without the slightest trace of fat in any portion of the body..  Wednesday April 17 - This morning about sunrise Gray died. He had not spoken a word distinctly since his first attack which was just as we were about to start. [...]  Sunday April 21 - Arrived at the depôt this evening just in time to find it deserted. A note left in the plant by Brahe communicates the pleasing information that they have started today for the Darling; their camels and horses all well and in good condition. We and our camels being just done up and scarcely able to reach the Depot have very little chance of overtaking them. Brahe has fortunately left us ample provisions to take us to the bounds of civilizations namely:  Flour 50 lb.; rice 20 lb.; oatmeal 60 lb.; Sugar. 60 lb.; and dried meat 15 lb. These provisions together with a few horse-shoes and nails and some odds and ends constitute all the articles left and place us in a very awkward position in respect to clothing. Our disappointment at finding the Depot deserted may easily be imagined; - returning in an exhausted state after four months of the severest travelling and privation our legs almost paralyzed so that each of us found it a most trying task only to walk a few yards. Such a leg-bound feeling I never before experienced and hope I never shall again. The exertion required to get up a slight piece of rising ground even without any load induces an indescribable sensation of pain and helplessness and the general lassitude makes one unfit for anything. [366] Poor Gray must have suffered very much many times when we thought him shamming. It is most fortunate for us that these symptoms which so early affected him did not come on us until we were reduced to an exclusively animal diet of such an inferior description as that offered by the flesh of a worn out and exhausted horse [...]  Journal of Trip from Cooper's Creek Towards Adelaide  April 1861  The advance party of the Victorian Exploring Expedition consisting of Burke Wills and King (Gray being dead) having returned from Carpentaria on the 21st April in an exhausted and weak state and finding that the Depot party left at Cooper's Creek had started for the Darling with their horses and camels fresh and in good condition deemed it useless to attempt to overtake them having only two camels both done up and being so weak themselves as to be unable to walk more than four or five miles a day. Finding also that the provisions left at the Depot for them would scarcely take them to Menindie started down Cooper's Creek for Adelaide via Mount Hopeless on the morning of the 23rd April intending to follow as nearly as possible the route taken by Gregory; by so doing they hope to be able to recruit themselves and the camels whilst sauntering slowly down the creek and to have sufficient provisions left to take them comfortably or at least without risk to some station in South Australia [...]  Tuesday April 23. [...] We only went about five miles and camped at half past eleven on a billibong where the feed was pretty good. We find the change of diet already making a great improvement in our spirits and strength. The weather is delightful days agreeably warm but the nights very chilly. The latter is more noticeable from our deficiency in clothing the Depot party having taken all the reserve things back with them to the Darling. [...]  Wednesday April 24 - From Camp No. 1 - As we were about to start this morning some blacks came by from whom we were fortunate enough to get about twelve pounds of fish for a few pieces of straps and some matches &c. [367] This is a great treat for us as well as a valuable addition to our rations.  Friday April 26 - From Camp No. 3. [...] This comparative rest and the change in diet have also worked wonders however; the leg-tied feeling is now entirely gone and I believe that in less than a week we shall be fit to undergo any fatigue whatever. The camels are improving and seem capable of doing all that we are likely to require of them [...]  Sunday April 28 - From Camp No. 5 - Morning fine and calm but rather chilly. Started at a quarter to five a.m. following down the bed of a creek in a westerly direction by moonlight. Our stage was however very short for about a mile one of the camels (Landa) got bogged by the side of a waterhole and although we tried every means in our power we found it impossible to get him out. All the ground beneath the surface was a bottomless quicksand through which the beast sank too rapidly for us to get bushes or timber fairly beneath him and being of a very sluggish stupid nature he could never be got to make sufficiently strenuous efforts towards extricating himself. In the evening as a last chance we let the water in from the creek so as to buoy him up and at the same time soften the ground about his legs but it was of no avail. The brute lay quietly in it as if he quite enjoyed his position. To Camp No. 6.  Monday April 29 - From Camp No. 6 - Finding Landa still in the hole we made a few attempts at extricating him and then shot him; and after breakfast commenced cutting off what flesh we could get at for jerking.  Wednesday May 1 - From Camp No. 6 - Started at twenty minutes to nine having loaded our only camel Rajah with the most necessary and useful articles and packed up a small swag each of bedding and clothing for our own shoulders. [...]  Thursday May 2 Camp No. 7 - Breakfasted by moonlight and started at half-past six. Following down the left. bank of the creek in a westerly direction we came at a distance of six miles on a lot of natives who were camped on the bed of a creek. [368] They seemed to have just breakfasted and were most liberal in the presentations of fish and cake. We could only return the compliment by some fish-hooks and sugar.. [...] Rajah showed signs of being done up. He had been trembling greatly all the morning. On this account his load was further lightened to the amount of a few pounds by the doing away with the sugar ginger tea cocoa and two or three tin plates.  Monday May 6. [...] The present state of things is not calculated to raise our spirits much. The rations are rapidly diminishing; our clothing especially the boots are all going to pieces and we have not the materials for repairing them properly; the camel is completely done up and can scarcely get along although he has the best of feed and is resting half his time. I suppose this will end in our having to live like the blacks for a few months.  Tuesday May 7 - Camp No. 9. Breakfasted at daylight but when about to start found that the camel would not rise even without any load on his back. After making every attempt to get him up we were obliged to leave him to himself. Mr Burke and I started down the creek to reconnoitre At about eleven miles we came to some blacks fishing. They gave us some half-a-dozen fish each for luncheon and intimated that if we would go to their camp we should have some more and some bread. [...] On our arrival at the camp they led us to a spot to camp on and soon afterwards brought a lot of fish and bread which they call nardoo. The lighting of a fire with matches delights them but they do not care about having them. In the evening various members of the tribe came down with lumps of nardoo and handfuls of fish until we were positively unable to eat any more. They also gave us some stuff they call bedgery or pedgery. It has a highly intoxicating effect when chewed even in small quantities. It appears to be the dried stems and leaves of some shrub.  Friday May 10 - Camp No. 9 - Mr. Burke and King employed in jerking the camel's flesh whilst I went out to look for the nardoo seed for making bread. In this I was unsuccessful not being able to find a single tree of it in the neighbourhood of the camp. I however tried boiling the large kind of bean which the blacks call padlu; they boil easily and when shelled are very sweet much resembling in taste the French chestnut. [369] They are to be found in large quantities nearly everywhere.  Saturday May 12 - Camp No. 9. - To-day Mr Burke and King started down the creek for the blacks' camp determined to ascertain all particulars about the nardoo. I have now my turn at the meat jerking and must devise some means for trapping the birds and rats which is a pleasant prospect after our dashing trip to Carpentaria having to hang about Cooper's Creek living like the blacks.  Sunday May 12 - Mr Burke and King returned this morning having been unsuccessful in their search for; the blacks who it seems have moved over to the other branch of the creek. [...]  Tuesday May 14 - Mr Burke and King gone up the creek to look for blacks with four days' provisions. Self employed in preparing for a. final start on their return. This evening Mr Burke and King returned having been some considerable distance up the creek and found no blacks.  Friday May 17 - Nardoo - Started this morning on a black's path leaving the creek on our left our intention being to keep a south-easterly direction until we should cut some likely-looking creek and then to follow it down. On approaching the foot of the first sand-hill King caught sight in the flat of some nardoo seeds and we soon found that the flat was covered with them. This discovery caused somewhat of a revolution in our feelings for we considered that with the knowledge of this plant we were in a position to support ourselves even if we were destined to remain on the creek and wait for assistance from town [...]  Friday May 24 - Started with King to celebrate the Queen's birthday by fetching from Nardoo Creek what is now to us the staff of life. Returned at a little after two p.m. with a fair supply but find the collecting of the seed a slower and more troublesome process than could be desired. [...]  Monday May 27 - Started up the creek this morning for the Depot in order to deposit journals and a record of the state of affairs here.  Tuesday May 28 [...] Obtained some mussels near where Landa died and halted for breakfast. [370] Still feel very unwell from the effects of the constipation of the bowels.  Thursday May 30 - Reached the Depot this morning at eleven o'clock. No traces of any one except blacks having been here since we left. Deposited some journals and a notice of our present condition [...]  Tuesday June 4 - Started for the blacks' camp intending to test the practicability of living with them and to see what I could learn as to their ways and manners [...]  Thursday June 6 - Returned to our own camp found that Mr Burke and King had been well supplied with fish by the blacks. Made preparation for shifting our camp nearer to theirs on the morrow.  Friday June 7 - Started in the afternoon for the blacks' camp with such things as we could take found ourselves all very weak in spite of the abundant supply of fish that we have lately had. I myself could scarcely get along although carrying the lightest swag - only about thirty pounds. Found that the blacks had decamped so determined on proceeding to-morrow up to the next camp near the nardoo field.  Saturday June 8 - With the greatest fatigue and difficulty we reached the nardoo camp no blacks greatly to our disappointment. Took possession of their best mia-mia and rested for the remainder of the day. [...]  Thursday June 20 - Night and morning very cold sky clear. I am completely reduced by the effects of the cold and starvation. King gone out for nardoo. Mr Burke at home pounding seed; he finds himself getting very weak in the legs. King holds out by far the best; the food seems to agree with him pretty well.. [...] I cannot understand this nardoo at all; it certainly will not agree with me in any form. We are now reduced to it alone and we manage to get from four to five pounds per day between us [...]  Friday June 21. [...] I feel much weaker than ever and can scarcely crawl out of the mia-mia. Unless relief comes in some form or other I cannot possibly last more than a fortnight. It is a great consolation at least in this position of ours to know that we have done all we could and that our deaths will rather be the result of the mismanagement of others than of any rash acts of our own. [371] Had we come to grief elsewhere we could only have blamed ourselves; but here we are returned to Cooper's Creek where we had every reason to look for provisions and clothing; and yet we have to die of starvation in spite of the explicit instructions given by Mr Burke that the Depot party should await our return and the strong recommendation to the committee that we should be followed up by a party from Menindie; [...]  Saturday June 22. . Mr Burke and King out for nardoo. The former returned much fatigued. I am so weak today as to be unable to get on my feet.  Sunday June 23 - All hands at home. I am so weak as to be incapable of crawling out of the mia-mia. King holds out well but Mr Burke finds himself weaker every day.  Monday June 24 - A fearful night. At about an hour before sunset a southerly gale sprang up and continued throughout the greater portion of the night; the cold was intense and it seemed as if one would be shrivelled up.  Tuesday June 23 [sic] [...] Mr Burke and King remain at home cleaning and pounding seed. They are both getting weaker every day. The cold plays the deuce with us from the small amount of clothing we have.  Wednesday June 24 [sic] [...] Mr Burke and King are preparing to go up the creek in search of the blacks. They will leave me some nardoo wood and water with which I must do the best I can until they return. I think this is almost our only chance. I feel myself if anything rather better but I cannot say stronger. The nardoo is beginning to agree better with me; but without some change I see little chance for any of us. They have both shown great hesitation and reluctance with regard to leaving me and have repeatedly desired my candid opinion in the matter. I could only repeat however that I considered it our only chance for I could not last long on the nardoo even if a supply could be kept up [...]  Friday June 26 [sic] [...] I am weaker than ever although I have a good appetite and relish the nardoo much but it seems to give us no nutriment and the birds here are so shy as not to be got at. [372] Even if we got a good supply of fish I doubt whether we could do much work on them and the nardoo alone. Nothing now but the greatest good luck can now save any of us; and as for myself I may live four or five days if the weather continues warm. My pulse [sic] are at forty-eight and very weak and my legs and arms are nearly skin and bone. I can only look out like Mr Micawber 'for something to turn up'; but starvation on nardoo is by no means very unpleasant but for the weakness one feels and the utter inability to move oneself for as far as appetite is concerned it gives me the greatest satisfaction. Certainly fat and sugar would be more to one's taste in fact those seem to me to be the great stand by for one in this extraordinary continent; not that I mean to depreciate the farinacious food but the want of sugar and fat in all substances obtainable here is so great that they become almost valueless to us as articles of food without the addition of something else.   W J. WILLS  West Maitland N.S.W August 19th 1860   My Dear Father   I received your last letter on 16th. Instant Dat[e]d May 30th. 60 which gave us great [co]nsolation to hear from you and to find you all in good health as this leaves us when writing those few lines in perfect good health thank God for his mercy to us.   Dear Father I received a letter from my sisters in America last January which gave us great pleasure to hear from them. I expect Honora & Husband will come here if they can. I scend the letter to Morten Bay to Mrs. Carrigg which gave her great consolation to hear from them. Michl Carrigg & family are doing very well. I got a letter of late from them. I generally hear from them once a month.   I got a letter from Thomas Doolan of late. He is in good health. I think he has a notion to go to the Diggings. There has been a large gold field discovered of late called the Snowey River. It is in a very cold climate in winter time. It is about 100 miles from Sydney. It is thought it will be one of the Richest gold fields that has been discovered. There will be a great Rush there after winter that is about the middle of next month. I hope it will turn out good for it was much wanted. Both trade & Labour was geting very dull. There is a great deal geting ready for it in this Town. They can go very near it by sea.   My dear Father I am living with the one gentleman for the last five years. They are very fond of me. They are frightend I will take a start to these last diggings. I have not made up my mind for it yet. I am very comfortable where I am meself & little family. Patt Neylon is stoping with us always. He is working for a nother large firm in the Town. He works but 5 days in the week. They keep Saturday their Sunday for they are Jews. He has fine times of it. He is a strong able man and no mistake.   I wrote differant times to Michl. O'Neill I got no Answer from him. I get letters from Mich Ford occasionaly he is in China. His sister Ellen got Married of late to a decent young man. She is a lucky girl and a decent girl. She was not like a good many more of the neighbours if a person done a good turn for them would go and cut your throat to others behind your Back. I expect you know who I mean. I have done a good many things and many good turns (it's not like the old saying self praise is no prais) for other people and it is the poisoneess bite you will get at long last from them like the black Snake. [84] I will drop speaking about that affair.   I would scend you some newspapers but you never told me that you received anny of them that I have scend you. I will scend one along with this letter called the Freeman's Journal Sydney paper. There is great discussion between the Catholicks and Prespeyterians Minister. They broke the church down &. &. and gave the Minister a good trashing. Next month will be the commencment of spring the wether is beginging to get warm. There is a great deal of Money collecting here for the Holey Father to be scend to Rome. I would like you would Scend me a good catholic paper when you are writing to me again.   I mentioned that I did not say annything about the childrin in my last letter. They are three as good children as you could wish to see if the Lord spares them. Johney is a regular Neylon he has foxey hair and very strong of his age thank God. You can tell the neighbours that we are all very happy and snug but not very rich. We have comfort in our life as yet scince we got Married. Whatever the Lord pleases to do after we have the beast [best] of eating & drinking a £I in our pocket when we wanted thank God.   I have not heard from my Sister Bridget this long time past. Patt Neylon & Bridget wishes to be remberd to their Father & Mother Brothers & Sister & to you all. I must conclude with my love to Martin Neylon wife & family my uncles aunts & relations & all the enquiring neighbours. Let me know how is Martin McDonell for I was dreaming of him of late. I thought I was along with himself & Martin Neylon having a stiff yarn at Derry chappel and to my surprise I found meself in Maitland when I awoke. Not forgeting my Stepmother Brothers & Sisters and you my loving Father I would like to see you. Good by for I must be in time for the Mail it is going on the 21st. Inst.   Michl. Normile   Mr. Foley from Ennistymon is living in this Town. He is in good health & family.   Chewton January 14th 1860   Dear Sir   In reply to your very kind and welcome letter of the 10th November I now in haste write these few lines. I received your letter the day before yesterday and I did not wish to write until I had a personal interview with Mr John Jeffery which I had last night as I with Robert my son set off after my days work to where he lived and of course he read the letter which I think did in place of pulling his ears. [217] The distance was only three miles which is not counted much in this place and the reason why I was so anxious to see him I knew that he was going to leave his Situation at the latter end of this week and going to a place which is a good distance from us. So when you receive this you need not write any more to my care as his letters will not come by this route as I suppose you have seen by the map of Victoria. So his will go by Ballarat. But as he told me that he was for writing to you by this mail he will likely give you all the particulars himself but I wanted him to have Mr Huttons Address which he was very glad to see as he never had got it and he promised to write to him immediately and to forward the other letters also. He has promised to give us a call on Sunday before he goes away if he can and he was over here a few days ago but I was not at home I was at work. You will likely get his address by his own letters but it is care of Messers Cheyney Brothers Merchants Creswick Victoria.   Now Sir as I know that you will have some personal discourse with the Revd David Jeffery I feel very much satisfied with this last interview with their son and I am proud of his conduct as far as I have had acquaintance with him. And I have bee[n] giving him a great caution and fatherly advice which take great effect as I said to him Remember now I speak plain but I say it to your face and let me see that you will be an honour to your parents to yourself and to the country you came from as I glory in every one from the North of Ireland acting like a man. He is now getting a good advance on his wages with a prospect of getting more by and by but this you will hear of by himself.   As for Robert Byers I am very proud of his conduct also. You will hear before you see this that he is fell into a situation and I am very happy to say that he has pleased his Master and turned out beyond our expectation and I am very glad on account of My very worthy friend Mr Baker the teacher of all my children who for our Sake recomended him to his uncle E. S. Parker Esq. I believe he is done fore as long as he is in Australia for if he does not want him himself he will find him a better Situation. I have two letters from him Since he went there and I have been writing to him wishing him a happy new year trusting that in this new year 1860 that he will be in the enjoyment of that happiness which the world cannot give nor take away. I am very glad to hear that he has joined the Total Abstinance Society since he went he is amongst the right sort. And I will write to him next week as soon as I get this away by this mail which I believe closes tomorrow and I intend to pull his ears with my pen for his neglect in not writing but he told me that he was going to write by the last mail. I know that you will have his address before you get this but still will state it here. It is in care of E. S. Parker Esq Mount Franklin Franklinford Victoria. [218] Mount Franklin is his estate and franklinford is his township and Post Office.   As for Thomas Brooks he is still in good health and in con[stant?] employ. I do not know what he is at at this time. He was to be up here at Christmas both him and William Patton as they both live down towards Melbourne about 12 Miles distant from us but they did not come as the Weather was very warm at that time and it is still very sultry yet and will be for the next Two Months. You know and understand about Geography and you know what it will be like in 33 south where we are fixed in Summer. You know what it is with you in Summer in I believe 5 north so you see it will be a good deal warmer with us. The flys is the only great annoyance that we have. They are very troublesome to the eyes this time of the year but we have nine months of a Splendid clime.   I Sometimes think that I will write you a long letter full of my ignorant information and than I think that a long letter full of my ignorant information concerning our climit our Birds our plants our trees etc might be little thought of by those who are farther advanced in learning and more refined in manners. But still any question that you would ask of me I would answer it to the best of my skill in my ignorant way.   As for John Reagen he is still in good health. He is working for wages at present which I think is the best in the long run. I do not know the reason that he does not write unless it is because he had not that good fortune that he expected but that would not keep me from it. I think his Father said in his letter that they heard that he was separated from John McMillans people. I do not know that ever I wrote to that effect further than saying that he with his mates was gone to a new rush at a distance. He was up here at christmas with us and I still hold him in great estimation and I hope that he will do well yet. Mr Hutton does live in New South Wales but Albury is on the banks of the Murray River that divides it from Victoria. He is a great deal nearer to Melbourne than Sydney the capital of New South Wales.   Our Thomas and Alexander is a great deal farther away than that at this time. Nathaniel is arrived home with us again. He has been mostly in South America but he is little more settled than when he went away and thinks of being off again.   We are glad to hear of you and your parents and Brother (but I am told yesterday that he is married) being in good health and that your are recovered from your Sickness and hope that the next you send that you will let us hear of your own Marriage as I have heard a little of it.   I have nothing new to send but what you will get in these papers that I Send by this mail. You will see in the mail Second page a descriptions of our Chewton gardens which is only a gunshot from us. You will also see our great procession which we had in Castlemaine at the laying of the foundation Stone of our Benovelent Asylum. [219] You will see also an account of the Chewton Wesleyan Sunday School Scholars and Band of Hope of Which my whole family formed a part. They appeared like the others with Banners flying and with Rosettes on their Breasts and Ribbons flying. They altogether made a grand show. We do read with astonishment of the wreck of the Steam Ship Royal Charter but than I do not wonder at it for such things has been is and will be. But we do not know what fine ship may be the next or what other precious Souls may be the next Victims but we ought to remember that in the midst of life we are in death.   We are all as a family in our usual good health Praise the Lord and hopes that it will find you all in the same enjoyment. Give my kind love to all those that may inquire of me and expect the same for yourself. So I must conclude your very thankful friend   John McCance   My Mother sends her best respects to your Mother and to her Sister Eliza and all her old neighbours and enquiring friends   Robert McCance [in hand of John McCance]   Dear Sir as I had made some mistakes in writing of this letter I caused Robert to Copy it and in doeing so he missed a line which is - and than I think that a long letter full of my ignorant information concerning our climit our Birds our plants our trees &c might be   Chewton October 23rd 1860   Dear Sir   I write you these few lines to inform you that I received your letter of 29th. July as also the inclosed lines for Robert Byers but I am sory to say that I could not forward it to him on account of my not Knowing his address as he seems to be like some others. That is he does not Know where we live untill he wants somthing for he Knows my address - but I do not Know his. He left Mr. Parker sore against his masters will for he was pleased with him and sent me word to that effect. But although I never heared the perticulars yet I beleive it was Mr. John Jefferys fault and I think they both have repented it - so now that I have named this young man I must tell you little about him also.   After he left Robert Byers he tramped the country as long as could and was at Bendigo on his rounds and came here hard up as they call it here and on his Fathers account and on yours also my bed and board was very welcome to him and I done my endeavour to get him a situation which he got in a very fine establishment in this place it was the place in which we all deal. But I must say that he has not proved as he promised to do. [220] For I gave him a very great caution and advice before he went and he made very fine promises but he left without ever telling me of it although I was in the Store on the same night that he left. His wages was two pounds ten shillings per week and board and lodging and if he had acted the man as he promised to do he might have been there for years. I have been makeng inquiry into the cause of his leaving but there was nothing to his dishonesty only carlessness and thoughtlessness or rather lazyness - I did feel very much grieved on his account and on his Fathers also but alas poor fellow himself will be the sufferer.   I have not heard of him since and I have a letter for him to my care from a town called Kyenton between this and Melbourne and I will Keep it till he calls for it as he will very likly give us a call some day or other. But I have done my duty and so has my Mrs. and I am glad it's no worse but I think we have done. Indeed I would have wrote to you by last mail but I depended on him as he prom[i]sed to come up night after night and write to you as he could handle the pen in a superior manner to me and of course he could indite it better but alas the mail closed and he came not. I would have sent papers also but waiting on him. He also promised to send a paper in which was the advertisement for Robert Byers as he did try to find him out and wrote to Creswick and to Melbourne but he said he got no answer before he left. I will very likely send you a few lines some time that he sent to me although the distance was scarsley as far as from your house to the turn of the Newtownards road and by it you may judge - it may be I might send it in this one.   You spoke of not Knowing William Boyces address but you may have seen it before this time as I Know that they wrote by last mail but I think that Scorpian hill Taradale will find him out. I will likily send some papers with this. I cannot give you any information about Mr. Thomas Brooks as he went away along with William Patton in the exploring party and we have not heard of him since. You will see by this last dated paper that they are got to the River Darling and the names of them all is there but his is not there. That name Blook [Belooch] is an Indian.   John Regan is well he is working on the railway down towards Melbourne but I think he will soon be up here. All the others of our family are all in good health. James and Nathaniel is gone to a new rush about 20 miles from us at a place call'd Yandoit. Thomas is just returnd from a visit down to the heads where we lived the first 2 years. He rode his own horse down and up again. Alexander is still up in New South Wales as yet but they were all well the last word we got from them.   You spoke of John Nivin saying I neve[r] wrote to him now but I sent him the last letter about 9 months ago but he might not get it at any rate I sent him another about a fortnight ago with this plea but we have got no answer to it yet. I would certinly write more oftener but it takes me a long time and at the best I am not good at it and you could not think how buisy I am I may say night and day. [221]  But Remember my very large garden and although I bost a little it is a wonder to many to see it. Numbers stands with their hands on the fence looking over with astonishment. If I was to send you a list of all things that I have in it - it would surpr[i]se you. But I have also to fill my time at my daily work of digging besides from eleven oclock in the morning to six at night as we are five in a party but we are making very little wages this long time. But we have made a good deal of the garden this year and the boys is begining to be a help to me but we still Keep them at the School as much as possable but I have Kept Robert at home this some time. But this will weary you so I will draw a tang [breach-pin of rifle] on it.   We certinly are very glad to hear the news you send to us of any event that may happen in or about the old town for all these things be them ever so trifling is precious to us. In fact we get very little but by you for which I feel very much obliged. Now sir I will draw this long yarn to a close. Agnes wishes to be Kindly Rememered to your Mother and to all inquiring friends and beleive me to be your sincear friend   John McCance  Bathurst N.S.W. 12 September 1861  You have no idea what a plague the servants are here. If a few married ladies meet it is quite ridiculous to hear the chorus of lamentation that they strike up. One has had a new American stove knocked to pieces; another every scrap of crockery broken; another her gowns pawned; another bills run up in her name at every shop in the town. All the buckets have been let fall down all the wells and the name of the 'followers' is legion. I suppose it is an evil that will mend itself as more servants come out here.  [Exmoor station Bowen River North Queensland 8 August 1864] You [her sister in England] seem surprised at our extensive housekeeping but in fact there is none here. It would be distracting if we had to keep house for the entire station. Every dray that comes brings its load of flour tea sugar and minor luxuries and necessaries and everything is stowed away in the store a large building at the back of the house which is fitted up with a counter weights etc. like a shop. Mr Hedge-land is storekeeper at present and he dispenses to the shepherds bushmen bullock-drivers and all employees their weekly rations of 8lb. flour 2lb. sugar 1 / 4 lb. tea and 16lb. beef nominally though practically this latter article is unlimited.  The Irish family in the kitchen have so much a week of the same allowed them though they are not kept strictly to any allowance and everything extra that the station people want they pay for such as pickles vinegar currants sardines jam etc.  So you see we have nothing to do with them. There is a pantry in the house where all our things are kept just as in your pantry at home. Tins of sugar tapioca rice sago etc. and these are filled from the store as wanted. Annie [the author's sister] keeps house for us - that is she makes puddings and pies and orders dinner just as you would for a small family at home.  Our things are quite separate. The remains of puddings etc. are always put back in the pantry unless given to the servants. When the milk is brought in it is set in the same pantry. Annie skims it and makes the butter; if there is plenty the servants are given some; if not they do without. It is by no means a right as it is in England. If they want currants or anything of that kind they buy them out of the store. The store contains also boots and all kinds of men's clothes and nearly everything you can think of as necessary in the bush. Mr Hedgeland enters whatever he gives out or sells in a day-book and I keep the station books enter whatever the men buy with their wages in a debtor and creditor account and make up weekly and monthly the entire consumption of the station. All that is sold and given out.  We kill our own beef. About once in ten days a beast is hunted in and slain. The best joints are reserved for the house an immense roasting and spluttering takes place all over the station and the rest is salted down into casks and kept in the meat store a small room behind the other store. We have a smoking-house now made of zinc where the beef kept for the house is hung up and smoked with damp wood. An immense improvement on the cask beef.  15th May. The shore was found to be generally very sandy a low flat valley extending from the head of the cove across the isthmus about two miles to Mermaid Strait where it terminated in a muddy mangrove creek. In about half-an-hour several wells were found some containing rather brackish water but one about eight feet deep in a hollow under a steep range of bare volcanic and granite hills not more than 200 yards from the beach was found to contain an abundant supply of good water; grass being plentiful and of fine quality in the valleys under the hills. [374] Our principal requirements being now satisfied it only remained to bring the ship in near enough to land the horses.. [...] While on shore to-day several new and very beautiful plants and flowers were observed amongst them one in particular. which without exception is the handsomest shrub I have ever seen in Australia; in form the plant resembles a large chandelier with a series of branches springing from a centre stem in sets of five each; on these are short flowers nearly three inches in length grouped like lustres producing a very gorgeous effect; the leaves of the plant are elegantly formed like those of the mountain ash and are of a rich green. A purple flowering bean the seeds of which are the size of the English horse-bean is here found in abundance and are eaten by the natives.  25th May. [...] we made a fair start this morning by 9.0 a.m. and arrived on the edge of the marsh by 11.30 where having first taken a survey of the several channels from the summit of a high granite hill we entered the waste of mud at a point where it did not appear to be more than two miles wide; an hour's struggle carried us fairly through on to terra firma only one horse having to be assisted by the removal of his load. After resting an hour and a half for dinner we resumed our route in a south direction across an extensive low grassy plain of red clayey laom passing over a few' rocky ridges at sunset and at 6 p.m. encamped on a dry creek twenty yards wide water being found in some clay pans in the adjoining plain.  26th May. - Being Sunday the camp was only moved a mile further to a fine pool of water in a river eighty yards wide with beautiful grassy banks which I named the Maitland. [...] Cockatoos and other game were plentiful sixteen of the former being killed by Mr. Brockman at one shot; they were white with orange-tinted feathers in the crest similar to those on the Murchison and Gascoyne Rivers.  27th May. - Having determined in the first instance to strike to the westward with a view to cutting any large rivers coming from the interior that might serve to lead us through the rocky hills that hemmed us in that quarter we this morning took a south-south-west by south course to 11.40 a.m. when we crossed a dry stream-bed sixty yards wide coming out of the granite ranges to the southward the country becoming more barren as we edged upon the spurs of the rocky hills. [375] At 2.0 p.m. we halted on the banks of another stream-bed of the same size as the last when it came on to rain; resuming our march at 4.10 steering west to 6.0 when we encamped on a dry gully with a little feed near it. Having pitched the tents it continued to rain until 11.0 p.m. when a sudden rush of water swept down the valley filling the watercourse and carrying away our-fire and before we had time to remove the baggage to higher ground we had a foot of water in the camp. Fortunately nothing was lost or injured and it only served as a useful lesson for the future [...]  29th May. [...] Steering north 230 degrees east mag. soon brought us out of the hills into a plain extending as far as the eye could reach to the north-west with a few patches of good grass upon it but mostly covered with triodia which was now lust ripe yielding fine heads of seed which the horses are very fond of. At thirteen miles struck the channel of a considerable river coming from the south. As this offered us a fair prospect of working inland and we had already attained nearly to longitude 116 degrees or about the meridian of the mouth of the Alma the stream was followed up for an hour its average breadth being over 200 yards [...] 31st May. - The general course of the river during the day was very little to the south of east its banks still maintaining the same rocky and precipitous character marks of inundation being frequently observed at the height: of thirty feet above the present stream which now was only running gently in a channel not more than thirty yards wide - but when in flood occupying the whole of the valley which averages a quarter of a mile in width. The larger pools are lined with flags and reeds and contain numbers of small fish  resembling trout similar to those found in the Lyons and Gascoyne Rivers. A very handsome tree resembling an ash grew on the margin bearing a beautiful white flower four to five inches across having on the inside a delicate tinge of yellow and yielding a sweet scent like violets. [...] [376]  1st June. - There was a decided improvement in the appearance of the valley as we continued to ascend the river the deep pools were more continuous and grass more abundant; the high lands on either bank still however retained their rugged outlines and were clothed with little else but triodia. Travelling along the bed of the river was nevertheless difficult and dangerous for the horses on account of the immense quantity of rounded boulders of water-worn rocks that occupied a large portion of the channel and frequently jammed the horses into narrow passes where they could not be extricated without meeting with very severe falls which very soon crippled more than one of them; their shoes also began to be wrenched off by being caught in the deep clefts of the rocks very soon expending all the extra sets brought with us [...]  4th June. - During the forenoon the river became much hemmed in by steep rocky hills the bed being a succession of rapids over a bare rocky channel; but after the noon halt the stream came more from the south-east with wide grassy flats on either side in many parts very boggy and producing melaleuca leucodendron with tall straight stems and a variety of eucalyptus resembling E. piperita. White sandstone and shales began to make their appearance on the banks and the water in the river had a saline taste. Several of the horses began to show signs of being much distressed by falling and sticking fast in the mud from which they had not strength to extricate themselves even after being relieved of their loads: Ducks were plentiful and tolerably tame.  5th June. - Having marked a large double-stemmed gum-tree with NAE and the date we made a start up the river but at about a mile found the valley narrow in until the channel of the river which was here full of water was walled in on both banks by perpendicular cliffs from which we were compelled to turn back nearly to our last night's; camp. During the last two days we had caught an occasional glimpse of an elevated range of hills extending for many miles parallel to the river and about ten miles to the southward which rendered it probable that some change would now be found in the character of the back country enabling us to travel without being so frequently retarded by the rocks and bends of the river. [377] A suitable spot was accordingly selected for ascending out of the valley which was accomplished with some difficulty when the country was observed to be intersected for many miles by deep ravines terminating however to the south in a level plain extending to the base of the range already referred to. After four hours' heavy toiling we at length reached the summit of the plain water having been found in one of the rocky gullies by the way.  For the first half-mile on entering the plain or tableland the ground was stony and covered with stunted acacia but it very quickly changed into a rich clayey loam yielding a splendid crop of kangaroo and other grasses melons and small white convolvulus yielding a round black Seed the size of a pea which we found scattered over nearly the whole surface of the plain for miles together. In the lower; parts of the flat rain-water appeared to have remained in shallow clay-pans until very recently killing much. Of the grass which was replaced by atriplex bushes. As we approached the foot of the range the ground became stony and covered with triodia; good grass was still however to be found in the ravines leading out of the hills and as our object was now to shape a course to the-southward we followed up one of the most promising valleys in the hope that it might lead us through the range; we were however disappointed in finding that after pushing some distance up very steep and rocky passes they all terminated in cliffs of horizontal sand stone running in parallel bands one above another to the height of 500 or 600 feet and frequently extending without a break for ten or fifteen miles along the face Of the range [...]   6th June. [...] Quitting the range which had been named-after one of the most liberal promoters of the expedition Hamersley Range we took a north-east course crossing over twelve or fourteen miles of beautiful open grassy plain in many parts the kangaroo-grass reaching above the horses backs; the soil being of the richest clay-loam occasionally containing beds of singular fragments of opaline rocks resembling ancient lava. By 5.30 p.m. we reached the river again several miles above the deep glen that had checked our course on the 5th. [378] The valley having again opened out gave us easy access to its banks which were here a rich black peat soil containing numerous springs. Here was first observed a very handsome fan-palm growing in topes some of them attaining to the height of forty feet and twenty inches diameter the leaves measuring eight to ten feet in length. The river had again opened into deep reaches of water and contained abundance of fish resembling cobblers weighing four and five pounds each. The whole character of the country was evidently changing for the better; and as I have no doubt that at no distant period it will become a rich and thriving settlement I named the river the Fortescue after the Under Secretary of State for the Colonies under whose auspices the expedition took its origin and the large expanse of fertile plain that lies between the river and the Hamersley Range Chichester Downs.  12th June. [...] we again made an attempt more to the eastward and this time succeeded in reaching a considerable stream-bed which ultimately proved to be the main channel of the Fortescue and led us through the range.  14th June. - On our first landing at Nichol Bay the nights had been very mild but we now began to feel them cold and bracing. This was partly owing to the increased elevation of the country we were now travelling over; the southeast wind coming off the mountainous country was very keen and almost frosty early in the morning. Our course this day was at first over tolerably good country which gradually became more and more rocky the ridges increasing in elevation until the aneroid barometer fell to 27.33 giving an altitude of 2400 feet above the sea.  21st June. - Although the size of the channel of the river we had been following down for the last sixty miles had considerably increased both in width and depth yet very little water had been found in it and as it took a decided turn in its course this morning to north-west after two hours' ride without observing any change and there being every appearance of its keeping the same course for the next twenty miles I was convinced that it could not be a tributary to either the Edmund or Lyons which I had at first hoped it might prove. [379] The barometer also ranged too high for it to be at a sufficient elevation to admit of it flowing into either of those rivers as the elevation of the Lyons at the confluence of the Alma is at least of the same altitude above the sea. Having named the river the Hardey we fell back upon the pools passed yesterday where I had decided upon forming a Depot camp at which to rest the weakest horses while with a lightly equipped party I proposed to complete the exploration of the country intervening between this and the Lyons River [...]  22nd June. - In accordance with the plan decided upon yesterday I started this day accompanied by Messrs. Brown Harding and Brockman with three pack-horses conveying eight days' provisions and fourteen gallons of water.  23rd June. [...] The first five miles was across an open grassy plain at times subject to inundation which brought us to the bank of a fine river containing permanent reaches of fresh water lined with canes the channel generally being from 100 to 200 yards wide with a depth of forty feet; it was now barely running but it was quite evident that it was too large for either the Alma or Edmund and its bed must be at least 200 feet below the level of those rivers. We however determined to follow it so long as it ran to the south of west which it did until it came in contact with the range observed yesterday when it altered its course to west-north-west and appeared to continue that direction for many miles probably until joined by the Hardey when in all likelihood it continues its course direct of Exmouth Gulf. Anxious as I naturally was to continue the examination of this promising river time and the condition of our horses' feet did not permit us to do so with advantage. Naming it the Ashburton after the noble President of the Royal Geographical Society we quitted its verdant banks and took a south course up a stony ravine which led us into the heart of the range where we soon became involved amongst steep rocky ridges of sharp slaty schist which very quickly deprived the horses of many of their remaining shoes.  1st July. - The horses left at the Depot were much improved by their nine days' rest and had we been provided with more shoes for them I should have at once returned to the Ashburton and traced that river up to the eastward as it offered a fine opportunity of penetrating to the south-east probably at least another 200 miles; and our provisions on a reduced allowance would admit of our remaining out forty days longer; but the lameness of many of the horses and lacerated condition of their fetlocks convinced me that should we meet with any more difficulties or rough country before obtaining a fresh supply of shoes much valuable time would be lost and we should probably fail to get many of the horses back. [380] I therefore deemed it more prudent to return at once by a shorter route more to the eastward so soon as we had repassed the Hamersley Range and obtaining a refit at the bay to throw all our remaining time into the second trip [...]   West Maitland March 17th. 61   My Dear Father   I received your welcomed letter by the last English mail which gave us great pleasure to hear from you Stepmother Brothers & Sisters being in good Health. Likewise I am very glad to hear that Martin Neylon wife & family are enjoying good Health not forgeting my uncles & Aunts and all the old neighbors hoping they will be as happy as I wish them to be. [85]  At the Same time when writing this we are all in a perfect state of health thanks be to God.   I am to inform you that we had a very hot Summer the last it is over very near. In a nother months time it will be geting cold. Morning & noons for the last six months we had it very hot. I got a letter from Michl. Carrigg of late. Both him & family are all well & doing remarkably well. Mary Carrigg is a big girl growing very tall her mother tells me. She is assistant Teacher along with a respectable Lady in Brisbane. They had a very hot Summer of it. Some people got sun struck there last summer. Morten Bay is Hotter in summer time then where we are. It lays to the North a good way. I got a letter From T. Doolan the very day I wrote this. Both him and Sister are in good health and I think they are doing very well.  Buisness is geting very dull of late. There is no Public works carried one here of anny conciquence to take away a large Boddy of the working Class from the Towns. There is a small pice of railroad making that is crowded with people who is badly need of a Jobb. There is plenty money in this part of the Colloney but these men that has it they wont leave it out in improving their lands or placces. There is Hundreds of them Storeing it up to go home to the Mother Country - and at the other hand our Governer & Legislature is not very willing to to Spend much money in improving our towns Streets or anny other place which Should be done by Goverment Money. In wet weather the most Part of our Streets are not Passible by man or beast. There is large water holes and Mud Holes large enough to Swallow a whole house. There is one Street which is the main Street in this Town that is more than a mile long and when there is wet weather you should want a pair of boots to go above your knees to go through the mud & water in this Place and that is considered to be a very fine street by the natives.   My dear Father I must turn over to some thing more Important than what I have been speaking off. I am living in the one place and in the one work as I have been this long time Back. My work is not so heavy as I youst have one time. I can call on one or two men when I want them for Loading drays & &. My constant work is Packing [erased: in side] Groceries wine & spirits & & for up country use. John Ford was Stoping at my place for a few days after landing he gave me great intelligence about home. I was Surprised I do hear that Martin Neylon left his old House and go to live in a nother for the Sake of any Son or Daughter - but I Suppose he knows better. Jn Ford has gone up the Country to live in a station about 200 miles from Maitland and I think he done very wise for doing so. He can spare some money up there but he could not here. When he gets accustomed to his work he will get £1 per week & rations that is the general run of wages in the bush or country. Ellen Ford & Husband is gone a great way up the country to live. They are geting 70 £ per year and as much as they can eat & drink and many chances besides. [86] [87] Up in the interiour is the Place for makeing money if a man is lucky for he need not spend but what he gives for clothing. I must conclude my feeble accounts of Town & Country.   I will scend you some newspapers which will amuse some of the neighbours for a bit. I hope you will scend me a newspaper as offten as you can. I was very much obliged to you for scending me one. The last time I had to lend it to upwards of 60 peopple. It gives us great Consolation to hear from home and especily a good catholic paper. I should like if Mr. Shannon would communicate with me. I would scend him a paper every month if he scend me one in every 2 months either Sydney or one of our local papers - I hope Mr. & Mrs. Shannon are well.   My loving Father  The sad News of the Death of Mrs McMahon when I perceived it made the tears drop from my eys. She was a good neighbour & an old neighbour and woman I licked well may her Soul rest in peace. I hope the rest of the family are well. Patt Neylon wants to be remembered to his Father Mother Brothers & Sister - he is in good health and lives In Maitland. I must conclude those few lines with my love to you all hoping this will find you all in good Health. Remember me to Martin Neylon & Family my uncles & Aunts & to Numerious to mention. I hope you wont fail in Scending Me the newspapers often. The English Mail Arrives here every month and goes home every month.   I am your loving Son   Ml Normile  It is a Patrick's Day I wrote this. Let me know how many in family have you scince I left.   West Maitland Octb. 21st 1861  My Dear Father  I take the favourable oppertunity in answering your kind letter dated June 11th 1861 which gave us great pleasure to hear from you Stepmother Brothers & Sisters being in a perfect State of health. Likewise we are very glad to hear from our friends & relations and our old neighbours to hear that they were all well & doing well thanks be to God.   My dear Father My Sister Bridget is married & gone up the country. I have not herd from her for the last 5 months. I hope I will by the next country mail. Patt Neylon is gone a good way up the country. He is hired with a [erased: large] squatter that Keep a Dairy and a large farming buisness. We got a letter of late from him. He said he was doing well and will shortly come down to see us. [88] Michl Carrigg & family are very well and are doing first rate. They tell me that Mary Carrigg is a clever looking girl & well educated. She is one of the leading girls that [erased: plays] sings in Brisbane chappel in the choir. She is well licked by the Bishop & Priests of that Town. I got no letter from Thomas Doolan of late. The last time he wrote to me he had a notion of going to the Diggings. I dont know whether he is gone or not.   Dennis McMahon & Brother James are in New-Zeland. I received two letters from there. They come from the East Indias there to quell the rebels or (Mourees) that made ware with the British authorities. They are natives of N. Zealand & very strong & neumorous race of people. It would take me to long to tell you how the war commenced between them. There was a good many European soldiers killed there before the strong forces arrived. I hope I will have the pleasure of seeing them one of these days for they are sure of coming to Sydney.   My dear Father it is a sad affair about the wars in America. There is a good many true hearted Irishman killed or wounded there and by all accounts from the last mail from home they have no thoughts of having an end of it. I expect it will do a great deal of harm to Ireland for there was a good deal of money coming from there to Ireland. Let me know as soon as you can if you heard from America or did Mary & Husband come out of it. I am uneasy for not hearing from them for this long time Past.   My dear Father this Place is not turning out so good as people thought. There is a great many people here often out of Employment. There is no large or extensive works carried on here that would take the influx of the labouring Class but at the same time there is a good deal of Blame on themself. They are frightened to go out of the Towns or go up the Country in to the interiour.   It is very hot here at the present time. Summer is commencing on and scarcely you could bare a light coat on going to church. I mean to inform you that we are in good Health at the Presant time and I am working in the same place as yet and likely not to leave it. The children & Bridget are well thank God.   My dear Father you have a large Family and I expect you will soon have good healp of your own. I am very much pleased at Theadys writing and was very glad for the newspaper he had scend me. You could not credit what pleasure I get in reading home papers. I had to conceal that Paper from many peopel until I read it over. I lend it to upwards of 20 persons and then they were not done. I have scend him a newspaper by this mail and twoo to Mr. Shannon. I will scend Mr Shannon one every month if he likes it. I hope Mr. Shannon and Mrs are well likewise Martin Neylon wife & family My uncles and Aunts and all relations Neighbours & &. I scend them my best love and respects. [89]  Actualy my Dear Father I fancy I am speaking to you verbaly while I am writing this scroll to you but my grife I am not. O wouldnt I be glad if I could have one glance at Derry People and especaly you dear Father and family. Good by. I expect I will never see yea.   Thomas Murry & Austin Fitzpatrick are the twoo onely Neighbours I care for in this Town. They are working in the one place with me they are strong men. I can tell you it would be hard to speake an angry word to a Co. Clare man in this Town. Mrs Murry is going to write home to her mother by the next mail that will be in a months time. The English mail leaves Sydney on 22nd of each month. I hope Theady will be kind enough as to scend me a paper as often as he can. I must conclude those few lines with my love to you dear Father Stepmother Brothers and Sisters and all enquiring friends & relations from   your loving son   Ml. Normile   May the Lord spare you long lives[?] over your Family. Belive this to the constant prayer of your loving son   M.N.  Forest Creek June 23rd. / 65 Mr Orr   Dear Sir  I Must trouble you once more to do me a favour. We are all in good health at present as I hope this will find you. My Brother in law William Boyce Sends a Check for the Sum of twenty-five Pounds £25 on the Bank of Australasia in this letter for the purpose of bringing his Sister & her son out to this Country Ellen Thompson & her son Robert. I think it is better to Bring them out in one of the passenger Ships as it would delay them too long to wait to the Emigration would be open again.   Mr Orr you will be Kind enough to tell her not to bring anything with her but what she will Stand in need of on the passage as it would cost as Much to bring them up to the Diggings as they would be worth. Besides they would be a Burden to her on the passage. When her Brother William & Johny Regan Came out the Sort of Provisions that the found best to answer was flour potatoes a few salt Herrings and a little Ham. Now these things she Could Bring from home Say - 0.5 Cwt potatoes 30 lb flour four or five Doz Salt Herrings & a little Ham and to have these things put in her day Box and to have it in her Berth so that she can get it any time on the passage. The Ships Allowance is plenty for a passenger But the above named articles is rather Scarce. [222]  And Sir - if You Could get any person to see her & the child togather with the Boxes placed on Board of the Ship Suppose she Sails from Liverpool and to pay him for his trouble I think it would be better as she is not Much accustomed to these things. If the Amt in this check is not sufficient to cover all expences If you be Kind enough to supply her with anything that she might be deficient of as Soon as I hear from you I shall return you the Amt by the Next Mail. Sir you will be Kind enough to write as soon as you agree for the passage and let us Know the Name of the Ship and the day she Sails so that we can be on the look out for her Arrival and send the Amt in full of what she may be deficient of and what ever funds you have supplyd her with at any other time. I would Have wrote sooner only waiting to see If we could obtain a passage for her & the Boy by the Emigration System but the passages was all taken up.   Wm Orr Gowdie was in my place on last Sunday and he told me that Robert Hutten was in a Company near Ballarat. I heard of Alexander Clark and that he was in Mr Gowdies a few days ago and that he was well and his Brother Also. I heard nothing of Mr Jeffry scince I wrote last. Thomas Brooks is driving a waggon on the roads. I see him frequently. Robert Byers was down at my place scince I wrote last. I heard about 3 weeks-ago that James Kerr was at Malmsbury. Johny Regan & My Brother John & I is always working togather.   My Mother in law Mrs. Boyce will be for ever obliged to you for your trouble that you have had with her Daughter on other Occasions as well as now. I think I have Mentioned all particulars Concerning her Passage & the rest you will please do as seems to you best. I will Conclude with Sending our best respects to you & Father & Mother and all enquiring Friends   and I remain Yr. Scincere Friend   Hamilton Mc.Millan  B of Australasia No. 3915 £25. Castlemane 30 days sight[?] 21 June / 61 To the B of Australasia Threadneedle St London To Mr. William Orr Grey Abbey Co of Down Ireland   Chewton July 23rd. 1861 Mr. William Orr   Dear Sir  I write these few lines to inform you that I Received your very welcome letter of the 28th. May and we were very glad to hear that the small sum come to hand safe and also that our friends were still mostly alive although the news of my Fathers illeness is not very joyful to me and trusts before you Receive this that you will get another of the same. And I certainly feel very much grieved that the offering is so small but this is the very hardest time with me as my family is all now got up and is a great deal worse to Keep than when they were small and none of them is begun to make much yet. But I must try and get them something to do as they are now getting up to men and women but still they have maid very little yet nor I have maid very little indeed myself for this very long time. But as our country is very changable and we still hope that things will change for the better but at any rate every year now will make us better if our family has any grace at all as if they dont do much for me they will be able to do for themselves and I will not have them to Keep and I certainly feel very thankful for what you have just told me. And if you be so Kind as to look after the old couple I will surely not forget your Kindness and as we all must die sooner or later it is possable that some of them may drop off and if so you will see that the are interred in a decent manner. I will surly reward you for all your trouble if I live and if not as we Know not what a day may bring forth some of my children surly will.   I have just been writing a letter to Mr. John Patton announcing the death of his son William a very fine young man indeed and very much respected by both me and all our family and you would have thought that you could not see a stouter abler young man. But alas he is no more so you see that we Know not what a day may bring forth. I do feel very thankful to Almighty God that we are all as a family at present in very good health and sincearly trust that this will find you all as it leaves us my parents and Brothers & Sisters also but when four score is atain'd our strangth cannot be great.   You have not said whether there is any word from Mr. John Jeffery latley and I have not heard of him this long time but we feel very much for him on his parants acount that he was so foolish or rather thoughtless. I have had a few lines from Mr. Robert Byers. He is now at a place called Huntley near Bandigo and he says him and his mates is doing pretty well up there. When Nathaniel was up at Yandoit he said he saw a man who said that he was a son of Mr. Wattsons of Ballybolly but my Mrs. thought that it could not be so. He also said that he heard that Mr. Robert Hutton was up there also but for the truth of this I cannot say. James Bailies son James of Ballygarvin call'd in John McMillins and had dinner some time ago but we did [not] see him as he was on bussness and I think that he was allowing to call again. [224] He was in good health at that time. I think he was living with a man of the name of Glass from Portaferry.   I think I have been telling you before about falling in with a man called James Gibson. He is Sisters Son to Alexander Seedses wife - but our coming to Know each other was rather singular as I had work with him for a whole summer and we did not Know each other nor till nearly a year after when I ventured to ask him where he was from when he said from Belfast. Oh I said we all hail from the same place and when I questioned on at last he said he was born in Inishargie and I said you had a friend called so & so and so & so. I cannot describe the stare of his eys when he said you surely did not Know them. So you see we might be living long enough along with our nearest neighbours and not Know them if they did not wish to be Known.   If you be talking to Alexander Seeds you can tell him that he told me that his Father had behaved in a very improper manner to him (A S) for his Kindness to his Mother and family of which he form'd a part on leaving Ireland as he had plenty of money and would not pay him but that he had maid a vow to his Mother that if God would spare him to be ever able to do so that he would Reward him for his Kindness as he had not forgot it yet. And he declared to me that he certainly would but he had not seen any of his people this 14 years but if any of them was writing to Amarica they might tell his Mother that he was still alive and in good health as he never writes to them himself. And although he intends to return to Amarica or home as he calls it he does not intend to go near them.   James McMillin saw Mr. Thomas Brooks about a fortnight ago. He was about six miles from This and returning to Melbourne but he was very poorly in health at that time and thought that he would have to give up his situation but we have not heard of him since.   My Mrs. is very thankful that you never omit sending her word of her sister Mrs. Dorrian but if you chance to see her you might tell her that we think it strange that she does not send us her son Jameses address if he be in this country or if she gets any word from him. We would also wish to Know if she or you ever hears anything of her Brother James McLeod as he is still her Brother and as we have got no word from him this some time and was in ill health the last word we got. If you wrote before May I never got it although we looked for it very anxiously every mail.   As to the seeds I have not collected colonial ones as it is generaly home plants or flowe[r]s we wish for and as this is our dead of winter we must wait till Summer to collect them.   If you see Mrs. Leackey you might ask her if she got a letter from me dated 5 or 6 months ago the answer to which her husband is very anxiously waiting. [225] And I went not very long ago in person to a friend to borrow 70 or 80 pounds to send for her and family and her father also if he would come and offered his deeds as surety for he had laid all his money in property but I did not succeed if [?and] have not seen him just latly.   I supose you are aware that one of Mrs. Boyces Doughters is dead since they come hear and one was married some years ago to a man from county Antrim. I think the other has got a Cornish man I hear or a man from Cornwall in England. Though I have never seen him I have heard yarns told about him but I have no certainty nor I have never seen any[t]hing. He seems very uneasy about his children but I must finish. Your ever the same friend   John McCance  I was at a fine kangaroo hunt last week; that's the fun; the devil a ditch or fence but at it as fast as your horse can carry you sometimes on an open plain then in low thick scrub next through a forest of trees [...]   As to my visiting Europe once more I fear it will be too cold for me to remain. There is fun here in every variety. I visited a Chinese theatre last night. You never saw such a performance.   WEDNESDAY 16th April Frew's Water Hole Sturt Plains. - Started at 7.45 a.m. on a course of 302° keeping along the edge of the open plain. I have made many twistings and turnings but my general course is north-west for ten miles. Seeing a small rise on the open plain a little to the north of west I changed to 2750; and at two miles came on some fine ponds of water about one mile and a half long twenty feet broad and three feet and a half deep. I examined them on both sides to see if they would do for a permanent camp for the party as it is a point nearer; and I think I may depend on the water lasting two months without any more rain. [382] I shall camp here to-night and try another day tomorrow to the westward and endeavour to make the Victoria for I can see but little chance of making the Adelaide. By my journal of the 14th everything is quite dry and parched up; no rain seems to have fallen there for a long time. The last two days have been excessively hot. The further to the west the hotter I find it. The natives seem to be numerous for their smoke in the scrub is to be seen in every direction. I name these ponds after John Howell Esq. of Adelaide [...]  Thursday 15th May Depot Howell Ponds. - Started with the party across the plain to Frew's Water Hole course 15° east of north; found the plain burnt for ten miles. The fire has been so great that it has burned every blade of grass and scorched all the trees to their very tops. [...]  Friday 16th May Frew's Water Hole. - Started at fourteen minutes past eight o'clock a.m. course 345° for King's Chain of Ponds. Arrived at about half-past three o'clock p.m. In coming through one of the horses separated from the rest and bolted off into the dense forest tearing everything down before him. We got him in again but with a broken saddle and the top off one of the bags which we afterwards recovered. Arrived at the ponds without any further accident. Wind north-east. Very hot and a few clouds. Lat. 16° 38' 53''  Tuesday 20th May King's Chain of Ponds. - Leaving Mr. Kekwick in charge of the party I started with Thring King and Auld at half-past nine a.m. on a northern course.  Friday 23rd May McGorrey Ponds. [...] There is still the appearance of a small creek which I shall follow until it runs out or trends too much to the east. Started at half-past eight o'clock a.m. course 20° east of north following the small creek about two miles; it seems to be getting larger with occasionally a little water in it. We. have also seen on both sides of us ponds with water surrounded by gum-trees; these ponds when full must retain water for a long time. We have also seen a new tree growing on the banks of the creek with a large straight barrel dark smooth bark with bunches of bright yellow flowers and palmated leaves. [383] At a mile and a half further the creek is improving wonderfully. We have now passed some fine holes of water which will last at least three months; at five miles the water is becoming more plentiful and the creek broader and deeper but twisting and turning about very much sometimes running east and then turning to the west and all other points of the compass. Having seen what I consider to be permanent water I shall now run a straight course 200 east of north and strike it occasionally to see if the water continues. I have named these 'Daly Waters' in honour of his Excellency the Governor-in-Chief. Within a hundred yards the banks are thickly wooded with tall mulga and lancewood scrub; but to the east is open gum forest splendidly grassed. Proceeded occasionally touching the creek and always found fine reaches of water which continued a considerable way. At thirteen miles they become smaller and wider apart; at fifteen miles the creek seems to be trending more to the eastward its bed is now conglomerate ironstone and as this appears to be about the last water I shall give the horses a drink and follow it as far as it goes. In a short distance it has become quite dry with a deep broad course upwards of twenty yards wide. At seventeen miles it separated into two channels and at a quarter of a mile the two channels emptied themselves into a large boggy swamp with no surface water. I examined the swamp but could see no outlet. The country round about is thickly timbered with gum and other trees. Returned to the last water and camped. I shall return to the Depot and bring the party up here. Wind south-east; a few clouds at sunset.  Sunday 25th May Auld's Chain of Ponds. - Proceeded to the Depot where I arrived in the afternoon and found all well. No natives have been near them although some of their smoke has been seen at a short distance from the Depot. Yesterday we hoisted the Union Jack in honour of her Most Gracious Majesty's birthday that being the only thing we had to commemorate this happy event with our best wishes for her long and happy reign [...]  Saturday 31st May Daly Waters. - As there are no appearances of rain the weather very hot and I have a good deal of work in plans &c. to bring up I shall remain here until Monday. [384] I feel this heavy work much more than I did the journey of last year; so much of it is beginning to tell upon me. I feel my capability of endurance beginning to give way [...] There are a number of small fish in this water from three to five inches long something resembling a perch; the party are catching them with hooks; they are a great relish to us who have lived so long upon dry meat.  Monday 2nd June Daly Waters. - Leaving the party in charge of Mr. Kekwick I started at twenty minutes past seven (course north) with Thring Auld and Frew. Camped at 4.20. The whole day's journey has been through a splendid grass country and open forest of gum-trees and other shrubs some of them new to us. Here again we have also met with the bean-tree the blossoms of a bright crimson and at this season they seem to shed their leaves. The country passed over consisted mostly of undulations of ironstone and gravel with a brown-coloured rock occasionally between which were broad valleys of a light-coloured soil all cracked and having many deep holes which being hidden with the long grass causes the horses to tumble into them and made it very fatiguing both to them and us. I have been constantly in the hope all day of coming upon some water but have been disappointed. After rain this country can be passed over with the greatest facility for we have passed holes that will hold water for a long time. The dip of this country is now to the eastward. To-day I think I have been running along where the dip commences from the table land. It was my intention to have tried a journey to the north west; but from what I have seen of the country to-day and on my other journeys to the north as well as Mr. Gregory's description of it on the other side I am led to believe that it would be hopeless to expect to find water there. To try it will only be losing time and reducing the strength of my horses. I must now try on a north-east course towards they Gulf of Carpentaria. I do not wish to go east if I can help it; but I must go where the water leads me [...]  Wednesday 4th June Daly Waters. - Preparing for a start to-morrow to the north-east. [...] [385]  Thursday 5th June Daly Waters. - Started at a quarter to eight with Thring and Auld taking all the water-bags full also King and Billiatt to take back the horses that carry the water. I have chosen King for this purpose as being the next best bushman to Thring and one in whom I can place the greatest dependence to execute any charge I may give him with care and faithfulness. At four o'clock arrived at the blue-grass swamp. Changed my course to 70° east of north following down the middle of it which contains a great number of large deep holes in which water has been but are now quite dry. Followed it until it spread itself over the plain causing a great number of deep cracks and holes completely covered with grass gums and other trees too thick to get an easy passage through. At sundown camped on the plain without water.  Friday 6th June Plain East of Blue Swamp. - Sent King and Billiatt back with the horses while I proceeded with the other two on a course 70° east of north. At a mile and a half came suddenly upon a scrubby ironstone rise about twenty feet high. After passing over a rotten plain full of holes and covered with grass and stunted gum-trees proceeded to the top from which we had a good view of the surrounding country - to all appearance one of the blackest and most dismal views a man ever beheld; even the splendid grass country I had been coming through has the same appearance. The cause of it is the trees being so thick and some of them of a very dark colour that nothing but their tops can be seen which gives it the appearance of being a dense scrub [...]  After a long search found that the flow of the water was to the west of north; traced it a short distance to the southeast and found a small shallow pool of water and gave our horses a drink; and wishing to take advantage of anything that may take me to the north-west I turned and traced it down; passed three ponds with some water in them and at three miles came upon a fine large one two and a half feet deep; followed it still on but was disappointed on finding it terminate in a dry swamp all cracked and full of holes; circled round it to see if the creek took up again but could see no appearance of any. As this last pond will do for the party I will return and bring them up for there is a slight appearance of rain and I wish to get them on as far as possible before the winter rain comes on. [386]  Tuesday 20th June Daly Waters. [...] Started at half past eight a.m. following my former tracks [...]  Friday 13th June Purdie Ponds. - Leaving Mr. Kekwick in charge of the party started at fifteen minutes past eight with Thring and Auld also with King and Billiatt who were to bring back the horses carrying the water-bags. Proceeded on a north course and at seven miles crossed what seemed to be a water-shed seemingly running to the west of north. Halted the party and sent Thring a short distance to see if the flow was in that direction. In a quarter of an hour he returned and informed me that it was but only very slightly so. Changed to north-north-west to follow it. It gradually assumed the appearance of a small creek. At two miles came upon three small pools of water. I now resolve to follow it down and see where it goes to. I should think there must be more water further on. Its course is west of north. Continued to follow it down winding and twisting about very much to almost every point of the compass. At seven miles from the pools found a little more water but not a drop between. Allowed the horses to drink what there was and proceeded down it. I sent Thring to follow it on one side while I and the rest of the party kept on the other. By this we were enabled to cut off the bends and see all the creeks so that no water could escape us. Twice it became very small and I was afraid we were going to lose it altogether but it commenced again and became a fine creek. Not a drop of water. At a quarter to five camped without it. Stony rises are now commencing which are covered with gum and other trees also a low scrub. They are very rough and running nearly west and south. The one on the west is a continuation of the one I crossed in coming to Purdie Ponds. The general flow of the creek is north. Some of the new trees are growing very large on its banks. The cabbage-tree is growing here also. This is the first time I have met with it sometimes growing to the height of fifteen feet. All along the banks of the creek and apparently for some distance back is covered with an abundance of grass but all dried up. In some places both horse and rider were completely hidden by it. [387] Wind southeast - few clouds. Latitude 15° 30' 27'.  Saturday 14th June River Strangways. - Named after the Hon. H. B. Strangways Commissioner of Crown Lands South Australia and who since his taking office has done all in his power to promote exploration of the interior. - Sent King and Billiatt back with the horses to the camp at Purdie Ponds whilst I proceed with the further examination of the creek. I find it now running to the east of north and the stony rises are closing upon it at two miles and a half. They begin to assume the shape of hills which causes the travelling to be rather rough. At three miles and a half the hills run close to the creek and are precipitous; the bed is very rough and stony - so much so that I could not take the horses down it. Ascended a hill near the creek to see what it and the country ahead was like; the hills being so rough that I could not get the horses close enough to see if there was any water dismounted and scrambled to the top of the precipices; was delighted to see below me a large hole of water; Sent the horses across a gully to another hill still higher while I descended into the creek; found the bed very rough having large masses of sandstone and ironstone which rendered it impassable for the horses. Found the water to be deep and beautifully clear proceeded down.: a little further and saw another large one.. I shall return and send the party on to this permanent water and try to find an easy road over the ranges for them [...]   Thursday 19th June Gorge River Strangways. - Leaving Mr. Kekwick in charge of the party started with Thring Auld and King to look for water. No rain seems to have fallen here for a long time back; the grass is quite dry and withered. At 8.15 proceeded down the river and to avoid the hills I went about a mile to the west and found a very passable road; for about two miles we had sandy soil and spinifex mixed with grass also a few stony rises of lime and sandstone. The country after that again became excellently grassed the soil light and a little sandy. No water in the bed which appears to have a very rapid fall; its general course is about north-north-east. At twelve miles seeing a stony hill of considerable elevation I left the bed and went towards it. [388]  At the base of it was a deep creek; I was pleased to see a fine supply of water in it. I immediately sent Thring back to guide the party up here to-morrow whilst I with the two others proceeded with the examination of the river further down. After following it for about ten miles through a beautifully grassed country passing occasionally sandstone rises with apparently scrub on their tops camped at the base of one of them.  Friday 20th June First Camp North of Gorge. - Returned to the other water and at noon met the party and brought them on to this water. We have passed a few stringybark trees. In the bed of the river there is growing some very large and tall timber having a dark-coloured bark the leaf jointed the same as the shea-oak but has not the acid taste: the horses eat it. There are also some very fine melaleucatrees which here seem to displace the gums in the river. We have also passed some more new trees and shrubs. Frew in looking about the banks found a large creeper with a yellow blossom and having a large bean pod growing on it. I shall endeavour to get some of the seed as we go on to-morrow. I shall now move on with the whole party and I trust to find water in the river as long as I follow it; its banks are getting much deeper and broader and likely to retain water; it is dreadfully slow work to keep searching for water; [...]  Sunday 22nd June Rock Camp River Strangways. - A few heavy clouds about. We are now in the country discovered by Mr. Gregory. There is a great deal of very good timber in the valley which is getting larger and improving as we advance. It is still very thick - so much so that the hills cannot be seen until quite close to them. Wind variable. Latitude 15° 10' 30''.   Monday 23rd June Rock Camp River Strangways. - This morning the sky is overcast with light clouds coming from the south-east. Started at eight o'clock still following the river which winds about very much; its general course 10° east of north.' At nine miles the channel became much smaller and shortly afterwards separated into numerous small ones and was apparently lost to me. I continued a north course and at twelve miles struck a creek coming from the south-east; at two miles from this creek found another large one coming from the south-west with shea-oak in it which makes me suppose it is the River Strangways and that it formed again and joined this one. [...] [389]  Wednesday 25th June River Strangways. Started at nine o'clock; course about 70° east of north following the channel. I expect in two or three miles to meet with the Roper. At three miles struck a large sheet of deep clear water on which were a number of natives with their lubras and children; they set up a fearful yelling and squalling and ran off as fast as they could. Rounded the large sheet of water and proceeded along it. At a mile three men were' seen following; halted the party and went up to them. One was a very old man one middle-aged the third a young stout well-made fellow; they seemed to be friendly. Tried to make them understand by signs that I wished to get across the river; they made signs by pointing down the river by placing both hands together having the fingers closed which led me to think I could get across further down. They made signs for us to be off and that they were going back again. I complied with their request and after bidding each other a friendly good-bye we followed down the banks of the river which I now find is the Roper. At seven miles tried to across it but found it to be impossible; it is now divided into a number of channels very deep and full of running water. Proceeded further and tried it at several places but with the same result. At twelve miles camped close to a steep rocky hill on the north side of the river. Searched all round for a crossing but was unable to find one. To the eastward the country is all on fire. The banks of the river are thickly lined with cabbage-trees also the cane bamboa and other shrubs. Two small turtle-shells were picked up by the party at the native camp. The country is still of the same fine description. We are now north of Mr. Gregory's tracks. Latitude 14° 5'.  Thursday 26th June Roper River. --- As I cannot find a crossing I shall have to return to my last camp and try to cross there. Arrived and camped. Day again oppressively hot. Almost immediately on leaving our camp this morning I observed native tracks on ours close to it. They must have followed us up last night although we saw nothing of them. [390] They are not to be trusted: they will pretend the greatest friendship one moment and spear you the next. They have been following us to-day but keeping on the other side of the river and setting fire to the grass as they go along. I wish it would rain and cause the grass to become green so as to stop them burning as well as to give me some fresh food for the horses for they now begin to show the want of it very much; it is so dried up that there is little nourishment in it. Some of them are beginning to look very poor and are much troubled with worms. My journeys have been very short last week in consequence of my being so weak from the effects of scurvy and a severe attack of dysentery for I have scarcely been able to endure the motion of horseback for four hours at a time; but having lately obtained some native cucumbers I find they are doing me a deal of good and hope by next week to be all right again [...]  Friday 27th June West Roper River. - Started on a course of 320° crossing the river and at three miles and half again struck the Roper running. Followed it up coming nearly from the west but winding about very much arid having many branches which makes it very difficult for me to. get the turns correctly. It is a splendid river. We have passed many brooks and deep reaches of water some miles in length and the country could not be better: it is really magnificent. [...]   Saturday 28th June Roper River.. [...] The water of this river is most excellent; the soil is also of the first description; and the grass although dry most abundant from two to five feet high. This is certainly the finest country I have seen in Australia. We passed three rocky hills yesterday not high but having grass up to their tops round which the river winds at their base forming large and long reaches of water. On the grassy plains it forms into different channels and is thickly timbered with shea-oak gum cabbage-trees arid other trees and shrubs. [...]   Monday 30th June Roper River. - Started at 8.10 course west following up the river which winds about very much from north-west to south and at last to south-east. When coming close to where the grass was on fire finding a good ford I crossed the party to the north-east side. [391] At fifteen miles came upon a large reedy swamp through which the river seemed to flow and again at twenty miles came upon the river running into the swamp and coming from the north-north-west. Although travelling twenty miles we have not made more than ten miles in a straight line; the general course is west. The country is of the same excellent description.. The river is still running very rapidly and as this 131 a different branch from those previously discovered I have named it the 'River Chambers' after my late lamented friend James Chambers Esq. whose zeal in the cause of Australian exploration is already well known. [...]  Thursday 3rd July River Chambers. - Started at 8.10 o'clock north-west course. At one mile and a half again struck the river coming from the west-north-west; left it and followed its north-west course: and at another mile again came: upon it with plenty of water. Saw four natives who ran off the moment they saw us. Followed the river the hill coming quite close to it very steep and rocky composed of a hard sandstone and occasionally a little ironstone. At nine miles again left the river finding it was coming too much from the eastward; crossed the saddle of the two spurs again; came upon a creek which I think is the river; ran it up to the west for about a mile but no appearance of water; left it and ascended a very rough rugged bill. In the creek we have just left there is a deal of limestone. Crossed three more small spurs and small creeks but not a drop of water. It being now afternoon and wishing to see from what direction the river is coming I changed to north-east but found that I was still among the rough hills; I then went east for a short distance and made the river now quite dry and having a sandy bed. Followed it up but saw there was no hope of water; turned and traced it down to try and find water. After following it for three miles came upon a fine permanent hole of water a short distance from where we left in the former part of the day. If it would only rain and put some water in the deep dry holes that are in the other creeks crossed to-day I should then be enabled to steer a straight line for the Adelaide. It is very tedious and tiresome having to look for water every day. We have now reached to the top of one of the tributaries of the Chambers. This is apparently the last water. [392] [...]   Saturday 5th July Gorge on another West Branch of the. River Chambers. - Started 8.15; course 50 west of north After travelling two miles over stony rises we ascended a low table land with coarse grass and a little spinifex; at six miles came up to a high stony tenthill which I ascended and named 'Mount Shillinglaw.' All round are stony hills and grassy valleys - dip of the country seemingly to the south! There is apparently a continuous range in the distance to the north-west the Chambers range. Changed my course 325° and at four miles struck another large branch coming from the north-east and running apparently south - plenty. of water in it. This I named the 'Waterhouse' in honour of Mr. H. W. Waterhouse naturalist to the expedition. Some. of the horses are become so lame on account of the stone they will not be able to travel another day. I have camped early to have them shod for on Monday I intend taking a north-west course to strike the source of the Adelaide. The country on the last course is again of the very best description and well grassed. The hills are stony but abound with grass; they are composed of sandstone ironstone and occasionally a little limestone; the trees are the same as those on the Roper. [...]  Monday 7th July Waterhouse River. - Started at 7.55 course north-west. At four miles the creek was coming from the west north-east and east; I therefore left it crossed two low stony rises and again struck another creek coming from the north-east with plenty of water; followed it for a short distance to the west found it so boggy and the body of water so large that I could not get the party round the stony hills. Returned about half a mile and crossed the stony rise and again struck it. At eight miles came upon a number of springs coming from the stony rises. Ascended one of the rises which are not high and found myself on sandy table land which continued for six miles having coarse grass and spinifex growing on it. Towards the last two miles it again became well grassed. The timber is stringy bark some splendid trees; amongst them gums and a number of pines also very fine. The cabbage palm still growing in the creeks in great numbers some of them very tall with several branches on the top. [393] The first eight miles was again over a splendid country and the last three of the same description. A stony hill being in my course I proceeded to the top of it from. which I had a good view of the country before us. This hill I named after Lieutenant Helpman. At 10° south of west are two remarkable isolated table hills Mount Levi and Mount Watts beyond which is the Chambers range to the north-west; my view in other directions is obstructed by other hills but to the west about one mile and a half is seemingly a creek to which I shall go and if there is water I shall camp. Proceeded and found it a fine creek with plenty of water; followed it about one mile to the north-west when it became dry. [...] Tuesday 8th July Water Creek in Stony Rises. - Started at. 7.40 a.m. course north-west; followed the creek a- little way but found it was running too much to the west of my course; left it and proceeded to the north-west: crossing some stony rises now composed of granite and ironstone with occasionally some hard sandstone. Crossing three small creeks running to the west at six miles came upon a large one with broad and long sheets of permanent water coming from the north-north-east and apparently running to the south-west. This I have named the Fanny in honour of Miss Fanny Chambers eldest daughter Of John Chambers Esq. In a small tree on this creek the skull of a very. young alligator was found by Mr. Auld. The trees in this creek are melaleuca and gum with some others. Proceeded across the creek still going north-west; ascended two stony rises and got upon low table land with spinifex and grass passing two stony hills one on each side of my course. At eighteen miles struck the head of a small creek flowing nearly on my course; followed it down in search of water now through a basaltic country. At two miles came upon another large creek having a running stream to the south of west and coming from the north of east. Timber melaleuca palm and gum with some of other descriptions. This I have named the Katherine in honour of the second daughter of James Chambers Esq. The country gone over to-day although there is a mile or two of light sandy soil is good for pasturage purposes; in the valley it is of the finest description. [...] [394]  Wednesday 9th July The Katherine. - Started at five minutes to eight o'clock crossing the Katherine and proceeded on a north-west course over a basaltic country splendidly grassed. [...]   Thursday 10th July Kekwick's Large Group of Springs. Started at eight o'clock; crossed the springs without getting any of the horses bogged. Proceeded on a north-west course but at a mile and a half again came upon springs and running water; the ground too boggy to cross it. Changed to north; at three miles and a half on the course changed to northwest. Ascended some very rough stony hills and got on the top of sandy table land thick with splendid stringy-bark pines and other trees and shrubs amongst which for the first time we have seen the fan palm some of them growing upwards of fifteen feet high; the bark on the stem is marked similar to a pineapple's; the leaf very much resembles a lady's fan set on a long handle and a short time after it is cut closes in the same manner. At half-past one crossed the table land - breadth thirteen miles. The view was beautiful Standing on the edge of a precipice we could see underneath lower down a deep creek thickly wooded running on our course; then the picturesque precipitous gorge in the table land; then the gorge in the distance; to the north-west were ranges of hills. The grass on the table land is coarse mixed with a little spinifex; about half of it had been burnt by the natives some time ago. We had to search for a place to descend and had great difficulty in doing so but at last accomplished it without accident. The valley near the creek which is a running stream is very thickly wooded with tall. stringy-bark gums and other kinds of palm-trees which are very beautiful the stem growing upwards of fifty feet the leaves from eight to ten feet in length with a number of long smaller ones growing from each side resembling an immense feather; a great number of these shooting out from the top of the high stems and falling gracefully over has a very pretty light and elegant appearance. Followed the creek for about two miles down this gorge and camped on an open piece of ground. The top course of the table land is a layer of magnetic ironstone which attracted my compass upwards of 20°; underneath is a layer of red sandstone and below that is an immense mass of white sandstone which is very soft and crumbling away with the action of the atmosphere. [395] In the valley is growing an immense crop of grass upwards of four feet high; the cabbage palm is still in the' creek.' We have seen a number of new shrubs and flowers. The course of the table land is north-north-west and south-south-east. The cliffs from the camp in the valley seem to be from two hundred and fifty to three hundred feet high. Beyond all doubt we are now on the Adelaide river [...]  Monday 14th July The Mary Adelaide River. [...] As I have now got all the horses shod on the front feet I shall proceed on a north-west course through the stony rises which are still quartz and slate splendidly grassed with gums and other trees and bushes not too thick to get through with ease.  Wednesday 16th July The Mary Adelaide River. - Started at 7.40 course north. The river runs off again to the north-west and I have passed over an undulating country all burnt but the soil of the richest description. [...]  Thursday 17th July Tide Creek Adelaide River. - Started at eight o'clock course north-west; passed over some stony hills small creeks and valleys well grassed. At three miles again met with the branch of the river with bamboos and trees of the same description as before a running stream but not so rapid. At five miles observing an open plain among the trees and the river trending more to the westward I changed my course to it 15° west of north; found it to be open plain of rich alluvial soil in places; at times it seemed to be subject to inundation I suppose. the drainage from the range to the eastward which is distant about four miles. I am pleased it has been burnt but where it has not the grass is most abundant; where the water seems to remain it is rather coarse. The plains are studded with lines of green gum-trees and the cabbage palms are numerous which give them a very pretty park-like appearance. They continued for ten miles when we made a small stony hill; we met with a large creek with large holes; of water in it and supposing I had got upon the plain that ran to the sea-coast and seeing those I had passed over so dry camped and having sent Thring to a rise to see where the river is he returned but can see nothing of it but report high hills to the north-west. [396] [...]  Friday 18th July Priscilla Creek. - Started at 8.15 course north-west. Proceeded over two other stony rises and valleys of the same description and came upon extensive plains well grassed and of beautiful alluvial soil; crossing them towards the bluff point at fifteen miles came upon the Adelaide between me and the bluff which is about a mile further on; the river is about eighty yards wide and so still that I could not see which way the current was. I suppose its being high tide was the cause of this. The banks thickly lined with bamboo very tall and stout very steep and twelve feet down to the water's edge; the water appeared to be of great depth and entirely free from snags or failed timber. The range on the opposite side of the river for which I was directing my course being the highest I have seen this new country I have named it after His Excellency the Governor-in-Chief of South Australia 'Daly Range' and its highest peak to the north 'Mount Daly.' Before reaching the river at thirteen miles we passed a high conspicuous tent hill at right angle north-east to our line; this I have named 'Mount Goyder' after the Surveyor-General of 'South' Australia. Followed the river on a north course for about a mile when I was stopped by a deep side creek of thick bamboo with water; turned to the east rounded the bamboo but found myself in a boggy marsh which I could not cross. This marsh is covered with fine grass in black alluvial soil in which is growing a new kind of lily with large broad heart-shaped leaf a foot or more across; the blossoms are six inches high resemble a tulip in shaped and are of a deep brilliant rose colour; the seeds are contained in a vessel resembling the rose of a watering-pot with the end of each egg-shaped seed showing from the holes and the colour of this is a bright yellow. The marsh is studded with a great number of melaleuca-trees tall and straight.  Saturday 19th July Lily Marsh Adelaide River. The country gone over to-day though not all of the very best description has plains in it of the very finest kind even the sandy table-land bears an abundant crop of grass. The trees are so thick that I can get no view of the surrounding country; the tall beautiful palm grows in this creek. [397] Native smoke about but we have not seen any natives. There are large masses of volcanic rock on the sides of this creek. At about a mile to the eastward is a large body of springs that supply water to this creek which I have named Anna Creek. Camped at ten minutes to three o'clock. Wind variable Latitude 12° 29' 7''.  Sunday 20th July Anna Creek. - The mosquitoes at this camp have been most annoying; scarcely one of us has been able to close his eyes in sleep during the whole night: I have ever found them so bad anywhere - night and day they are at us. The grass in and on the banks of this creek is six feet high; to the westward there are long reaches of water and the creek very thickly timbered with melaleuca gum stringy-bark and palms. Wind south east.  Monday 21st July Anna Creek and Springs. - Again passed a miserable night with the mosquitoes. Started at eight o'clock; course north-north-west. [...]   Tuesday 22nd July Fresh-water Marsh. - As the marsh seems to run so much to the east and not knowing how much farther I shall have to go to get across the numerous creeks that appear to come into it I shall remain here to-day and endeavour to find a road through it to the river and follow up the banks if I can [...]  Wednesday 23rd. July Fresh-water Marsh. - Started at 7.40 course 22° east of south one mile to round the marsh; thence one mile south-east; thence east for six miles when we struck a large creek deep and long reaches; thence three quarters of a mile south before we could cross it This I have named 'Thring Creek' in token of my approbation of his conduct throughout the journey; thence east one mile and a half; thence north for nine miles when I again struck the large marsh. Thring Creek has been running nearly parallel with the north course until it empties itself into the marsh. The country gone over to-day after leaving the side of the marsh as well as the banks of the creek and also some small plains is of the same rich description of soil covered with grass; the other parts are slightly elevated the soil light with little sand on the surface of a brown colour; timber mixture of stringy-bark and gums with many others; also a low thick scrub which has lately been burnt in many places the few patches that have escaped abounding in grass. [398]  I have come twelve miles to the eastward to try to round the marsh but have not been able to do so [...]  Thursday 24th July Thring Creek Entering the Marsh. Started at 7.40 course north. I have taken this course in order to make the sea-coast which I suppose to be distant about eight miles and a half as soon as possible; by this I hope to avoid the marsh. I shall travel along the beach to the north of the Adelaide. I did not inform any of the party except Thring and Auld that I was so near to the sea as I wished to give them a surprise on reaching it. Proceeded through a light soil slightly elevated with a little ironstone on the surface the volcanic rock cropping out occasionally; also some flats of black alluvial soil. The timber much smaller and more like scrub showing that we are nearing the sea. At eight miles and a half came upon a broad valley of black alluvial soil covered with long grass; from this I can hear the wash of the sea. On the other side of the valley which is rather more than a quarter of a mile wide is growing a line of thick heavy bushes very dense showing that to be the boundary of the beach. Crossed the valley and entered the scrub which was a complete network of vines. Stopped the horses to clear a way whilst I advanced a few yards on to the beach and was gratified and delighted to behold the water of the Indian Ocean in Van Diemen Gulf before the party with the horses knew anything of its proximity. Thring who rode in advance of me called out 'The Sea!' which so took them all by surprise and they were so astonished that he had to repeat the call before they fully understood what was meant. Then they immediately gave three long and hearty cheers. The beach is covered with a soft blue mud. It being ebb tide I could see some distance found it would be impossible for me to take the horses along it; I therefore kept them where I had halted them and allowed half the party to come on to the beach and gratify themselves by a sight of the sea while the other half remained to watch the horses until their return. I dipped my feet and washed my face and hands in the sea as I promised the late Governor Sir Richard McDonnell I would do if I reached it. [399]   The mud has nearly covered all the shells; we got a few however. I could see no sea-weed. There is a point of land some distance off bearing 70°. After all the party had had some time on the beach at which they were much pleased and gratified they collected a few shells; I returned to the valley where I had my initials (J. M. D. S.) cut on a large tree as I did not intend to put up my flag until I arrived at the mouth of the Adelaide. Proceeded on a course of 302° along the valley; at one mile and a half coming upon a small creek with running water and the valley being covered with beautiful green grass I have camped to give the horses the benefit of it. Thus have I through the instrumentality of Divine Providence been led to accomplish the great object of the expedition and take the whole party safely as witnesses to the fact and through one of the finest countries man could wish to behold - good to the coast and with a stream of running water within half a mile of the sea. From Newcastle Water to the sea-beach the main body of the horses have been only one night without water and then got it within the next day. If this country is settled it will be one of the finest Colonies under the Crown suitable for the growth of any and everything - what a splendid country for producing cotton! [...]  Friday 25th July Charles Creek Van Diemen Gulf. - I have sent Thring to the south-west to see if he can get round the marsh. If it is firm ground I shall endeavour to make the mouth of the river by that way. After a long search he has returned and informs me that it is impracticable being too boggy for the horses. As the great object of the expedition is now attained and the mouth of the river already well known I do not think it advisable to waste the strength of my horses in forcing them through neither do I see what object I should gain by doing so; they have still a very long and fatiguing journey in recrossing the continent to Adelaide and my health is so bad that I am unable to bear a long day's ride. I shall therefore cross this creek and see if I can get along by the sea-beach or close to it. Started and had great difficulty in getting the horses over although we cut a large quantity of grass putting it on the banks and on logs of wood which were put into it. We had a number bogged and I was nearly losing one of my best horses and was obliged to have him pulled out with ropes; after the loss of some time we succeeded in getting them all over safely. [400] Proceeded on a west-north-west course over a firm ground of black alluvial soil. At two miles came upon an open part of the beach went on to it and again found the mud quite impassable for horses; in the last mile we have had some rather soft ground Stopped the party as this travelling is too much for the horses and taking Thring with me rode two miles to see the ground was any firmer in places; found it very soft when the salt water had covered it in others not so bad. Judging from the number of shells banked up in different places the sea must occasionally come over this. I saw at once that this would not do for the weak state in which my horses were and I therefore returned to where I had left the party resolving to recross the continent to the City of Adelaide. I now had an open place cleared and selecting one of the tallest trees stripped it of its lower branches and on its highest brand fixed my flag the Union Jack with my name sewn in the centre of it. When this was completed the party gave three cheers and Mr. Kekwick then addressed me congratulating me on' having completed this great and important undertaking to which I replied. Mr. Waterhouse also spoke a few words on the same subject and concluded with three cheers for the Queen and three for the Prince of Wales. At one foot south from the foot of the tree is buried; about eight inches below the ground an air-tight tin case in which is a paper with the following notice: 'South Australian Great Northern Exploring Expedition.'  The exploring party under the command of John McDouall Stuart arrived at this spot on the 25th day of July 1862 having crossed the entire Continent of Australia from the Southern to the Indian Ocean passing through the centre. They left the city of Adelaide on the 26th day of October 1861 and the most northern station of the Colony on 21st day of January 1862. To commemorate this happy event they have raised this flag bearing his name. All well. God save the Queen!  (Here follow the signatures of myself and party.)  As this bay has not been named I have taken this opportunity of naming it 'Chambers Bay' in honour of Miss Chambers who kindly presented me with the flag which I have planted this day and I hope this may be the first sign of the dawn of approaching civilization. [401] Exactly this day nine months the party left North Adelaide. [...]  West Maitland April 18th. 1862   My Dear Father   I am glad to Acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated Decembr. 18 / 61 which gives me & wife great consolation to hear from you and from the old country. Belive me dear Father I feel meself at home when I am reading your valuable letters & newspapers I read them over & over - but to my grief I expect I never will see Ireland anny more or the Land that gave me birth. It's all I can say I wish yea all & the Country you live in every good luck & prosperity.   My dear Father  I might be a wealthier man than what I am at presant If I did go to the [erased: Interiour] wild country to live and live there like wild cattle where I would not see a Priest for years nor the face of a white man for months. It's strange to hear & see how some people lives in this Country. I know some people living (what we call the bush) in the Interiour far in the country. They might be Catholics. If they hapen to have a family they Cant run to a Priest to get them christined. They Come down here some times with as many as half a Dozen at a time and get them Baptized and the whole of them well able to talk to the Priest. Catholics has the worst chance for anny such thing in the bush. As for other religions I could count as many as 6 or 7. All of them has plenty (what the call clergymen traversing the country well paid from goverment for converting them as they say so). [90] I heard a yarn from a true Auther that he had seen a young girl of pretty good age getting christened & married the same time by what we call Wesleyan Preacher. Certanly there is a great many young natives both sex in this country and I am sure they dont think there is a God. They are wild and careless about religion but very Hospitible. A man can travel the whole Country without a penny that is if he walks or has his own horse to ride from one station to another. You will get plenty of bred & meat you can stop as long as you like no charege that is there rules.   My dear Father  I did not choose to go far away. I am near the priest & church and religion I have plenty as yet thank God. I am working in the old place still. I have 4 in Family 3 girls & a boy the eldest is going to school. We are comfortable as yet thank God.   I am to inform you that Michl. Carrigg wife and family were all well when I last herd from them. So is Patt Neylon he is Married and doing well. I wrote to the McMahons I got no answer from them also to Ritchard I got no answer so I dont know what reason they have for it. I did not hear of late from Thomas or Hana Doolan. I will write to them again in short. I hope Margret Will arrive safe and be happy here after. This is a good country for man or woman when they get accustumed to the work of the place and keep from bad Company. I got a letter from Sister Bridget of late. She intends to go to Morten Bay to her Sister Susans.   I am very glad to hear that Miss Margret Shannon is married and called Mrs Stretch. She cant have more luck than I wish her. I hope Mr. James Shannon Mrs Shannon & family which I hope they have are well. I was verry sorry to hear of you to let your old chapel to be chifted to (Ballyfadeen). O poor Derry is gone and to let them crow over yea.   I must let you know that I have not sceen Michl. Healy's daughter Scince She got Married but I heard from her often. She is dooing very well also. I was told that she has another Sister out from home named Susan. I have not seen her.   Let me Know how is my Father in Law Martin Neylon wife & family. Let me Know in your next how is my uncles & aunts or did John get Married yet. I expect my uncle Edmonds son is a big Boy be this. I hope dear Father that you will have good help for the future. I hop that God will spare you to them for a long time and I earnestly Pray to God for the restoration of your Health. Remember me to all enquiring friends & relations. Let me know is Big Darby Leary & wife living as yet. My wife wants to be rembered to them also she wants to be rembrd. to her Father & Mother Brothers & Sister. She says that she has nothing to tell her Father &. but what I tell them. She gets no accont from her Sister Mary. I must conclude this scroll. [91] My wife & me Joins in scending our love to you Stepmother Brothers & Sisters. When I say that I say the whole of you I remain your lovin son   M Normile   I will scend some Newspapers By this Mail.   Chewton August 23rd 1862  Dear Sir  In reply to your very welcome letter of June the 16th. and Fathers of the 13th. I now write these few lines and I am very glad to hear that you are all in the injoyment of of good health when it left and that my old parents were still alive but I am very sure they must be very frail indeed at their stage of life. Even if the times had been good it is certianly a wonder to me how they have got through such trublesome times but I am very thankful to hear that the times is a little better.   I am happy to be able to inform you that we all that is here at present are in the injoyment of good health with the exception of one of Hamiltons little Children. Its name is Nathaniel. It is ratherly ill looking at present. You ask me is Hamilton home from New Zealand. I must tell you that he did come home I beleive in April last both him and James and began to puddle but they could not make much. So they have Sold off their horses and cart and allmost everything and is off again to New Zealand Hamilton John and James McMillan and John Regan all four in a party and two others aquantance from the County Derry. But the have both left their families here.   Things here are very dull indeed at present and not much work to be had. I have been only at the Stone Breacking this last year and you Know thats not a very high station in life but anything in honesty. But I am very sory to say that in one week from this date that this job will be done also and I do not realy Know what to turn my hand to next. But I will not despare as there will still be somthing and my old hope is the Lord will provide. It may be that if the boys (as I call them so) falls in with anything that will be likely to pay for a Summer's work they may send for me to go over to New Zealand also as I think James would have took me with them only it did not suite me to go with them as I had my garden to labour or finish out in the Spring. [226]  And also the wether has been very bad for some time as you will See by the papers that I send. And the storms has nearly carried away our Calico house so we are about to try to get some sort of a more lasting sort of a one and to pay it as we can as I have got some Credit here. We are thinking of having a frame and wetherboard one but I supose you hardly Know what that is. It is something like a boat built only upside down with some sort of a lasting roof as calico is as much as a rent and we are never safe in it so. I am thinking of building it myself now when we have finished this job.   And also I was left one of the executters of the Late John Leckeys will and I could not get away untill his little affairs was settled and to see if anything would be left for the Widow and Children. But alas for the poor Widow I am begining to think there will be nothing for her as there is a great many heavy debts coming in that we never expected besides some of his debts we have tryed at the police Court and we were beat and had to pay cost as we could not prove the work was done. [227] And if we have to pay all the debts that is claimed we will not have money enough to pay them with. But some of these I objact to and they will have to try us by law and if we loose that will still be more expences but we cant help it as we have done and will do all we can for the best. Things here is enormious in Charges. The attorneys charges for getting the will proved was £22-9-4. The Auctioneers Charges for Sale and advertising &c £17-17-0 so you see there is nearly £40 for these alone but I am determend to see it out. If you ever see Mrs. Leckey you might tell her so as I seen she had giving you a call before now.   You will wonder why you got no papers by last mail and so many by this one but I will explain the reason. I had them tied up and directed and the stamps on and went away to the bush that day with Hamilton John and James and John Regan to get a stock of firewood home for us and their wives before they would sell off the horses and go away and I forgot to give them orders to post them and they did not Know it Closed that day. So when I come home and found that the were not posted I was very much greived and as the were directed and stamped I send by this mail. You might see something new in them if you got none from any other.   Robert Byers has been over to see us and made my Mrs. and present of a one pound note for anything we might have had done for him and I must say this was the first money we ever received in the manner since we came to this country. He left here on the first of June and he was thinking of goeing off him and his mates to British Columbia but we have not heard of him since. We have heard that his mate is a month sail'd at this date but whether he is with him or not we Know not.   Alexander is at a new diggins in New South Wales called the Lachlan but I think I was telling you before. I will ask him to make inquiry for Mr. Hutton. He had not mad one penny the last time He wrote although his Share in Claim was worth £200 but they were begining to sink but he might not get 200 pence out of it. But it is nothing venture nothing have but I think I would sell at £200 but some people must venture. We hear Thomas is in a place call'd Wangaratta that is in Victoria but it is 200 miles from us. He was breaking in horses but he does not write to us. Nathaniel we hear is in Dunedin Otago yet but he does not write to us either.   You may tell my Father if he is still alive that I felt very glad indeed and very very thankful to see a letter as it was from his own hand and I think he said that Widow Matthews was dead about a week before he wrote. [228] We would wish to Know who it was. As we heard of Mr. Matthews of Ballybrain being dead some time ago we presume it is of Inishargie. Tell him also that if I hear nothing new by the next mail that I will write to himself by it and I realy cannot write what I would write. My mind is so confused concerning my old Father & Mother in their old age and I hope the next news I send will be better.   So I will cut this short with the Kindest Love to my old parents and Brothers and Sisters and with every Respect for your Father & Mother and Brother John and the same for your self we remain Dear Sir yours very humley   John & Agnes McCance  West Maitland Feby. 18th. 1863   Dear Father   I have taken a notion of writing a few lines to you Hoping you will excuse me for not writing to you for the last six months or more. I have nothing particular to tell you now - but I have been Dreaming of you of late very often and very nasty Dreams. I hope there is nothing wrong with ye with the blessing of God. My wife has been Dreaming of her people also so we were thinking there might be someting wrong with ye.   The reason I did not write or answer your late letter was my wife was very bad for a long time with a deadly Headache. She Tried all the Docters in this district but done her but little Good. She had to go to another Town about 40 miles from Maitland to a more noted Docter. He done her some good but she could not stop away from the children under his care for anny length of time. How ever she is a good deal better and after she was over the worst of it one of the children took a disease called the Gastic fever which Continued on her for 4 months but thank God she is getting all right although she was given up for death by this Most Eminent Docter in this part of the Coloney. He is newly come to this Town his name is Docter Doyle. He charges (£1) one pound a visit besides medcine. His Bill soon amounts to Something. Though he is an Irishman he has no compassion for rich or poor he must get his money.   My Dear Father I hope every thing is geting on all right with you. I am very thankful to Mr James Shannon for his Kindness to me for scending me the newspapers. They gave me great pleasure to read them and many more besides. I do scend you & Mr. Shannon a paper every month. If you receive them they will give you more news than I could concerning many things. The mail Steemer leaves here 22nd. of each month and the mail arrives here about the 10th or 12th of every month.   We had a very dry Season nothing but scorching hot weather for 6 or 7 months no grass no water except in the river and some places the river was not within 20 miles of them. Thousands of sheep & cattle died for the want of water or feed. They dont Care much for that here especily in the bush. The Town people feels it more for it made the Beef & Mutton Dear. [92]  They could not travel with cattle from the country without water so beef is 4d per lb. I will scend the paper it will show you the market price. Potatoes are 12 shilling for Cwt. in the Town. They cant be had up the country for love or money. They are sowing the second crop of potatoes now. We are after 3 days and 3 nights rain which fell in torents the same as a cascade.   I got a letter of late from Mich Carrigg & family they are doing very well. I am in the same Employment as yet. I have nothing particular to tell you at presant. Patt Neylan & family are well. My wife want to know how is her Father Mother Brother & Sister are geting on. Remember me to all my uncles aunts & relations likewise my old neighbours. Let me know as much as you can about home. I should like to hear does Austin Nester write home or not. Thomas Doolan did not write to me of late I think he left Sydney. Remember to Mr. J Shannon and Martin Neylon & wife not forgeting my uncle Ned.   I conclude these few lines by giving my best respects to my Stepmother Brothers & Sisters & to you my loving Father. I had always a notion that I would see you but alas I dont think I will be able. But I give you my Blessing   Michl. Normile   West Maitland 15th Septr. 1863   My dear Father   I received your letter By the last mail which gave me and wife great Consolation to hear from you & Family being well. Also I was very Happy to hear from my Sisters in America. I wrote differant letters To them & got no reply. I thought it might be the reason they did not wite [write] the state their Country is in at presant. I hop the wars of America will soon be at an end. It will be a good Country after. The English mail that arrived this week has brought news that their is great rumours of war between Rusia France & England - which I hope there will if it does any good for Farmers In Ireland. They cant be much worse (I hear) than what they are at presant.   Dear Father - I am verry sorry to hear that Mr J Shannon is not your Land Lord. How in the name of Providance was it Swingled away from him. I should like to hear the whole of it but deer Father I expect it would be too much trouble for you. If the Trial had been published in anny of the Dublin Papers Mr Shannon might get it for you and scend it to me. Let me know has he left old Derry House the Mansion of his Father & Mother and his own native house & home. If I should see Derry House and he not living there I would Surely shed tears for it (But I expect I never will) to my griefe. [93] Dont forget to let me know how Mr Shannon is situated for I feel very uneasy for it. He is a loss to you dear Father that I know thoug I live far away from you.   I have been a bad son to you dear Father but I could not help it. I had a few Pounds once and I was thinking of buying a piece of Ground to Build on it a House. But something come and took away which I dont like to tell - after that Providance laid sickness on both of us which cost me some scores of pounds. Thank God we are all right at presant.   Michl Foley comes to see us often. He lives about 6 miles from us. He is a steady young man and doing well. He told me that you loocked fresh and young yet which I was very glad to hear. I hope my Mother [added: in law] and Family are well. Ye must have good help at home. I expect my Brothers are well able to work. Neddy ought to be a strong fellow. He was a promising youth when I left home.   This Country is not turning out as good as people thought. There is a great flow of Emigrants to here daily from England Ireland Scotland Germany & China. This country is infested with that race of people chinamen that they are able to destroy any Employer. The work for little or nothing. And besides this country is in trouble very much in the Interiour whit what they call Bushrangers young vagabonds that does not care for God or man plundering and robing takeing peoples lives which you will see an account in the newspaper of some of their doings that I will scend you along with this letter. It is not safe to travel in it with money Horses or Goods of any Kind that they can lay their hands on. There is a good few of them taken by the police. There is one of them in Maitland Jaol condemed to Death and another man waiting for his trial to come off.   I got a letter From my Sister Susan of late they are all well. She informed me in the letter that Michl. McMahon arrived there of late in good Health. I wrote to them when I got the letter from home. I mentioned to them about Mary Carrigg I got no answer as yet. Dear Father I wish to let you know my Sister Bridget is well. She is married and living about 60 miles from Sydney. Let me know if you possibly can did Mich. Ford receive 3 £ that his son Patcy scend a long time ago. It was I that scend it for him. I mean I directed the letter from him that Conveyed it home.   I am still living with the same people. I have not much work to do but waiting in the shop as grocier & Draper per times. We are all right at presant thank God. Bridget and the children are enjoying good Health. You wanted to know their names - which I will let you know (Mary Susan John & Margret they are good children thank God). Also you wanted to know Patt Neylons wifes name. (Catherine Colman) was her maiden name a good strong Healthy woman. They are all well at presant.   Let me know his [?how is] Martin Neylon and wife. It would take me too long to mention their names. [94] I hope you will remember me to my uncles Aunts & relations give my love to them all also to all my old Neighbours not forgeting my Stepmother Brothers & Sisters and you my loving Father. That the Almighty may spare you long to your Family blive this to be the constant Prayer of your son   M Normile   Dont forget if you can to scend me newspapers as often as you can. I got the last ones you scend me. It gives me great pleasure in reading them. I can scend you newspapers every month if the be any use to you. I have nothing else particular to tell you. Good by for ever I suppose.   Chewton August 24th 1863 Mr. William Orr   Dear Sir  I take the liberty of adressing you with these few lines and you may think I am bold perhaps but as I am so fixed at present I can hardly help it. And the boldness I make is that if my Brother and Sister is Coming away if you will be Kind enough to send me about twelve yards of the best flannel you have as price will be no obstickle as also the same of the best white moleskin as we cannot get any of a good quality here.   And if you will be so Kind as to Suply them with any thing that they may be Short of as I had not much Cash to Send at this time to make them ready and by forewarding an account of the same I will Send you the money the first I receive from New Zealand or when they come home at the fartherst. And if you would be so Kind as do any writing which they may have to do for them as you will understand better what to do or where to send to than them I may have the chance to recompence you for truble expence &c. yet or I am sure Johnney will if he is Spared to return safe.   As I have been sending all the perticulars of how they are doing in New Zealand in my Fathers letter it is allmost likly you will see them so I need not write them here.   I have received several papers from you for which I am much obliged. I am also very much obliged to you for all the truble you have taken in former times with us and our friends and I think you will not shrink at this time as you seem very anxious to see as many off as possable. I will send you a paper by this mail. Also give my best respects to your Father & Mother and accept the Kindest regards of your friend   Mary McMillan [229]  Dear Sir I received your very welcome letter by this mail also but having a good deal to write this time I cannot reply to it this time. So exuse your friend and wellwisher   John McCance  for Mr. William Orr Grey Abbey  Thursday 1 January  Last night the bones of Burke & Wills were deposited in their metallic coffins. The skull of Wills & feet of both had disappeared. Burke's skull a very fine one. In taking a cast of it some of the teeth dropped out which I procured. The woollen shirt of Wills still hung in tatters round his ribs. Mrs Dogherty (Burke's nurse) who had "stretched" his father & his mother performed the last sad office for her darling wrapping the cere-cloth round his bones & placing a little pillow beneath his skull. The room (the Royal Society's Hall) hung with black & dimly lit with a catafalque & baldacchino in the centre had a sombre & solemn effect. Wrote a species of requiem for performance at the Theatre Royal on the evening of the funeral. To the Exhibition of Fine Arts. The best local pictures are the "Weatherboard Falls" by E. von Guerard a Canadian lake scene by M. Sonntag and "Tea Trees & Creepers" by N. Chevalier whose "Waterfall on the Parker River" has many fine points about it. But alas for art in this colony! Guerard - the ablest most conscientious & most industrious of the painters told me that his whole earnings last year were only £120 - less than the wages of any artisan. To the Theatre Royal in the evening - Akhurst's pantomime. Introduction very tolerable. Scenery poor. Chas Young as an oriental Dundreary excellent. Sang a clever burlesque of "Piff Paff" (Riff-Raff); the ballet girls have a clever imitation of the Maoris. Toute pensee traduite en personnages et en action says Auguste Vacquerie est drame dans le sens large du mot. [378]  Friday 2 January  To the Princess's last night - "Wives as they Were" and the "Conjugal Lesson". Jefferson's drunken man is one of the best I have ever seen on any stage. The dull lack-lustre eye the immobility of the mouth the thickness of utterance the limpness of limbs the maudlin tones of the voice the confusion of time place & person in the memory the dim sense of humour lighting up the foggy condition of his mind generally the vague motion of the hands & the imbecile good humour of the man are points of detail each of which challenges a separate tribute of admiration. One special merit of Jefferson's acting is that he is absorbed in & by the character he sustains for the time being. To quote a favourite expression of his own he never "travels out of the picture". He appears to be unconscious of the presence of an audience & therefore never plays at them When he is not taking an active part in the business of a scene he fixes his eyes on those who are speaking and does not endeavour to divert attention from them or to defraud them of their legitimate applause by the introduction of impertinent bye-play. In addition to which he is scrupulous in "giving the stage" to the principals in the dialogue.  Wednesday 21 January  Public funeral of Burke & Wills. All business suspended. The procession about a mile in length started from the Hall of the Royal Society passing through Spring Street Bourke St & Elizabeth Street to the new Cemetery. The footpaths lined with spectators who also clustered on the housetops on the awnings at the windows on cars coaches carriages & wagons & wherever a view of the cortege could be obtained. From all the suburbs of Melbourne & from the country districts people had been pouring in all the morning & I should compute the number of persons who witnessed the imposing spectacle at not less than one hundred thousand. I rode in the same mourning coach with Bourke's [sic] foster mother Mrs Dogherty & the survivor of the Expedition John King. In the evening at a crowded meeting in St George's Hall the Governor presented the addresses I had written to Ambrose Kyte Commander Norman & Alfred Howitt. Dr Macadam made a successful speech vindicatory of the Committee. He was denied a hearing at first; but eventually carried the audience completely with him & was congratulated by the Governor the Chief Justice & the Bishop in having rehabilitated the reputation of the body to which he had acted as Hon. Secretary. At the Theatre Royal a Musical Ode on the death of Burke & Wills written by myself & admirably set to music by Mr Reiff was sung by the company in mourning Madame Lucy Escott Miss Hodson Mr Squires & Mr Wharton taking the solos. [379] It was followed up by a tawdry tableau vivant which had been better omitted. At the Haymarket Richard Younge declaimed a Monody written by Dr Bowman illustrated by tableaux vivants.  Thursday 29 January  A complete fiasco at the Theatre Royal. A young lady named Young whose appearance had been heralded by mysteriously worded puffs made her debut as Amina in "Sonnambula". Her voice was painfully thin her execution tolerable her action awkward her stature short & the experiment an utter failure. The house was crowded in every part & at the end of the First Act there was such a manifestation of displeasure as a Melbourne audience rarely indulges in. At length the Manager came forward & made an apologetic conciliatory speech in which he stated that the young lady was an Australian (Farquharson says she was born in London) that he was induced to give her an appearance by the recommendation of some gentlemen who heard her at rehearsal and concluded by soliciting a hearing for her in the next Act. This was accorded but from what I heard in the course of ten minutes it was apparent that her presentation to the public was a ludicrous mistake.  Thursday 5 February  Placed the correspondence in Aspinall's hands. To Lyndhurst in the evening to dine with Barden. The other guests consisted of Messrs Sasse Duigan Teale & Labertouche. After dinner our conversation happened to turn upon the sensual extravagancies of Martley (Solicitor General in a former Administration who is married to a charming woman - a niece of Chas. Lever's). On one occasion Martley is said to have been found dancing naked in a brothel surrounded by prostitutes. On another he gave the wretched inmate of one of those houses situated in a right of way off Bourke Street a cheque which was dishonoured. The women of the house took away his clothes & he was a prisoner for two or three days until a brother barrister sent him a suit & released him. Someone observing that such a man ought to be castrated Duigan said that he knew a lady (née Kate Featherstone) who having detected her husband a Major in the army in an act of infidelity actually excised his penis with a razor from which he nearly lost his life. Sasse said that while he was residing at Montpellier a similar circumstance came to his knowledge. In this case a young girl had been seduced by & lived with a young man to whom she became passionately attached. [380] But on the eve of his marriage with another woman his former paramour induced him to sleep with her & she performed the same horrible operation with the same weapon. After having thus mutilated him she announced her willingness to marry him. He took her at word & she became a most devoted wife.  Sunday 15 February  Dined at O'Shanassy's with H.W. [W.H.] Archer Hugh Glass P. Higgins Quinlan Julian Woods Father Finn etc. Discussed the project of an Australian Quarterly Review drawing its contributors from the whole of the Colonies in this group circulating among all & endeavouring to build up a sound & healthy public opinion to discuss problems of political & social science with breadth and vigour and to serve as a bond of union among the first class literary & scientific men in Australia. Woods Archer & I offered to give our services for a year. Conversation turning on the approaching visit of Prince Alfred the foundation of an Australian kingdom with Prince Alfred as its sovereign was debated. O'S strongly in favour of monarchical institutions; observing that our future choice lay between them & petty ephemeral republics. We were rich enough & populous enough to constitute an independent kingdom and the creation of a Court & aristocracy surrounded with the elegancies of civilised life would have the effect of rendering the colonies more attractive both to those who are already here & to those we are desirous of alluring hither. The only difficulty anticipated was the agreement of the other colonies seeing that Melbourne from its position & other circumstances would naturally claim to be the capital of the kingdom and the seat of the Court & Legislature.  Tuesday 17 February  Aspinall tells me that the brothels of this city are under a police surveillance not altogether dissimilar to that which is practised in Paris. They are classified and those in which the visitors are liable to be robbed are carefully discriminated from those which are conducted on "respectable" principles. In some cases the prostitutes are serviceable as thief-takers giving information to the police when notorious bushrangers & others pay them a visit. Captain Standish - my informant adds - is furnished with a report every morning of the number & the names of those who have spent the night in the better class of brothels. The record must be a curious one and calculated to lift the veil from the secret immoralities of many of the outwardly moral & respectable. [381] [...]  Tuesday 21 April  Parliament re-assembled. Duffy mentioned a smart repartee of Mr Moore one of the Irish members in the Imperial Parliament who referring to the dissensions among his own countrymen quoted the current saying that if one Irishman was being roasted alive you would always find another to turn the spit. An Opposition Irish member interrupted him by some inaudible ejaculation; whereupon he exclaimed "What was that? I didn't catch the remark of the honorable turnspit." The House roared. Another anecdote of Archbishop Whately who at the time the Whigs were filling all the offices in Ireland with Catholics was consulted by the Lord Lieutenant as to the most fitting man to appoint to a vacant bishopric. "Couldn't you find a respectable Caro-tholic?" was the sarcastic query of the Protestant prelate.  Introduced to Deniehy of Sydney one of the ugliest men I ever saw short of stature slovenly in attire with unkempt hair a fluffy moustache small eyes obliquely set very near his nose & generally half close & eyebrows rising diagonally from the root of his nose. Altogether his countenance resembled that of a withered monkey. Completed "Duke's Motto" and handed Fifth Act over to Kyte.  Tuesday 19 May  Festivities in honour of the marriage of the Prince of Wales to the Princess Alexandra of Denmark. A steady rain until 2 p.m. when it cleared up until midnight. The city and suburbs gay with garlands triumphal arches flags banners and greenery. At night a brilliant illumination the streets thronged with spectators & the general effect impressive if not imposing. Transparencies innumerable were exhibited & tons of Chinese crackers must have been exploded. In the Chinese quarter in Little Bourke Street so incessant was the discharge that it resembled a sustained fire of musketry & was accompanied by the beating of gongs tom-toms & all sorts of discordant instruments. From the roof of the Library the coup d'oeil was magnificent. All Melbourne & its belt of suburbs was visible. Bonfires were kindled on Mount Macedon the You Yangs Plenty Ranges and at other points on the horizon & showers of rockets were sent up from the Botanical Reserve. Coloured fires were burnt on the roof of the Melbourne Club the Bank of Australasia & other elevated sites two huge As flamed in front of the University a gigantic cross of light sparkled in front of St Patrick's & St Francis's Cathedrals; & a huge cresset blazed at the unfinished tower of the former. [382] Looking down Bourke St the sight was very animated. The yellow light gleamed upon a dense mass of upturned faces reaching from Spring Street to Queen Street and through the midst of the crowd slowly wound a serpentine line of carriages each with its pair of lamps & looking in the mass like a monstrous snake with luminous scales. In most of the suburbs oxen were roasted whole & barrels of beer set flowing; while the poor and the inmates of the charitable institutions were universally regaled.  Thursday 28 May  Governor's Ball at the Exhibition Building  Frazer MLA got very drunk & on the way home quarreled [sic] with a cabman who called in the police. He abused these as being either orangemen or papists O'Shanassy's spies or Standish's pets. Eventually he was taken to the watch house but was liberated on his own recognisances. About daybreak accompanied by Dr Macadam he knocked up the Mayor (E. Cohen) and entreated him to take the charge off the charge sheet. Upon the Mayor refusing to adopt such an illegal course Frazer shed maudlin tears of penitence wiped his greasy face with a skull cap (which he pulled out of his pocket instead of a hand kerchief) and presented a most ludicrously woebegone appearance; being half sober and wholly dirty and demoralised in appearance. What makes his escapade the more amusing is that he is Chairman of a Legislative Committee now sitting to inquire into & report upon the organisation discipline & management of the Police Force.  Friday 14 August  Kyle related to me an episode of colonial life. Some weeks ago a young lady called at his office to enquire if he had any rooms to let in Bourke Street suitable for opening a school. Interested by the applicant he questioned her pretty closely & found that she possessed good testimonials; that she had been a governess in Sydney where she was engaged to be married to a respectable young man who died of disease of the heart a few days before the time appointed for their wedding. Her health & spirits having been shattered by this shock she was recommended to come round to Melbourne where she had formerly lived & where she hoped to obtain an engagement as a governess. Disappointed in this expectation she was induced to apply to Mr Kyle who having satisfied himself of the truth of her story told her to call at his office for a weekly stipend until she could obtain employment. [383] A month afterwards when confidence had been established between them she told her benefactor that when she first called upon him she was penniless had pawned all her spare articles of clothing had been turned out of doors by her landlady & had been without food for two days. She had therefore determined on committing suicide but some vague impulse had induced her to apply to him. "What a glorious thing money is!" said Kyte repeating the incident to me. "I never felt so proud & thankful as when I found out that I had stept in between that poor creature and destruction."  Wednesday 21 October  To Guerard's in the evening. Good story of a Mr Horden who was the first to take cattle overland to Adelaide. Being looked upon as a great gun he was invited to Government House but was so much immersed in the business objects of his journey that when Governor Gawler at dinner happened to inquire "What will you take Mr Horden?' he replied "Fourteen-ten a head all round & the calves thrown in."  Wednesday 11 November  The Governor declines to give his patronage to a performance at the Theatre Royal for the benefit of the Benevolent Asylum because Barry Sullivan is opposing Chas Kean who as the protégée of the Duke of Newcastle Secretary of State for the Colonies is necessarily an object of interest to a colonial governor.  After the first night of the Keans' appearance at the Haymarket when the audience was neither excessive in number nor immoderate in its enthusiasm Mrs Kean observed to Coppin: - "If I were Ellen Tree I would play once more to complete the education of the people & return to England forthwith."  Thursday 12 November  Gave some readings from Copperfield to about 4.00 prisoners at Pentridge. I felt that I never read so well or succeeded more completely in carrying the audience with me. It was interesting to watch the effect of the pathetic passage descriptive of Mrs Copperfield's funeral on that congregation of felons. The most profound silence reigned - broken only by the "sniffing" of the attentive listeners. Numbers dropped their heads & were touched with a sympathetic grief & at the end there was a general blowing of noses & clearing of throats. The humorous passages they appeared to enjoy hugely. [384]  Wednesday 16 December  After three days heavy & incessant rain we experienced a devastating flood. The Yarra rose 37 ft 6 in above its ordinary level & all was ruin & consternation on its banks. Houses were swept away trees uprooted & crops washed out of the earth. The rise was so sudden & so incredible that numbers of persons living on the banks of the river were unable to save their furniture. In my garden the water nearly reached the edge of the flower beds about two hundred feet distant from the ordinary banks. A wide waste of water swept from the Custom House to the sea & boats traversed the interval. Emerald Hill rose like an island from the flood. Traffic on the Hobson's Bay Railway was suspended & communication with St Kilda cut off except by a circuitous route. Numbers of small farmers in the rich valley of Heidelberg were ruined by the calamity; & market gardeners brick makers & felmongers on the banks of the Yarra suffered severely by the inundation.    AN IMPRESSIONIST EXHIBITION 1889  Such an exhibition of impressionist memoranda as will be open today at Buxton's Art Gallery by Messrs Roberts Conder Streeton and others fails to justify itself. It has no adequate raison d'être. It is as if a dramatist should give a performance on the stage of such scraps of dialogue hints of character ideas for incidents and suggestions of situations as had occurred to him while pondering over the construction of a play or as if a musician should invite people to listen to crude and disconnected scraps of composition containing the vaguely indicated themes for a cantata a symphony or an opera; or as if a sculptor should ask us to inspect certain masses of marble from which he had just blocked out the amorphous outlines of various pieces of statuary. None of these is to be regarded as a work of art. Neither is a painter's "impression". It is simply a record in colour of some fugitive effect which he sees or professes to see in nature. But like primeval chaos "it is without form and void". To the executant it seems spontaneous and forcible. To the spectator it appears grotesque and meaningless. The earliest impressionist of whom we have any knowledge was Piero di Cosimo and he had "a bee in his bonnet". Vasari tells us that "he would sometimes stand beside a wall against which various impurities were cast and from these he would image forth the most singular scenes combats of horses strangely ordered cities and the most extraordinary landscapes that ever were seen". The modern impressionist asks you to see pictures in splashes of colour in slap-dash brush work and in sleight-of-hand methods of execution leading to the proposition of pictorial conundrums which would baffle solution if there were no label or catalogue. [385] In an exhibition of paintings you naturally look for pictures; instead of which the impressionist presents you with a varied assortment of palettes. Of the 180 exhibits catalogued on the present occasion something like four-fifths are a pain to the eye. Some of them look like faded pictures seen through several mediums of thick gauze; others suggest that a paint-pot has been accidentally upset over a panel nine inches by five; others resemble the first essays of a small boy who has just been apprenticed to a house-painter; whilst not a few are as distressing as the incoherent images which float through the mind of a dyspeptic dreamer. Here is an impression for example entitled "Harrowing" which is quite true to its title. It represents a long-legged pig in company with two terribly deformed horses - or are they "creatures of the slime?' - struggling to get away from one of those scarecrows which English farmers set up in their cornfields when the grain is ripening and dislocating their legs - number uncertain - in the process. And here is a mystery called '"The Milky Way" consisting of two or three spots of positive colours on what appears to be a sheet of smoked brown paper. Here again is something bearing the title of "Orange Blue and White representing a hydrocephalus doll with glass eyes wooden hands and a broken nose almost buried in a mass of white-lead. And there are landscapes and samples of architecture belonging to some embryotic world in which as Pandulph says All form is formless order orderless and nature herself is either unshapen or misshapen. Some of the impressions in which sufficient work has been put to entitle them to be spoken of as sketches show that the artists are capable of much better things Such is the clever "Looking over to Williamstown" of Mr R. E. Falls; the "Fisherman's Bend" "Evening in Richmond Paddock" and "Austral Summer" of Mr A. Streeton; the "Treasury" "Early and Damp" "Good-bye" and "Going down to Dinner" of Mr Tom Roberts; the "Dear Lady Disdain" and "Myosotis" of Mr Charles Conder and the plastic sketches of Mr C.D. Richardson. These and a few others afford something agreeable for the eye to rest upon; but the exhibition viewed as a whole would leave a very painful feeling behind it and cause one to despond with respect to the future of art in this colony did we not believe with Mr W P Frith R A that Impression is a craze of such ephemeral character as to be unworthy of serious attention."  128 ELIZABETH ST. SYDNEY.   Oct. 7th 1864.   MY DARLING WIFE- The number above is that of the new office I have taken. People are gradually coming round me; and without wishing to show myself over sanguine I think I shall do very well eventually. For the present I am mainly engaged in literary matters but these except as a help and not as a dependence I shall quit at as early a date as possible. This however is certain that while nothing at all was to be done at Melbourne something perhaps in a little while a good deal can be done here. Meantime the only thing is to go on steadily and patiently "to labour and to wait." It is bad at this time of day this beginning the World over again; but it must be done now or never. Occasionally at night I feel more depressed and wretched than I think any human being in Australia at all events ever before felt. I keep at home not going out or visiting anywhere entering nohotels and if from intense depression I take a little brandy it is only in my own room at night. [33]  "Things are really looking more hopeful to-day and please Heaven we shall yet see better times.   "Here is something that will please you. Amongst the few men acquaintances I have made is a native born barrister a Mr. Barton the Editor of Punch. He told me that when studying at the Temple in London 'How I became Attorney-General of New Barataria' reached there from New South Wales; and though they did not understand the 'hits' or know the individuals sketched he assured me the English law students and barristers resident in the Temple were charmed with it. But enough of this; I have no heart or mind to feel or write about anything but yourself and the children. I hope speedily to be in possession of sufficient funds to send for you and render your passage a comfortable one. Now my dearest if you care for me and would preserve something to me worth living and striving for take care of your health and keep your mind as easy as you can. Think as little of the past as possible for it will not be my fault if all is not yet well with us. Kiss my darlings for me and believe me   Ever your lover and husband   D. H. DENIEHY."   MRS. DENIEHY."   Lake Menenia June 24th 1864   My dearest Father & Mother   I am very ungrateful not to write oftener than I do but the fact of it is this is an outside part of the world in which I am located. Far removed from any town or village In the midst of a wild and dreary country it is not always I have an opportunity of sending letters. I am in good health thank God and doing well. It gave me great pleasure to read your last letter. You cannot conceive what delight it gives me to read a home letter to a person far removed from it. It is like a link between bygone times and the present Something to remind a person that although oceans separate him from all he cares for or loves on earth there are still a father and mother brothers and sisters to think of him. [243]  I was very happy to hear that John was bound to Dr Considine I know his place in Galway. John has a good prospect open before him if he minds himself. This is a bad country for medical men. There are such numbers of them in it for every ship brings out a surgeon and they generally settle in the country.   I am getting no richer than I was when I landed. People in Ireland form strange notions of this country they imagine it to be a lump of molten gold it is no such thing. I'll tell you what it is it is a good country a person with sense and temperance can generally speaking command a living and in other respects make money as they do at home but for building up colossal fortunes and creating Nabobs its power has declined.   There was a time or in other words two periods in the past existence of Victoria when poor men did get chances of making large fortunes. The first chance was destined to be the more permanent one. That was the original partitioning out of the lands. Men with money enough to buy a few sheep could get a tract of country 70 or thirty miles square; as the population increased and more especially when the gold fields attracted adventurers from all parts of the world the land increased in value enormously - and the poor emigrant who worked to his Knees in his £50 worth of a property - twenty years ago - is now rolling in his carriage - forgets his former state and is only conscious of the fact that the banks will honour a bill of his to the tune of 20 or 30 thousand pounds. A great number of those gentleman and nearly the entire of the Sydney settlers have been unwilling emigrants to this country that is they have been transported out to Van Diemans Land and the other penal settlements. When their time was expired they turned about to seek a fortune and found it.   The goldfields were the next Smile that Fortune cast in Victoria and I am sure you Know all about that. The returns of Gold are decreasing year after year and it scarcely pays private individuals to look for it now all the gold digging of any importance in the colony is vested in the hands of companies who work the ground with machinery. It is rather hazardous to embark money in this pursuit as it very often happens that people lose thousands in fruitless searches. Quartz reefing is the chief hunt. There is one large hill in Pleasant Creek where Dr Molony lives and there has been I suppose £700000 taken out of it. He has shares in different claims there but they are not paying verry well at present. I was down in a few of them the main shaft going down is about 400 feet in depth down through a solid rock. The reefers below blast the stone through which the lead of gold runs it is then burned like limestone and crushed in a large machine the gold is then extracted from the pulverised stone. There did some diggings break out lately in Queensland I wish there did a good goldfield break out. [244] It is the only means of making a rise at present. I was golddigging only for two months but there is no use in it now. It is not plenty enough to pay.   I am still in the same place where I was when I wrote last. My employer wants me to stop and would give me any wages but it is horrible to be out of the world altogether there are only a few persons within miles of us and it is too lonely - I could not bear it long.   Dean Hayes from Geelong was up this way the other day. I am acquainted well with him and he advised me not to stop here. He told me that as soon as he would go to town he would interest himself with the members of the Education Board for me; and by passing the requisite examination I would be entitled to a good School. My salary from Government would be over £100 a year and the school would be worth a few pounds a week beside that. Devitte my old college chum was ordained in Queensland he is a professor in the Brisbane Seminary and he advises me to go over to Queensland and that I could not fail in getting a good school so between these two roads I don't well Know which one to take but I think I have made up my mind on passing the Education Board in Melbourne. It is the better.   If I once got settled in a good School I would be able to be of service to some of my brothers and God Knows there is nothing on Earth would give me greater pleasure. I would send a form for Bid Leyden by this mail but I could not encroach on the little money I have until I have passed the examinations as a persons pocket is his only friend in this country. I pity my uncle James very much and his poor family and I Know he will take it ill of me not to send a few forms to him. I will do it as soon as I can but it is not always or at every time a person can do it.   My dear Father  I was sorry and it gave me great uneasiness to hear that you were bad with the Rheumatism but I hope in God it will not signify. I am writing to John by this Mail. Do not expect a letter from me for about two months as I will not write until I am settled down. The weather here is very bad now as it is the middle of the Australian winter. I would send some papers home if I had an opportunity of getting them. I heard that Michl O'Loughlin was in Melbourne in some Kind of a Situation there it is very bad of him not to write.   My dear Mother  I received the picture which you sent me and I will Keep it in fond remembrance of you. I am Surprised that Michael does not be enquiring after me he would not have much fish to catch in this part of the world. I will send home my portrait most probably when I Go to town. Melbourne is 200 miles from here. This place is very wild and lonely - But we do have great hunting excursions - we were away for a week the other day three of us up the mountains after Kangaroos. [245] Whenever we want to Kill a cow or rather bullock I or some one else rides out on horseback with a rifle and give chase to the whole herd and when we come within range of a good one give him a ball through the head.   How is Mary and Young Bid. And Ned and all my brothers. How I would like to have them round me again fighting with them; I can see now they were the real pleasant times. Remember me to my uncle James my Aunt Russell and my poor old grandmother. With love to my father and you and my brothers and Sisters. I am your loving Son until death   Patrick Comber.   PS. Dont answer this letter don't direct your next to Dr Molony because he might not Know my whereabouts. I will write again if not the mail after next I will by the following one. PC   DEAREST ETTA  We received your double letters by the last mail. You will imagine that the contents were very welcome & equally dispiriting. I really believe we owe this legacy of Mrs Taunton to Aunt Henrietta for the old lady could never have even known our names except from her. I think like you that the pleasure of this piece of good fortune is much marred by Amy & Biddulph being left out. I think perhaps she has selected those of the family who wanted it most. I hope now Tregenna will pay his debt to Mr Sloman & very likely he will go home. I think it is far the best thing he can do. I have had so much writing to do & have been so busy with starting Biddulph for the Port that I have hardly yet taken in how much better off I am than I was before. Nearly one third richer. I can hardly fancy it & Uncle William seems to think that we & yourself (the females mentioned in the extract from the will Mr Boyce sent us out) will be able to get our shares sold out & handed over free & unfettered a great thing for those married or going to be. I feel very much obliged both to Aunt & to the unknown friend who has left us the money it has made me well off at once & Annie probably will be able to be married.  And now I must thank you my dearest Etta for your share in the watch parcel altho' I have not yet seen it as it is not yet come from Sydney. I shall be delighted to have Enoch Arden for my own possession. I have seen it as I told you in my last letter & liked it greatly but you do not half enjoy a poem in reading it once through. [83] Tennyson's especially the book was only lent us for a short time by our neighbour Mr Paterson. Biddulph has no telescope & it is just what he will like tell Mr Boyce. I can hardly fancy dear little Constance big enough to work a kettle holder. I shall like it so much as her work. It is vexing we were not at Sydney when the parcel arrived. I have written to Emily to send it on here at once to Port Denison that is to be got here by the first opportunity. I want exceedingly to see the [illegible] sketches. I wish they were come up. Biddulph liked the idea of seeing Parr Hennings genealogies though I dont think he is exactly prepared to believe them. I thank you for sending me the stamps. I am afraid you paid for them unless they came out of the [illegible] interest.  I am very sorry to hear of Aunt Vizard's serious illness. I wished I could have been with her to nurse her for my own sake I mean for I have no doubt she was taken every care of. She told me some time ago she had heart complaint. It is very sad to think I may never see her again. She was always so very kind to me & I have spent such pleasant days at that beautiful Dunsley. I do not suppose they will ever come back again.  You will see that I have been troubling Mr Boyce with a commission again & Annie ditto you perhaps you will some day both take a trip to London to execute them for us. If you do accompany Mr Boyce as I hope you will do not "hold his hand". We want almost the best plain watch that he can get & are prepared to pay accordingly. I forgot to mention about sending it out when I was writing to him. I suppose it would be best sent by a parcel & insured. Not to the Tuckers they really must not be bothered any longer but directed to Biddulph care of Messrs Danpar Gilchrist & Co. Sydney. As you know the watch is a present to B from A & I.  Biddulph left us yesterday for Port Denison whither he has gone to load his drays and start them for the Flinders river Station they are to take supplies for a year for the Colony out there. I do not think we shall ever go out there to live. I hope Biddulph will sell it & keep Exmoor. He talks of doing so & I should be so sorry to leave this place. He set off quite in style yesterday driving the buggy & pair & with his big hairy dog "Tiger" running after him & Jimmy one of the black-boys riding on horseback behind the said Jimmy being gorgeous in new white trousers slightly too large for him a scarlet crimean shirt & scarlet cap. Biddulph bought scarlets for both the black-boys when he was last in Sydney they are so fond of bright colours & look best in them. Nearly all the squatters take a black-boy with them when they are going a journey as a sort of groom they are very useful to get up the horses of a morning &c. Biddulph has a great many things to bring up from the Port & this is the reason he drove down instead of riding among other things we have bothered him with commissions to get us boots & winter petticoats as we are sure to be here through the winter - I think B will be away about ten days I hope he will not be more.  Old Mrs Lack is staying with us now. She is the mother of the Mr Lack who owns Blenheim the next station to this she was here for two or three days last year now she has been here about a fortnight & will stay a week longer. She is rather a nice old lady very gentle & lady-like though slightly meandering but when you have lived a long time in the bush you get lazy & do not like the trouble of entertaining anybody. [84] Gentlemen visitors are different as they entertain themselves or you. Mrs Lack rode on horse-back the first 5 miles of the way & we drove over with Buddulph in the buggy & met her about 8 miles from here & I rode the horse home as we thought she would be tired. She goes home next Friday I believe. Mr Lack is coming over on Thursday evening to slay beef for us & takes his mother back next day.  I told you when I last wrote that after all Biddulph had not to go to Rockhampton in March as the cause was put off till September. He is sure to go then & Annie & I shall probably go so far with him & then go on to Sydney he certainly will not be able to accompany us at that time of year as it will be just before lambing & shearing but I suppose we shall go as we shall then have been up here three years & it will be getting time to see Amy again besides wh there will be many purchases to make by that time. I do not know whether Annie means to be married then or not. Mr Hedgeland is not come back from the Flinders yet. There is nobody on this station except ourselves till Mrs Lack goes & B comes back.  We are having a new fire-place built against the cold weather comes tho' at present there seems no chance of any cold the hot weather has lasted longer than usual this year & it is still hotter than any English summer in the middle of the day but the mornings & evenings are cool and pleasant. The old fire-place which was a great farm-house "ingle" the whole width of the room was taken into the room when it was papered the new one is smaller & is built outside again & is to be lined with stone & have iron dogs for burning the wood. The side-board will have to be moved to make room for it.  I have been telling Aunt that the first grave has been made at Exmoor an event in the history of the station a family travelling with two drays & horse teams passed the house & camped over the creek one evening a few weeks ago & a man came up after dark to ask for some medecine &c for his little girl who had been ill a fortnight of diptheria I should think from his description. We gave him some milk & promised to come & see the child next day but at daylight next morning he came over & told Biddulph the child had died in the night & asked for some old cases to make a coffin. B offered to have one made & send it over but he preferred doing it himself. We asked if his wife would like us to come & see her but he said she would rather not which I did not wonder at. B also offered to come over & read the service when they buried the child but he said he did not care about it so we could do nothing for them. He had 3 children this was the eldest a little girl of 5. There were several men with the drays & they buried her in the morning & then harnessed their horses & went on their way. I went across the creek in the evening to where they had camped it was very sorrowful to stand by the little lonely nameless grave among the gum-trees and think what it must have been to the poor mother to drive away that morning & leave her little child among strangers. We did not even know their names. The grave is in a beautiful spot on a high bank shaded by trees & the creek flowing beneath. [85] It is fenced in most securely with whole trunks of trees so that it can never be disturbed. That is the first grave. I thought who can tell whose the next will be?  The mailman is just come in so I must not write any more now. My kindest love to yourself and the children. I wonder do they rejoice as we used to do at the coming on of spring & the buttercups & daisies coming out & the hawthorn in blossom on the downs. I think it wd be pleasant to be a child again.  GOODBYE ONCE MORE MY DEAREST ETTA. / BELIEVE ME YOUR EVER AFFECte SISTER /   RACHEL HENNING  SATURDAY 10th March Milne Springs: - At half past 11 last night it began to rain and continued doing so nearly all day. Wind south-east.  Sunday 11th March Milne Springs: - About 10 o'clock last night we were flooded with water although upon rising ground and were obliged to move our camp to the top of a small hill. It rained all night and morning but there are signs of a break in the clouds. During the day it has rained at intervals. The creek is coming down very rapidly covering all the valley with a sheet of water.  Monday 12th March Milne Springs : - A few heavy showers during the night but now there seems a chance of a fine day which will enable us to get our provisions dried again. The country is so boggy that I cannot proceed to- day but if it continues fair I shall attempt it to-morrow morning. This rain is a great boon to me as it will give me both feed and water for my horses and if it has gone to the north-west it will save me a great deal of time looking for water. [...]  Friday 16th March The Peake. - Saddled and started to cross the Peake about three miles to the south-west but had a fearful job in doing so the banks being so boggy and the current so strong. The horses could hardly keep on their feet and most of them were up to their saddle-flaps and some under water altogether. One poor old fellow we were obliged to leave in it as he was unable to get out and we were unable to help him although we tried for hours. [...]  Saturday 17th March Kekwick Springs. [...] Started on a north-west course for the Neale. At fifteen miles struck it and changed to the west to a creek coming south from the stony rises. The banks of the Neale are very boggy. The first four miles to-day were along the top of a sandy rise with swampy flats on each side with a number of reeds growing in them also rushes and water-grass. [337] At four miles was a strong rise but before we arrived at it we had to cross one of the swamps in which we encountered great difficulty. After many turnings and twistings and being bogged up to the shoulders we managed to get through all safe. It was fearfully hard work. For three miles on the top of a stony rise the country is poor (stones on the top of gypsum deposit) but after that it gradually improves and towards the creek it becomes a good salt-bush country [...]  Monday 19th March Neale River. - Rained during the night and looks very stormy this morning. Followed the Neale round to where it goes through the gap in Hanson range; in places it was rather boggy but good travelling in this wet weather - firmer than I expected. We had much difficulty in crossing some of the side creeks.  Thursday 22nd March Side Creek of the Neale River. - Wind south-west; clear sky. I intended to have gone northwest from this point but in attempting to cross the creek we found it impassable. My horse got bogged at the first start and we had some difficulty in getting him out. We were obliged to follow the creek westward for seven miles where it passes between two high hills connected with the range. We managed at last with great labour and difficulty; to get across without accident. At this place four creeks join 'the main one and spread over a mile in breadth with upwards of twenty boggy water-courses; water running. It has taken us five hours from the time we started to cross it. The principal creek comes from the south-west. I ascended the two hills to get a view of the surrounding country and I could see the creek coming from a long way off in that direction. At this point the range seems broken or detached into numerous small ranges and isolated hills. I now changed my course to north-west over table land of a light-brown colour with stones on the surface; the vegetation was springing all over it and looking beautifully green. At six miles on this course camped on a myall creek. The work for the horses has been so very severe to-day that I have been induced to camp sooner than I intended. Wind south.   Friday 23rd March Myall Creek. - Wind south. Started on the same course north-west. [...] [338]  Saturday 24th March Large Gum-Tree Creek. - Found it impossible to cross the Neale here; the banks were too boggy and steep. We therefore followed it round on a west course for three miles and found that it came a little more from the north. Changed to 2900 after trying in vain to cross the creek at this point. At about four or five miles south-south-west from this point there are two high peaks of a low range. The higher one I have named 'Mount Ben' and the range 'Head's Range'; its general bearing is northwest to opposite this point; it turns then more to the west. I can see another spur further to the west trending northwest. At four miles and a half after leaving we found a ford and got the horses across all safe. I then changed to the north-west again through a scrubby country - mulga acacia hakea salt bush and numerous others with a plentiful supply of grass. The soil is of a red sandy nature very loose and does not retain water on the surface. We had great difficulty in getting through many places being so very thick with dead mulga. We have seen no water since we left the creek. Distance eighteen miles. I was obliged to camp without water for ourselves. As we crossed the Neale we saw fish in it of a good size about eight inches long from which I should say that the water is permanent. I shall have to run to the west to-morrow for there is no appearance of this scrubby country terminating. I must have a whole day of it.  Sunday 25th March Mulga Scrub. - I can see no termination on this course to this thick scrub. I can scarcely see one hundred yards before me. I shall therefore bear to the west cut the Neale River and see what sort of country is in that direction. At ten miles made it; the water still running but not so rapidly. The gum-trees still existed in its bed and there were large pools of water on the side courses. We had the same thick scrub to within a quarter of a mile of the creek where we met a line of red sand hills covered with a spinifex. The range on the south-west side of the creek seemed to terminate here and become low table land apparently covered with a thick scrub the creek coming more from the north. I did not like the appearance of the spinifex an indication of desert to the westward. Camped on the creek. [339] Wind north-west; heavy clouds from the same direction.  Monday 26th March The Neale River West. - I am obliged to remain here to-day to repair damages done to the packs and bags which have been torn all to pieces; it will take the whole of the day to put them in order [...]  Wednesday 28th March West Neale River. - Started on a north course to get through the mulga scrub. At ten miles could see the range to the north-east. The scrubby land now became sand hills; I could see no high ground on ahead the scrub becoming thicker; it seemed to be a country similar to that I passed through on my south-east course (first journey) and I think is a continuation of it. I therefore changed my course to the north-east range bearing 359. After five miles through the same description of country mulga scrub with plenty of grass we arrived at water where three creeks join; one from the south-west one West-Northwest and the other from about north-west. The water was still running in the one from the west-north-west with large long water holes; also water holes in the other two; gum-trees in the creek. I suppose this to be the Frew; excellent feed on the banks of the creek up to the range which is stony. I ascended the table range in order to have a view of the country round. To this point the range comes from east-south-east but here it takes a turn to the east of north all flat-topped and stony with mulga bushes on the top and sides; the rocks are of a light flinty nature. At about six miles north the country seems to be open and stony. That country I shall steer for to-morrow.  Thursday 29th March The Frew. - Started on a north course. At one mile after crossing a stony hill with mulga we suddenly came upon the creek again; it winds round the hill. Here another branch joins it from the north the other coming from the east of north. Along the base of the range there were very large water holes in both branches. The natives had evidently camped here last night; their fires were still alight; they seemed only just to have left. From the numerous fires I should think there had been a great number of natives here. All round about in every direction were numerous tracks. We also observed a number of winter habitations on the banks of the creek; also a large native grave composed of sand earth wood and stones. [340] It was of a circular form about four feet and a half high and twenty to twenty-four yards in circumference. The mulga continued for about six miles; but at three miles we again crossed the north branch of the creek coming now from the north-west. The mulga was not thick except on the top of the rises where splendid grass was growing all through it. We now came upon the open stony country with a few mulga creeks. There was a little salt bush but an immense quantity of green grass growing about a foot high which gave to the country a beautiful appearance. It seemed to be the same all round as far as I could see. At fourteen miles we struck the other branch where it joined with splendid reaches of water to the main one which now came from the west of north and continued to where our line cut the east branch. This seems to be the place where it takes its rise. Camped for the night. The whole of the country that we have travelled through to-day is the best for grass that I have ever gone through. I have nowhere seen its equal. From the number of natives from there being winter and summer habitations and from the native grave I am led to conclude the water there is permanent. The gumtrees are large. I saw kangaroo-tracks.  Friday 30th March Small Branch of the Frew.  We then ascended the low range for which I had been steering. Four miles from the creek it is rough and stony composed of igneous rock with scrub mulga and plenty of grass quite to the top. To continue this course would lead me again into the mulga scrub where I do not want to get if I can help it. It is far worse than guiding a vessel at sea; the compass requires to be constantly in hand. I again changed to the north which appears to be open in the distance. I could see another range of flat-topped hills. After crossing over several small spurs coming from the range and a number of small creeks volcanic and stony we struck another large gum creek coming from the south of west and running to the south-east. It was a fine creek. These courses of water spread over a grassy plain a mile wide; the water holes were long and deep with numerous plants growing on their banks indicating permanent water. [341] The wild oats on the bank of the creek were four feet high. The country gone over to-day although stony was completely covered with grass and salt-bush; it was even better than that passed yesterday. Some of the grass resembled the drake some the wild wheat and some rye - the same as discovered by Captain Sturt [...]   Sunday 1st April The Stevenson. - I find to-day that my right eye from the long continuation of bad eyes is now become useless to me for taking observations. I now see two suns instead of one which has led me into an error of a few miles. I trust to goodness my other eye will not become the same; as long as it remains good I can do. [...]  Monday 2nd April 'The Stevenson. [...] The first three miles of to-day's journey were over good- country; it then became rather scrubby with numerous small creeks and valleys running to the east. Plenty of grass and salt-bush with gravel ironstone and lime on the surface.   Tuesday 3rd April Gum Creek South of Range. - Ascended the hill at three miles from last night's camp. The country very rough stony and scrubby to the- base. The view from it is very extensive. I have named it 'Mount Beddome' after S. Beddome Esq. of Adelaide. To the west is another broken range about fifteen miles distant of a dark-red colour running nearly north and south. The- country between is apparently open with patches of scrub. A gum creek comes from the south-west and runs some distance to the north-east; it then turns to the east. In the distant west appears a dense scrub. On a bearing of 330° there is a large isolated table hill for which I shall shape my course to see if I can get an entrance that way.- To the north are a number of broken hills and peaks with scrub between; they are of every shape and size. To the east another flat-topped range; country between also scrubby;' apparently open. Close to the range distant about twenty miles saw hills in the far distance; to the east another flat-topped small range; between it and the other the creek seems to run. The highest point of it bears 800 and I have named it 'Mount Daniel' after Mr. Daniel Kekwick of Adelaide. [...] -  Wednesday 4th April Mount Humphries [...] I sent Kekwick to examine the creek that I saw coming from the north. [342] He says there is plenty of water to serve our purpose.  The creek is very large with the finest gum-trees we have yet seen all sizes and heights. This seems to be a favourite place for the natives to camp as there are eleven worleys in one encampment. We saw here a number of new parrots the black cockatoo and numerous other birds. The creek runs over a space of about two miles coming from the west; the bed sandy. After leaving it on a bearing of 329° for nine miles we passed over a plain of as fine a country as any man would wish to see - a beautiful red soil covered with grass a foot high; after that it becomes a little sandy. At fifteen miles we got into some sand hills but the feed was still most abundant. I have not passed through such splendid country since I have been in the colony. I only hope it may continue. The creek I have named the 'Finke' after William Finke Esq. of Adelaide my sincere and tried friend and one of the liberal supporters of the different explorations I have had the honour to lead [...]  Friday 6th April Small Gum Creek in Range of Hills.   We passed through a few patches of good grassy country. In the sand hills the oak is getting more plentiful. We were three-quarters of an hour in crossing the creek and obtained an observation of the sun 116° 26' 15". We then proceeded on the same course towards the remarkable pillar through high heavy sand hills covered with spinifex and at twelve miles from last night's camp arrived at it. It is a pillar of sandstone standing on a hill upwards of one hundred feet high. From the base of the pillar to its top is about one hundred and fifty feet quite perpendicular; and it is twenty feet wide by ten feet deep with two small peaks on the top. I have named it 'Chambers Pillar' in honour of James Chambers Esq. who with William Finke Esq. has been my great supporter in all my explorations. To the north and north-east of it are numerous remarkable hills which have a very striking effect in the landscape; they resemble nothing so much as a number of old castles in ruins; they are standing in the midst of sand hills. Proceeded still on the same course through the sand rises spinifex and low sandstone hills at the foot of which we saw some rain water where I camped. [343] To the south-west are some high hills through which I think the Finke comes. [...]  Monday 9th April The Hugh Gum Creek. -.. On the north-west the view is intercepted by a high broken range with two very remarkable bluffs about the centre. I shall direct my course to the east bluff which is apparently the higher of the two. In the intermediate country are three lower ranges between which are flats of green grass and red sand hills. To the west are grassy flats next to the creek; beyond these are seen the tops of distant ranges and broken hills; at about six miles the Hugh seems to turn more to the north towards a very rough range of red sandstone. We then descended into a grassy flat with a few gum-trees. We have had a very great difficulty in crossing the range and now I am again stopped by another low range of the same description which is nearly perpendicular - huge masses of red sandstone on its side and in the valley a' number of old native camps. After following the range three miles we. at last found out a place to cross it. Although this is not half the height of James range we encountered far more difficulty; the scrub was very dense a great quantity having withered-and fallen down: we could scarcely get the horses to face it. Our course was also intercepted by deep perpendicular ravines which we were obliged to round after -a great deal of trouble having our saddle-bags torn to pieces and our skin and clothes in the same predicament. We arrived at the foot nearly naked and got into open sandy rises and valleys with mulga and plenty of grass among which there is some spinifex growing. At sundown after having gone about eight miles further we made a large gum creek in which we found some water; it is very broad with a sand and gravel bottom. Camped both men and -horses being very tired. [...]   Wednesday 11th April Bend of the Hugh.. [...] I hoped to-day to have gained the top of the bluff which is still seven or eight miles off and appears to be so very rough that I anticipate a deal of difficulty in crossing it. I am forced to halt at this bend of the creek in consequence of the- little mare becoming so lame that she is unable to proceed further to-day. Our hands are very bad from being torn by the scrub and the flies are a perfect torment. Indications of scurvy beginning to show themselves upon us. [344] Wind west; cool night. -   Thursday 12th April The Hugh. - Started for the bluff. At eight miles we again struck the creek coming from the west and several other gum creeks coming from the range and joining it.   We have now entered the lower hills of the range. Again have we travelled through a splendid country for grass but as we approached the creek it became a little stony. At twelve miles we found a number of springs in the range. Here I obtained an observation of the sun. As we approached near the bluff our route became very difficult; we could not get up the creek for precipices and were obliged to turn in every direction. About two miles from where I obtained the observation we arrived with great difficulty at the foot of the bluff; it has taken us all the afternoon. I expected to have gone to the top of it to-night but it is too late. It will take half a day it is so high and rough. We are camped at a good spring where I have found a very remarkable palm-trees with light-green fronds ten feet long having small leaves a quarter of an inch in breadth and about eight inches in length and a quarter of an inch apart growing from each side and coming to a sharp point. They spread out like the top of the grass-tree and the fruit has a large kernel about the size of an egg with a hard shell; the inside has the taste of a cocoa-nut but when roasted is like a potato. Here we have also the india-rubber tree the cork-tree and several new plants. This is the only range that I have met with since leaving the Flinders range. I have named it the 'McDonnell Range' after his Excellency the Governor-in-Chief of South Australia as a token of my gratitude for his kindness to me on many occasions [...]   Sunday 15th -April The North Gorge of McDonnell Range. - I ascended the high hill on the east side of the gorge; the atmosphere being much clearer I got a better view of the country. To the north-west between the Mc Donnell range and the conical hill north-north-west is large plain apparently scrub; no hills on the horizon but- light shade in the far distance; the conical hill bears 340° from this; it appears to be high. [345] From the foot of this for about five miles is an open grassy country with a few small patches of bushes. A number of gum creeks come from the ranges and seem to empty themselves in the plains. The country in the ranges is as fine a pastoral hill-country as a man would wish to possess; grass to the top of the hills and abundance of water through the whole of the ranges.  Monday 16th April The North Gorge of McDonnell Range. - Started at 9 o'clock to cross the scrub for the distant high peak. For five miles the plain was open and well grassed: afterwards it became thick with mulga bushes and other scrubs. At twenty miles we again encountered the spinifex which continued until we camped after dark. Distance thirty miles. Met with no creek or watercourse after leaving the McDonnell ranges.   Tuesday 17th April In the Scrub. - Got an early start and continued through the scrub and spinifex on the same course 340°. At three miles passed a small stony hill about two miles to the west of our course. At eighteen miles saw to the west two prominent bluff hills and two or three small ones about ten miles distant from us. At thirty-two miles crossed a strong rise. There are three reap-hook hills about three miles west their steep side facing the south. At sundown reached the hills. At two miles passed a small sandy gum creek the only watercourse we have seen between the two ranges. Followed the range to the north-west till after dark hoping to find a gum creek coming from the range but without success; nothing but rocky and sandy watercourses. Camped. The poor horses again without water; I trust that I shall find some for them in the morning; if not I shall have to return to the McDonnell range [...] Wednesday 18th April Under the High Peak Mount Freeling. - At daybreak sent Kekwick in search of - water while I ascended the high mount to see if any could be seen from that place. To my great delight I beheld a little in a creek on the other side of the range bearing 113° about a mile and a half. I find this is not quite the highest point of the range; there is another hill still higher about fifteen miles further to the north-north-west. About two miles off I can see a gum creek looking very green coming from the range in the direction in which I have sent Kekwick where I hope he will find water. [346] The country from west to northeast is a mass of hills and broken ranges; to the south-west is another hill with a plain of scrub between. To the southeast scrub with tops of hills in the far distance. Brinkley Bluff bears 166° and Mount Hay 186°. Returned to the camp and find to my great satisfaction that Kekwick has discovered some water in the creek about two miles off. I am very glad of it for I am sure that some of my horses would not have stood the journey back without it. I must not leave this range without endeavouring to find a permanent water as no rain seems to have fallen to the north of us; everything is so dry one would think it was the middle of summer. The sun is also very hot but the nights and mornings are cool. [...]   Saturday 21st April Gum Creek East Side of Mount Freeing. - Started at half-past seven across the scrub to another high hill. For seven miles the scrub is open and the land beautifully grassed. At twelve miles from the camp we crossed another gum creek coming from the range; as far as I could see it ran to the north-east. After seven miles the scrub became much thicker. We had great difficulty in getting through from the quantity of dead timber which has torn our saddle-bags and clothes to pieces. There are a number of gum-trees and the new tree that was found on Captain Sturt's expedition 1844 but mulga predominates. At fourteen miles we struck a large gum plain but after a short time again entered the scrub. At about twenty-two miles met another arm of the gum plains with large granite rocks nearly level with the surface. We found rain water in the holes of these rocks. At thirty-two miles crossed the sandy bed of a large gum creek divided into a number of channels; too dark to see any water. Four miles further on camped on a small gum creek with a little rain water; the creeks are running to the north-east. The soil is of a red sandy colour: - the grass most abundant throughout the whole day's journey. Occasionally we met with a few hundred yards of spinifex. Wind south-east. Native tracks quite fresh in the scrub and plain; we also passed several old worleys. [347]  Sunday 22nd April Small Gum Creek under Mount Stuart Centre of Australia : - To-day I find from my observations of the sun 111° 00' 30'' that I am now camped in the centre of Australia. I have marked a tree and planted the British flag there. There is a high mount about two miles and a half to the north-north-east. I wish it had been in the centre; but on it to-morrow I will raise a cone of stones and plant the flag there and name it 'Central Mount Stuart.' We have been in search of permanent water to-day but cannot find any. I hope from the top of Central Mount Stuart to find something good to the north-west. Wind south. Examined a large creek; can find no surface water but got some by scratching in the sand. It is a large creek divided into many channels but they are all filled with sand; splendid grass all round this camp.   Monday 23rd April Centre. - Took Kekwick and the flag and went to the top of the mount but found it to be much higher and more difficult of ascent than I anticipated. After a deal of labour slips and knocks we at last arrived on the top. It is quite as high as Mount Serle if not higher. The view to the north is over a large plain of gums mulga and spinifex with watercourses running through it. The large gum creek that we crossed winds round this hill in a north-east direction; at about ten 'miles it is joined- by another. After joining they take a course more north and I lost sight of them in the far-distant plain. To the north-north-east is the termination of the hills; to the north-east east and south-east are broken ranges and to the north-north-west the ranges on the west side of the plain terminate. To the north-west are broken ranges; and to the west is a very high peak between which and this place to the southwest are a number of isolated hills. Built a large cone of stones in the centre of which I placed a pole with the British flag nailed to it. Near the top of the cone I placed a small bottle in which there is a slip of paper with our signatures to it stating by whom it was raised. We then gave three hearty cheers for the flag the emblem of civil and religious liberty and may it be a sign to the natives that the dawn of liberty civilization and Christianity is about to break upon them. [...]  West Maitland April 18th 1865   My dear Father   I recived your letter dated Janury 20d which gave me & wife great pleasure to hear that you were all in good health but on the other hand we are very sorry the way you are situated in your old days. We shall be very uneasy until we hear from you again. I know from my heart that some of your Carrhuduff neighbours is but very glad to see yea dethroned or rejected out of your old hard earned home. They are worse than the bushrangers of Austrilia. My firm beliefe they think there is no (supreme being) over them. I hope and trust in God that honourable Gentleman Mr O'Brien wont be said by them to hunt the poor families of Derry far from their homes. My dear Father I expect Mr Shannon felt heart Broken when he left Derry. He was a good friend to you no doubt. Let me know where Mr Shannon lives in your next letter to me. I will scend him some newspapers to read and remember me to him. I am very sorry for him leaving his old home. I hope you will have better news my dear Father for me in the next letter which I will be anxtiously waiting for until I receive it. I am very thankful to my Brother for scending me the newspapers. It gives me great pleasure to get home catholic papers to read.   I scend you newspapers by every mail that leaves here. I have scend you some by the last mail. You will see in them concerning a great fire that took place here. The largest place of buisness that was in this town was burned to the Ground thousands of pounds worth of Goods Destroyed. The day was awful hot and hot winds blowing a hurrican but thank God there was no lives lost. I worked there for many hours day and night. My Employer scend all his men there and shut up all his own places of buisness - to assist to save the neighbouring houses from distruction.   My dear Father I hope you will tell my Stepmother that I cant get her Brothers address. I get letters very often from Margret. I scend her the letter I got from you of late. [95] She told me that she wrote home. They live a long way from me or I would go to see them. I rode 15 miles one Sunday to see John Lenane. He appointed to come to meet me there but his Employer would not let him come so I was disapointed. I had my 30 miles Journey for nothing. Margret said she would write to hanna Doolan to Sydney about geting his address. As soon as I get it will scend to my Stepmother.   My dear Father I am verry sorry that I cant scend you some assistance. It takes all my earning to support ourselfs and little family. Every thing is so verry dear boots & clothes is very dear especily anny cotton clothes. All things are dear that a family wants except meat tea & sugar is reasonable we would not grumble at the price. Also you will see by the newspapers I have scend you the price of Flour here. We had no wheat grown in this district for the last two Seasons so that makes the Flour deare.   I received a letter (this day) from Sister Susan from Moreton Bay with her likness she looks well. They are keeping a large Hotell in Brisbane and I belive doing very well. There is a great many of the old neighbours located here. Michl. Healy's son & daughters I can see often.   Dear Father I was very much pleased to hear from my uncles & aunts and all the old neighbours. Give my best repects to them all. I am scending three of the youngsters to school the are doing very well at school. We are all in good health thank God so is Patt Neylon wife and family. He wishes to be remembered to you. Bridget wants to be remembered to you dear Father & Stepmother also to her own Mother Brothers and Sister. I cant find out Tom Doolans wifes name until I get his address. I will hunt it out some way or another. I was very happy to hear from America. I hope their husbands wont be slaughtered [in] that merciless war which I would [like] to be at an end.   I have nothing else particular to tell you. But hoping you will have better news for me in your next letter I conclude with our love to you Stepmother Brothers & Sisters your humble son   M Normile  Adelaide South Australia April 29th 1865[?]   My dear Edward   I soppose you will be disapointed not hering from me last Mail but Susan will explain. I hope you will like the enclosed. I tell you dear Edward what I want you to do. That is to get me a good Cart [carte] of your dear Mama. I did not like the cased one for it looked so old and I did not think Good. [135]  We ar getting on as usual. I was delighted with that pleasing newse of last Mail. I shall be glad to hear of the dear Girl having a happy home of her own[?]. I should so like to know if you ar thin[k]ing of taking that desperat[e] step. I hope you will some day when you can meet with one worthy of you that will make you a good Wife. Do let me into the secret.   I must tell you a little Newse. Uncle Robert Wylys Alaxander is Married and living in the Bush. He is keeping a General Store. We have not seen her yet and I do not think we shall for some time to come. His Brother Tom is living with them. Uncle Alaxander is getting [on] as usual. Henrietta is keeping a School. I told you Fanny was married. William does not think of any just yet. He is quite the Gentleman that family has done very well. They have kept up their posicion[?]. Alaxander is in a gover[n]ment Situation.   Poor Ruth she has had her triales[?]. She has 5 little ones the eldest 10 years old and no Servants doing the best she can for them. Mr Shadgit fail[e]d this last year so the were left pennyless. I give you this newse for your Mama. I am sure she will like to know how all ar doing. Every thing has [been] so dull this last year those that ar left to get on can just keep their heads above water.   Do you think you could get me a few more Vewse of Ireland or I shoul like Dublin as I know more about it. I think Uncle John could. Would you please ask him. You can get them much cheaper. I shall pay for them if you let me know what the will be.   I must bring this hasty scrible to a close hoping the next will be longer but I coul not say more or it would make this to[o] heavy. I think I sent you our likenesses. Let me know. I should like to see yours. I have not seen that yo[u]ng friend of yours yet. Is he gone to Melbourne. Good by dear Edward with Dear love to Mama and also your good self. In writing[?] give Uncle[?] yours.   I remain your fond & Affectionate Aunt I. A. Scott Ps   Pleas hast[e] write soon. I hope you got the Austrilian Pap[e]rs. We shall send them ev[e]ry Mail.   [...] in mind you can do twice as well in Ireland as you could possibly do in Qland. There are some families from about Ennistymon out here who would give all they are worth to be back again. Michael Kean and his family are living here in Brisbane. I have visited them a few times. He desired me to remember him to you & my Mother.   My dearest Mama  I hope this letter will find you all in good health. You were saying in your last that my Father was bad from Rheumatism. It pained me verry much to hear that he was still suffering from it but I hope he is better by this.   Ned Thyne & his family are living in Ipswich about 20 miles from here I will see them please God on tomorrow. Michl Herbert & Austin Carrigg live there also. I met Austin Grady & Michl the other day here in town. They are in good health and doing well.   My dear Mother  I Know that you are thinking me very ungrateful at home not to have sent home some money or sent for any of my uncles family since but God Knows it did not lie in my power to do it as I would wish and another thing I dont think that I would be the means of bringing anyone to Australia. It is such a miserable place and still people at home will not believe it. They imagine that money is easily had here until they experience it and then they begin to curse themselves for ever coming out. There is not a person in this country but has to work for their living. There is nothing like money to be made in it. Father Devitte my old college companion is a priest in town an[d] one or two more of the boys. [246] So you see that I have some to talk to.   How are all my Brothers & Sisters and friends. I often wish to see you all again which I will please God if we are [words lost: ?all spared] for it. Is John still in [word lost]. Make him write to me this time. Mary never sends me a line - at any rate we never pulled well and I suppose she has an old spite for me. Do not forget to tell me how poor "Dowdle" is in your next is he fond of fishing now. Do not forget Dear Mother to give trades to all of them. Is little Bid in good health? Tell me how my Aunt Russell is & also my grandmother. You would Confer a great favour by sending the portrait of yourself & my father to me in one to me by next post if you can and I will send mine the post after. Do not forget [words lost: ?to write] at once. With sincere [word lost] affection I remain Dear Parents   Your affectionate Son  P Comber  1.  The shearers nine in number have a cook of their own and buy their own extra rations everything except flour beef tea and sugar. They pay a man about £2 a week to cook for them while they are shearing. Christmas Eve yesterday was signalized by a chase and capture on the station. One of the shepherds came in the night before and said that his hut which is near the road had been robbed while he was out with his sheep and his blankets clothes and rations stolen. Biddulph gave him some more blankets. Yesterday afternoon Julian came in in a state of great excitement to say that the man who had stolen the things had just passed the station and that the shepherd had recognized the blankets he was carrying.  Biddulph mounted Julian's horse and went off through the bush at a gallop. Pat Mr Palmer's man followed also on horse-back and everybody else on the station ran.  Biddulph presently came back with the culprit mounted on Pat's horse. He conducted him up to the stockyard and the whole of the property was found in his possession. Moreover he had borrowed Pat's horse the day before promising to leave it at Exmoor where he said his own horse was left and then had ridden it on past the station evidently with the intention of stealing it.  Biddulph said he could not have the trouble and expense of sending him to Port Denison in custody 110 miles and afterwards appearing against him at Rockhampton 370 miles off. So he had him then and there tied up to a tree and soundly flogged Pat who is a stout Irishman being the executioner; and he bestowed two dozen with hearty goodwill stimulated by the remembrance of his wrongs about the horse.  Justice being administered in this summary manner Biddulph gave the man some rations that he might not be obliged to rob any more shepherds at stations and sent him off at the same time warning the shepherds all down the road to look after their huts.  2.  About a month ago a Mr Digby started on foot from Port Denison - he was coming up this way by the high road but he unfortunately took a "short cut" lost himself and was out for fourteen days with nothing to eat but the gum which oozes out of the trees. I cannot think how he lived so long. He was found by some bushmen and brought to Mr Paterson's a station about thirty miles from here. [57] He has been there more than a fortnight and every care has been taken of him but they say he cannot recover as he has been so weakened by want of food that he cannot keep down anything but liquids.  One of the shepherds who went out to the Flinders with Biddulph's sheep returned here a short time ago and he told us that having one day lost himself in the bush with his flock he came upon the body of a man lying under a tree. The blacks had evidently found it but instead of disturbing and robbing it they had laid a piece of bark over the head and another over the feet and left. He took the news on to the next station Mr Henry's and was told that a week or two before a riderless horse with all the usual accoutrements of saddle blankets etc. had found its way in to the station; and by the books and clothes rolled up in the blankets it was evidently a gentleman's "swag".  The shepherd did not know whether they found out his name or not. It seems always to me a terrible end to be "lost in the bush". I had rather hear of anyone being killed by the blacks at once.  3.  Since I last wrote to you the station has been enlivened by an elopement. During the absence of Alick (the black boy who fought so valiantly on the Flinders) Billy the other station black boy ran away with Biddy the wife of the aforesaid Alick. Alick came back the next day and his rage was great when he found out his loss especially as they had taken all his property with them and particularly 35s. which comprised his worldly wealth and which he kept tied up in an old sock.  He picked out a formidable "waddy" and set out in pursuit vowing vengeance. In the meantime Billy and Biddy finding running away not quite so pleasant as they had expected came back the third day in a very penitent state of mind. The nights were very cold just then. They had had "nothing to eat but cold water" and Biddy said "I believe mine cry good deal cry all day." Billy fled to the Two Mile station to be out of the way of Alick's wrath. Biddy was obliged to abide it but he was persuaded not to give her the beating he promised and which she certainly deserved and in a few days they became good friends especially as he recovered the precious 35s.  Since that Alick has been ill and Biddy has made her peace by carefully attending him. He caught cold and had a sort of chest attack and used to lie in his hut and groan and cough and yell alternately. Biddy came down one morning. "I believe that fellow dead" she said. We went up to see after him and found him all right enough only coughing. Annie called into the gunyah "Are you better Alick?" "No" he shouted very loud. "I'm dead."  However he did not die and next day Mr Hedgeland prescribed a mustard plaster for his cough. [58] So one was made and then Mr Hedgeland took it up to Biddy and told her how to put it on and to wash the place with a little warm water when it came off. About twenty minutes after he went up to see after his patient and he found Alick lying outside his hut groaning and shivering without a rag on him (it was a cold day).  Alick looked the picture of hopeless resignation. "What have you been doing to Alick?" Mr Hedgeland asked. "I believe I washed that fellow all over" Biddy said with a doleful face. "And where is the mustard plaster?" "Pudding inside long of hut" she said and there was the plaster carefully rolled up and put away in a corner and if Mr Hedgeland had not gone up when he did I think it very probable she would have made him eat it as the second part of the prescription.  Of course Alick caught a worse cold than ever but he is better now and consumes quantities of mutton broth and cornflour. I hope he will be well soon for we are very short of horses. They have all betaken themselves to distant parts of the run and no one can find them like a blackboy.  So - poor Aunt Russell is gone. I was not surprised because I always knew she was not long for the world - God be with her - I hope she is in a better life she deserves to be at any rate. And William Carmody and his mother are taking their long rest in the chapel yard - When I think of old times in my own School days and think of friends & companions so widely dissevered - some by the wide ocean and others by the wider barrier of the grave it makes me melancholy enough. But - I Know the world well by this. There is scarcely a hue in the broad curve embraced by its ups & downs that is not familiar to me although I am very young. And I can always console myself by recurrence to my short but bitter experience Of life - we are all on a preparatory stage for another life and our ills and woes in this world must be met with a bold and fearless face either to conquer them or if that is beyond our reach why the common and only alternative of man remains.   It gave me pleasure to hear that crops were good for last year the poor old country wants some thing to Keep it from being entirely depopulated.   I cannot send you my photograph by this mail as there is no chance of getting it done at present in Wangaratta. Sharry is removed from Beechworth - he is now in Geelong. I saw him about a fortnight ago when he was going down by coach to Melbourne. He & Mrs Sharry are very well. [247]  You did not mention how my fathers health was. I expected him to write a few lines to me. I did not hear from any of the Combers in Geelong this time past. I will write to Mary soon. The saddling is a good trade for Michael. It does splendidly in this country. How is my grand mother & uncle James. Remember me to all friends - with Kind love to my Father & brothers and Sisters   I remain your affectionate Son  P Comber   PS I am sending you a Wangaratta paper. The letter marked is mine. Write by next mail.   PC. - address   Patrick Comber Wangaratta Victoria.  Dont forget sending Clare Journals.  I had a letter from dear Mary a few months since asking my advice as to her emigrating to this colony with her son which much as I desire to see her I could not conscientiously encourage. her husband St. John by all accounts is utterly unfit to encounter the roughing of our bush life and there is great difficulty in obtaining situations as there are so many applicants from Colonial youths when a vacancy occurs: besides the society is not what would suit Mary: it is generally composed of people that have risen from a low degree by amassing wealth whose manners and habits are not the most agreeable: therefore both William Busby and I strongly advised her not to think more of it [...] [38]  Busby has lately bought this place (Edgecliff House) the late residence of the late Judge Wise. It is a large and handsome house conveniently situated about a mile and a half from the city in a beautiful garden with splendid views of the harbour all round. He intends to bring his family here every winter that they may enjoy society and be at Cassilis during the busy months when the sheep require attention: they are now preparing to return there and have already let the house for six months to a nice family for £200 which will save his keeping it. They have been living in great style warranted by his thriving establishments both at Cassilis and in Queensland: in fact there is no one I know that manages his affairs better. We are most especially fortunate in having such a worthy son-in-law who is all kindness to our daughter. I have not been one of the fortunate settlers although I have managed to go on with a fair share of comforts around me perhaps quite enough for great success does not improve the character and disposition of man. I made a mistake in the first instance in purchasing so much landed property instead of employing my capital in the cultivation of sheep and cattle on the wild wastes of the interior: this and a disinclination to speculate has keep [sic] me just rubbing on with sufficient income to meet our reasonable wants but not enough to go visiting about in the old countries as most of my acquaintances do: however a change is gradually taking place and this landed property is assuming its proper value and will no doubt be the most desirable in the end. Pomeroy is a magnificent estate and will be a principality to the young ones. I have lately changed the character of its management by selling off all the livestock and giving up farming on my own account having leased the land to tenants keeping nothing in my own hands but the house garden and pleasure grounds. I do not get so large an income by these means but it is more certain and free from anxiety and will yearly increase as the district becomes populated: besides it leaves us at liberty to go and come when we like. It is a Derryman and woman that rents the home farm (William Gallagher) who was for seven years foreman in Mr. Watt's brewery. He came to this colony 25 years ago when I employed him and have since had opportunity of befriending them which has caused an unusual degree of attachment in him and his whole family (now consisting of four young women and two sons) to us. He and she have proved themselves to be guided by the strictest integrity and they possess a delicacy of feeling that any gentleman might be proud of. Consequently I have the highest respect for them and notwithstanding their class I estimate them more as friends than otherwise. They have left a valuable farm in Cumberland and came up to live with me I believe from pure affection: he rents all the enclosures about the house and supplies us with wood water dairy produce vegetables and poultry taking charge of the premises in my absence so that I have none but the indoor servants to look after and they are a family I have had on and off for 18 years so that although I am not so rich in money as my neighbours we are very comfortable and having got rid of farming work I can amuse myself by improving the place which I have done to considerable extent lately. I am voluntarily building a nice stone cottage of fine rooms with detached kitchen and offices as a residence for the Gallaghers as it is both my desire and interest to make them as comfortable as possible for we will probably end our days together: he and I have many talks of old Derry and would be glad to hear from you of anything that is going on. [39]  Within the last two years we have succeeded in establishing a bishopric in the South-Western part of New South Wales. The Bishop Goulburn (Mesac Thomas) who has for some years been the principal correspondent or secretary of the Society for the Diffusion of the Gospel living in London is a very superior man admirably calculated for organising the extensive diocese he has undertaken and not less so by his energetic and amiable wife. They are a strong healthy couple without family active devoted to the undertaking and so affable with a proper proportion of dignity that they secure the goodwill of every person. Within twelve months of his arrival they travelled 2000 in their own carriage round the distant parts of the diocese no small undertaking as they have lived nearly all their lives in London. We have managed to collect in money and landed property £20000 as an endowment which now produces about £1200 per annum yearly increasing and this entirely from private subscriptions. He is establishing clergymen and schools everywhere so that an immensity of good is being effected.   [...] I must inform you that I have been a miner ever since the year after the gold was first discovered (that is to say 1853) which alone supported me till now. The diggings about where I resides is done or deserted almost; only a very few diggers seen at work. There are hundreds of men walking and travelling about looking for employment. Indeed these times it is hard for a man to know what to do to earn an honest living.   March 18 / 67   Dear Father   I received your letter dated December 11th and was delighted to hear you Mother and all my Brothers and Sisters are well and all old frends as this leaves me at presant and all the Children thanks be to God for his Kind mercy to us. [317] I was sorry to hear of the trouble my Uncle has met with by the death of his Son and also Mr Kernans Children hopeing the are now better.   Dear Father I thought by this time I would be Sending you a better account of Brisbane but I am Sorry to Say that it has not improved Since I wrote to you last. If any it is worse; there are a grate many leaving hear for America. I Could not Complain So much of this place untill up to the presant for the buisnes I was at I had to leave on the 8th of January. I happened with an accident. I was loadeing on top of the van. The Horse Started off and I was upset & was very Severly hurt and my Colar bone was broken. I must give thanks to God I am now better. I was under a good dale of expences togeather with the loss of time it has Came very heavy on me. I am not in any employment at presant. I now want a frend to assist m[e] to get over the presant difaculty untill Such time as I would be able to make Some recompence. I was getting on to my wishes untill I happened with the accident but when I was not Killed on the Spot I have not much Cause to Complain when God was pleased to leave me over my Children. I was for two hours after that fall that I did not make a motion but lay quite Sinceless. I was takeing to my home where I had to remain for Seven weeks without leaveing my bead and the grater part of that time in Sever agony.   Michael mentioned he would Send me a paper but I did not receive it. I would have Sent you one this time but ther is nothing in them worth reeding. As to Thos. Brady he has left Brisbane and went to Melborn about four months past. I have herd from him once Since. He was then in good health. I have had the pleasure of seeing James Murtagh at Christmas and he Came to See me when I was hurt. He wishes to be Kindly remembered to you all. He told me to mention he was to send Something to his Father and in Concequence of the dullness of the times he will not be able to Send him anything Sooner than July and that he would Send him what he Could. He is married and has three Children and the enjoy good health. He also told me that if his Brother and Sister wished to Come to this Colony he would pay there passage on Conditions that the would pay him back and if his Father wished to Come he would also pay his.   I send m[y] love to you and Mother and all my Brothers and Sisters also to Mr McDonnell and Mr Kernan hopeing the and there family are well. Wishing to be Kindly remembered to W. S. Garnett Esqr. Mrs Garnett and family also Mrs Ryan and family Patrick Christy a[n]d Anne Gibney hopeing the all enjoy good health. I now Conclude Sending my love and blessing to you all.   I remain Dear Father and Mother Your affectionate Son   Christopher Dunne [318]  N.B. Direct your Letters  Sherrif Street Brisbane Queensland Australia  Neuarpur - Apsley  Victoria  17th May 1868  My dear Miss Lewin I am now so reconciled to Australia that I was surprised to see by your letter I had apparently been disappointed at first. At times I feel it is rather dull work never to go beyond the garden or Croquet ground but then I remember I can rake or hoe in the garden as I please & freedom to please oneself more than compensates for monotony. Occasionally we have a good deal of riding & I have a nice horse for my own use - then if Mr Hines is busy we are sometimes weeks without going outside the gates.  Latterly there has been a great deal of gaiety for this place - one public Ball & two private ones - one of the private ones here. The style is to dance till daylight because it is impossible to ride or drive in the dark so those who must go dance until it is light enough to start & the rest take thankfully anything they can get in the shape of a bed - when it comes to provide for thirty you cannot be very particular. [194]  I felt the heat much more this summer than last - but then it was more continued. & unusually severe - this part is nearly as hot as Adelaide - I hope this Xmas to be able to take a trip to my brother & sister. Travelling there is very very expensive & last year I felt economical - I remain dear Miss Lewin  Very truly yours  L. A. Geoghegan  Neuarpur - Apsley  Victoria  12th August 1868  Dear Miss Lewin I am so glad that my gratitude has caused you pleasure - but it did not half acknowledge what I feel or the benefit you have done me - I cannot tell you anything about the wants of Melbourne - except that I see in the Melbourne Newspapers accounts of a Society for 'Educated people in Indigent Circumstances' their applications to the Society published etc & teachers of both sexes figure largely in the list.  In this district (colonial term) for three gentlemen there are six mushrooms I suppose you would call them. The former I have heard say would like thoroughly good lady Governess from Home if they had any one there conscientiously to select them - the mushroom class pay largely but expect rather queer things - viz that the Governess should light the Schoolroom fire & similar things. They have been accustomed themselves to manual exertions & dont understand not keeping it up. In my short experience I have known of two cases where ladies got with these people & very soon had to separate.  It is a totally different life from what it is at home. In nearly every instance you are looked on as the Intellectual Member of the Establishment. You are the constant companion & associate of the Lady - considered I might say indulged in every way - & your only difficulty is to civilize the children which you are supposed to do through example as they are uncontrolled to a degree & the parents object to anything else. I believe in Adelaide salaries are much lower than in Victoria.  I think with you that capable women have a better chance here than at home [196] - but I think a few of a good class not long accustomed to home scrubbing & drudgery would be a better importation than a larger number of the common run of Governesses - I think it a mistake unless very strong minded to come out here without having some relatives in the Colony - no out-door variety - no change of face or scene - so that the feeling of monotony & exile is apt to take forcible possession of you unless you know you have a resource to shake it off. My thoughts on the subject may be very imperfect ones for I have never given it deliberate consideration. [195]  I remain dear Miss Lewin  Very truly yours  L. A. Geoghegan  Rich Avon West Avon Plains by Glenorchy Victoria 13th August 1869  My dear Miss Lewin  My impressions of Melbourne & the Colony are thoroughly unfavourable. I was not one hour in it when I regretted deeply the step I had taken. Had I possessed the money I would returned in the next ship. I do not use too strong a language when I say no one with the tastes habits or feelings of a lady should ever come out to Australia. It may do for mediocre governesses who can put up with roughnesses or I should rather say vulgarity of mind & great want of intellect but I never would advise a lady to try it.  I hate Australia and the Australians. I shall be with them but never of them. I would rather have £15 per annum in London than £50 here.  Australia is by no means the Eldorado it is supposed to be or perhaps once was. There is a vast amount of wretchedness & poverty in the Country & men of talent & ability find it most difficult to obtain employment. Even I lately come to the Colony know instances. How much more then for a Governess. [205]  As to the Town of Melbourne it is beyond anything abominable in every respect. I was more than thankful & glad to leave it. I was quite sorry to find by a letter I had lately from Mrs Roe another lady Governess was coming out in the Highflyer. I think it is a great pity. There has not been one Governess to whom I have spoken on the subject but has not told me they deeply regretted ever coming out & who would return to England could they afford it & so very very many have gone back hating place & people. You have no idea of it.  I am quite satisfied with my present abode I leave the word 'happiness' out of the question. I only feel as if all the brightness had gone out of my life. I am very sorry I did not think of India or Rio unprejudiced & unbiassedly. With no feeling of actual home sickness do I write only weary disappointment. Now that I am here I should be ashamed to return without feeling I had made some effort for good. On all sides do I hear sad tales of the struggle for our daily bread the last few years & seasons have been so bad. There is of course much wealth in some instances but it is confined to the few. I would recommend no one unless indeed servants to emigrate to Australia.  The climate is trying also so many sudden changes. This winter has been very severe. You will say perhaps I am writing very one sidedly. Not so I am & have been most fortunate in getting my present situation & have by no means seen or felt the worst side of the picture but I hear a great deal & cannot help judging accordingly. One thing I do know. I never never shall like or be happy in Australia & would leave it tomorrow if I could.  I just try not to think or else I would die but there are times when I must think & I am weary of life & everything & everyone. Mrs Scott the lady in whose family I am said to me on hearing I was writing Home 'Tell your friends Miss Payne we are both Mr Scott & myself much pleased with you you are so attentive to the children & so bright!' She does not know my heart is nearly breaking sometimes. I knew they were satisfied with me & I am with them. Dear Miss Lewin this is a different letter perhaps from what you expected from me but I cannot write otherwise it would be untruthful. Will you write to me? How much I wish you would. It would give me such pleasure of happiness.  Yours very sincerely -  Rosa Payne  Neuarpur  Victoria  10th August 1870  Dear Miss Lewin I must begin by telling you about myself but I will try and be as short as possible. I have gone on steadily here for three years and a half and have managed to scrape together money to buy a piano and otherwise enable me to go live with my brother in Sale Gipps Land and enter into partnership with my sister who already has a pretty good school.  I do not leave Mrs Hines until Xmas. She is sending home for a Governess or rather she is getting me to do so for her as she knew no one whom she could depend on. Mrs Hines will not pay the passage for any one and as I do not think there are many Governesses willing or able to embark the necessary sum I have mentioned you as helping through your Society deserving persons in such a dilemma. You will perhaps wonder that when Mrs Hines had so much difficulty in the matter she should send home - but she came to this decision from her observation of Governesses in this district who have come from Melbourne and as a class they are not much to be admired.  Mrs Hines and Mr Hines and the children are very much to be liked but no convent life could be more monotonous than life here is. The routine is teaching from 8 o'clock to dinner at 1 o'clock again from 2 to 3 o'clock after which you are your own Mistress but your resources are limited solely to intellectual amusements. Walking owing to the heat and wet is only possible a short time through the year & then you must be brave enough to go by yourself for here they think it laborious. Driving is inconvenient there being no roads only tracks & as Mr Hines is now his own overseer he seldom has time to take us out riding as he used to do & a book the piano & fancy and plain work occupy you until bed time. [197] No one comes & there is no place to go to. I have never been unhappy here. and though I am sorry to part from Mrs Hines I am not sorry to leave the Bush. Believe me  Always yours gratefully  Louisa Agnes Geoghegan  Rich Avon West Avon Plains by Glenorchy Victoria  25th March 1870  My dear Miss Lewin I am now satisfied. I must have written my letter to you in great bitterness of spirit & in utter disgust too of the colony. Now I shall endeavour to modify & moderate my feelings & give you a juster & unprejudiced view of things. My lines are now cast in pleasant places. Strange as it may seem to you it just feels here as though it were my groove in life. The Scotts are pleasant educated kindly people. My duties are not laborious & what they are I like greatly.  In Bush life there is a great charm. Lonely perhaps some people would find it. I never have done so. I have seen more of life of the springs of action in people their ways and peculiarities than I ever did in my life before & I have travelled & seen much. Perhaps it is because there is less reserve less stiffness less of the conventionalities of life. I like it. I am very happy with all this. I feel I am in the Colony simply not of the people or with them beyond our own household.  I had the pleasure of staying at Mrs Somerville Learmonth's about six weeks ago. She is very nice & I liked her greatly. So like home is she. She regretted not having seen you & spoke so highly of Miss Rye. At the same time she quite agreed with me that it is a mistake sending Governesses out to Australia. There are quite sufficient to suit the requirements of the Colony and in so many cases utter misery to the ladies who do come out. I have heard some sad strange tales since I came out. I never would advise a sister of my own to act as I have done particularly now the Colony seems to have reached a culminating point of difficulty & embarrassment. There is nothing doing in business. This is quite universal. Many settlers - (Squatters) have failed. Many have abandoned their run. If rain does not come soon I don't know what will be done for the sheep are dying so for want of food. Literally there is not one blade of grass.  You ask me why do I hate Australia & Australians. I expressed myself rather strongly then. Now I shall just say I do not like place or people nor never shall but as I have made it my home I shall put up with it & all its shortcomings. Place & people with few exceptions are verily the antipodes of home selfish mortally and so unsympathizing. I think I have said all I have to & I wonder what you will say on reading this production. [207] [208]  Thanking you once more for your kind letter & hoping when you have leisure you will sometimes bestow a thought on me I remain dear Miss Lewin  Yours very sincerely  Rosa Payne  Gold digging is both dangerous and uncertain I do not intend trying my fortune on the gold fields. Store keeping is a much shurer game. We have done a very large trade in the wholesale since those new rushes opened.   Neuarpur - Horsham  Victoria  2nd October 1871  My dear Miss Lewin I did not write immediately on arrival thinking it better to give myself time to form an opinion of Colonial or rather bush-life. I started for my 300 miles up the country. Such travelling in a vehicle one can only call a covered cart across miles of uncultivated flat country diversified only by ugly dark pine trees heath & swamps; not a person to be seen; every 20 or 30 miles a station or small township. In my opinion it is very disagreeable for a lady alone travelling in this style especially in a country where society is so mixed & it is impossible to say who may be your fellow-passengers. [198]  I have now had nearly six months experience & without hesitation I can say it is not a life I should like to try long notwithstanding the nice kind people I am with. There are perhaps few families as intellectual & well educated as this at all events not in Victoria. Still had I known the very isolated life I was to lead. I do not think I should have been induced to come out. This is not the only drawback. One could cheerfully bear it two or three years if there were any advantage to be gained in the end but I must candidly confess from what I have heard & seen there is no better chance of getting on out here than at home. The expenses are far greater & the salaries not in proportion. Consequently £100 is not more than £60 in England that is taking travelling expenses into consideration.  The bush life is a perfect exile. There are about three visitable families near. If a Governess has friends in Melbourne it is something like £20 if she takes a holiday. The transportation of luggage is fearful. Only small portmanteaus are allowed & if there be anything extra it is heavily charged.  I am perhaps putting things in their worst light but Home ideas of this Country are very false. The greatest amusement we have is riding but even too much of that becomes monotonous with no object in view. As to scenery there is none. It is certainly the ugliest country I have ever seen reminding one of the N. of France.  I only wonder the sheep thrive on such poor land. Of course mutton forms the principal dish. The living is simple enough. There are times when we cannot get butter. I have not yet experienced the hot weather. The winter is over now. Altho' not the cold of home still I think I felt it quite as much. Perhaps this was owing to the house being only of one storey and the rooms all leading into the garden so that it is almost like living in the open air.  The garden is looking nice but nothing to equal the flowers at home The soil is bad & the heat with hot winds dry up every thing All I can say is that I do not like Australia & would rather be in England or on the Continent with £50 than here.  With kind regards  Believe me  Sincerely yours  M. A. Oliver  Rich Avon West Avon Plains  by Glenorchy Victoria  18th May 1871  My dear Miss Lewin   You may possibly be surprised at hearing from me again but the fact is that do my very best I cannot like the Colony or people. More and more do I dislike both & am exceedingly unhappy & heartily weary of it. I have been in my present situation ever since my arrival which will be two years next month and during that time have had more to contend with than I ever before had in my Governess experience.  Mrs Scott & I never have got on well be the fault where it may. One thing she has not one feeling like a lady altho' one ostensibly & I cannot conscientiously approve of children having their own way in all things. It has been and is a very difficult situation to fill. I should long ere this have left it but the difficulty of obtaining another situation in this country is extreme and remuneration not adequate to the disadvantages! I tried in many quarters and made many an inquiry about another situation but to all my applications there was the invariable reply any number of applicants on the same errand & no chance of their being supplied nothing to be got.  Into the details of a Bush life I shall not enter much its advantages & disadvantages. Of the former the principal is one does not spend too much money which is desirable as things are very dear in this Country. Of the latter the place feels like a prison to me only without the ignominy. No books no society nothing improving. Everything retrograde - conversation scandal & gossip things I hate & have never been accustomed to. You may say perhaps I am overdrawing the picture because I am prejudiced against. Not so. I would not wilfully or willingly do it. It is the case.  Now I am quite determined to return home (I have saved sufficiently for the purpose) and want to ask you could you assist me in obtaining a situation in England on my landing. I would rather have £25 there than £100 here. [209] My own cannot help me. They find it quite enough to do to aid themselves. I must bear my own burdens but it would be no burden were I out of this land. Can you & if so will you help me in this? I would not care how much I had to do preferring an active life to my present desultory one.  I know all you would say of the overpopulation & number of applicants for situations but in extenuation for returning home my plea is I so dislike the Country & everything in connection with it I am satisfied I shall not regret taking a step homeward. I doubt if I am suited for the climate or people or an Australian life at all. I should very much like to be in or near London having an intense admiration if not love for the Metropolis of the world.  I remain  Yours very sincerely  Rosa Payne  We are living on the farm which is good one free of rent or taxes of any kind with plenty of wood for the fire and plenty of water. I can grow the very best potatoes and vegetables I ever saw without manure. I have Indian corn growing now sixteen feet high. I have one acre of orange trees four years old loaded with fruit. In another year or so they will be worth a pound a tree annually. Also one acre orchard of all sorts of trees - We have twenty head of cattle and five horses and fifteen large pigs and mother keeps one hundred fowls [...] We are doing very well for we have good crops and a good stock and everything we can wish for and a good bit of money in the bank also. We don't regret leaving old Ireland for this is a very good country for steady industrious people though it is not near so good as it was some years ago.   DEAREST MOTHER  I wrote you a line last Monday by the California Steamer telling you of my arrival and I will go on day by day since then. Not that there is much to say; but they are my impressions such as they are.  I have been busy most mornings looking after business matters which are more hopeful than I had anticipated. On Tuesday afternoon Robert Sellar took me over the Parliament Houses the handsomest public building here. Only one front is yet finished faced with a yellowish sandstone and that is good enough; but the other front is in a most ghastly unfinished state - and it is the most important as it faces one of the principal streets and the other looks more or less into space. They have a House of Commons & an Upper House got up as much as possible after the English pattern and a first rate Library. Altogether it is done in very good style - The House of Lords being a trifle gaudy and somewhat in a Gin Palace style of florid decoration. I daresay however in time when it is all finished that it will be a himposing hedifice.  The general impression left on one's mind by everything here is that their ideas are a good deal ahead of the capabilities of the place. In fact it has to grow up to its institutions.  There is the same incongruity in the architecture as is noticed to exist in New York in a most entertaining article in a late 'Macmillan' - only more so : there are fewer palaces & more shanties. Very few of the shops or Houses in the principal streets are over two stories high and very many only one storied wooden cottages. [87] Still the Town Hall Post Office and many of the Bank Buildings are really handsome if a little ambitious.  The streets are extremely broad but have no trees like New York. All the drainage is done by open gutters some four or five feet broad running down the sides of the streets which remind me very much of New Orleans. In fact the whole place is a sort of cross between New Orleans Chicago & San Francisco. The Street this Club is in is Collins Street which about answers to Broadway in New York: capital shops at the lower end - near the bay - and at the Upper end it is faced by the Treasury buildings which are close to the Parliament Houses which latter again are at the head of Bourke St to the South. The town is laid out rectangularly with a very broad street such as this Collins Street then a narrow street called Little Collins Street & then a broad street again such as Bourke Street - and so on alternating broad & narrow. The town covers a tremendous space of ground and the good buildings are consequently very much detached from one another.  As far as I can make out no one lives in Melbourne but as in Liverpool all the world goes to the suburbs. Doctors seem to me the only inhabitants for instance of the Upper part of Collins Street which is I suppose the most desirable location in the town. And indeed one can't wonder at it for the suburbs are very pretty and very comeatable. St Kilda for instance which is within less than quarter of an hour of Collins Street by rail is very much such a place as Bognor or any other small coast place - villas & the sea. Looking out from my window here in the Club which is on the third story I have a very pretty view of the surrounding country for there is nothing between me & it but the houses on the opposite side of the street and then the ground takes a dip; there is one further narrow street beyond and then one broad one which latter is really a road with nothing on the other side but the country - so that as the dip is sufficient to let one see easily over the tops of the Houses I have a really fine view when it is clear as far as the 'Dandenong Ranges' the name of some high hills 30 or 40 miles distant. It is rather a pretty rolling country fairly wooded. Melbourne itself too is very rolling - Up & down hill a good deal like Glasgow in that respect.  On Tuesday afternoon I went & presented my letter to Professor Irving (from Mr Jowett). He is a tall fine looking man with very deep set eyes which he looks down on the ground with in a shy sort of way; a very pleasant voice & manner; and knows a lot of William Sellar's friends. He has given up his chair at the University and is now head Master of the Wesleyan School here & is very busy so I only staid some ten or fifteen minutes with him and have not seen him since. Next day I called on Professor Wilson to whom Macmillan gave me a letter. He seems a clever little fellow but he could not get through 'Romola' and his idea of a good novel is 'the Bramleighs of Bishop's Folly' so that we have not a bond of union in leeterature. He asked me to dine with him yesterday but I was engaged to Mr Philip Russell a cousin of George Russell & of course connected with the Elie.  Yesterday I called on Mr Yencken and he asked me to dine also that evening which I could not do; and I am going out to see Mrs Yencken on Monday. Tomorrow I am going to take an early dinner - it being the Sawbath - with a Mr Robert Simson who is some connection of the Russells & had met Papa & Zibby at Elie years ago. [88] He is a vulgar sort of fellow but good-natured & friendly & I believe has a very pretty place in the suburbs. On Thursday night I dined with one of the young Hentys who have done our business since McCulloch Sellar & Co. ceased to act as our agents. They are decent respectable people but slow to a degree. They had a very self-complacent Clergyman & his wife - a Mr & Mrs Vance the former of whom told with a shudder how Jowett had examined him in Divinity at Oxford & seemed to consider the examination a joke - 'in fact his very eyes twinkled'. I can easily believe it!  The party at Philip Russell's last night was entirely of men - Simson Robert Sellar two or three other members of this club and a Mr Officer who I think is some relation of D. Wood's in whose marriage all the Fife people here seem to be interested! It was a capital good dinner - excellent wines some very fair whist after dinner and altogether very first chop colonial I have no doubt. Lots of 'capital jokes' on local subjects; but not what you would call feverishly gay to an outsider - though one's reception was most cordial and kindly. I should think the sort of thing very much like a Glasgow dinner. It was better than the Henrys for though Madame H. is quite a pretty woman she was werry colonial and he though a good fellow is a considerable prig with an absolute want of humor but apt to let off small jokes & feeble puns.  The Hentys live at a suburb called Kew some five miles from town and Russell beyond Robert Sellar at St Kilda so you may imagine from the distances that Melbourne is not a very sociable place. They seem to be divided up into small local cliques and are all apparently very churchy. I don't think my lambs that the society as far as I have seen of it would be attractive.  There is a clear distinct difference between a colony & a new country like America. It is evident in Canada: it is equally - perhaps more - evident here. All you can say about Americans & American society is that they are different from English - here inferior there superior; but this & all Colonial places I have seen are simply inferior English or Scotch. There is a distinct want of individuality about them. It is very curious : I wonder whether they would improve by being left to themselves. Certainly as far as I have seen the Americans are infinitely ahead of the others. There is a go & an independence about them that one doesn't find here. If I were an emigrating laborer I should not have one second's doubt about choosing the United States for my future. As far as one can see however that class are pretty well off here. There are no painfully visible paupers. No doubt there is some distress but it is of a mild character - in fact a man has only to go up country to get all the beef & mutton he wants every day of his life. I have not yet seen a beggar.  Then they have a most excellent Free Library here. I saw no end of working men reading there - and the education is lying there for them. The University too is very cheap; and with Irving as master of the Wesleyan School a first class education is within the reach of large numbers. Wilson took me all over the University. He lives there in very nice rooms. None of the undergraduates reside. It is like a Scotch University in that respect. A fine stone building with a quadrangle which will be handsome enough when finished but like the parliament Houses with a great deal still to be done to make it look sightly. [89]  In walking out to Russell's House yesterday R. Sellar & I went through the Botanical Gardens which promise to be really very pretty. They are building a House for the Governor overlooking them which is to cost £50000. It's a pity they don't finish one thing before beginning another. The Yarra river runs through the gardens - a narrower stream than the Thames at Maidenhead with plenty of skiffs & four oared wherries not unlike dear Father Thames. The banks are well wooded but not with pretty trees. The great tree here is the gum tree which is an evergreen with pendulous leaves but rather dreary.  19 APRIL 1872  I dined with the Simsons on Sunday & again on Monday when they had a little party with some young ladies. Style bad English - not interesting. On Tuesday I dined with the Yenckens who live at Windsor some 4 miles from the city. They have a very nice house which Fred. Druce built for them when he was out here. They have six nice children - two young ladies the boy who was at home last year and two smaller boys & a young one of 3 years. The eldest of the girls has been ill and looks delicate; but they seem a very happy & united family. After dinner Mr Yencken & his eldest daughter played charmingly together on the piano. The girls seem to go out a good deal & altogether look very happy. Mrs Yencken whom I had not seen before is very nice and asked most affectionately after Anna & Albert.  On Wednesday I went to a large public ball at the Town Hall principally to see the room which is really very handsome; the company very common. Last night I dined with the R. Sellars who had a little party - not very lively; & tonight I am going to a large ball at a Mr Francis' a political gentleman. So you see I am having 'quite a gay time'.  Tomorrow I start up country to visit our Stations. I shall be back before the mail comes in from England - & oh! how glad I shall be to get your blessed letters & to hear how all the honorable famille are getting on & what new flights of genius Alky Palky is exhibiting. I am wearying now for the 22 May when I hope to get on board the good steamer 'Baroda'. I long to be back with you all. I daresay the Spring will be very lovely with you now & before you get this it will be well on to summer & the woods will be leafy again. God grant that you may all have kept well through it all & that this will find you strong & well without trouble or grief. My soul longs to be with you.  EVER WITH DEAREST LOVE TO ONE & ALL THINE / J.WC.  1. AUGUST 4TH TO SEPTEMBER 6TH  AFTER A RATHER prolonged sojourn at the Peake (where I met great hospitality both from MT Blood of the Telegraph Department and from Messrs Bagot & Conway of the cattle Station) I arrived at the Charlotte Waters Telegraph Station on the 4th August 1872 which would be my last outpost of civilization. I and my friend Mr Carmichael were most kindly welcomed by Mr Johnston the officer in charge of this depot and by Mr Chandler a gentleman belonging to a telegraph station further up the line and in consequence of the kindness we received I extended my stay here to a week. My horses were all the better for a short respite for the journey up from Port Augusta for several hundreds of miles being nearly destitute of grass had reduced them to a very low state; from the Stangways however the country had been better clothed.  The party consisted of myself Mr Carmichael and Alexander Robinson fifteen horses and one little dog. We at length started from the Charlotte on the morning of the 12th August; and as my intended starting point to the west was Chambers's Pillar upon the Finke Creek I proceeded up the line as far as the crossing place of the last-mentioned creek which is sixty miles by road though only fifty-three by the line. In the evening of the same day we encamped there a Government party also arrived under the command of Mr McMinn who had completed his section and was now en route for the metropolis. Mr Harley Bacon who had been in charge of all the Government stock also accompanied him and I had the pleasure of their company at the camp. Near this crossing place a considerable tributary joins the Finke near the foot of Mount Humphries; and Mr McMinn Mr Bacon and myself went a few miles up it the following day. [10] Had I found it coming from the west I had an idea of leaving the line and proceeding up it; but we found its course to be considerably from the south of west. We found a waterhole about twelve miles above the junction and returned. The country consisted chiefly of open sandhills well grassed but the grass was very dry. We retraced our steps and returned again to the camp. The following day Mr McMinn and Mr Bacon after making me several kind presents left for the Charlotte but I did not remove my camp until the day following. I must here remark Mr McMinn had but recently returned from an exploring trip out to the eastwards from the MacDonnell Range having descended the Todd Creek and followed it up for some considerable distance until the country became waterless. I obtained from Mr McMinn before starting however the true course and distance from our camp to the Pillar and at starting again I travelled upon it; to do so however I crossed the Finke three or four times and on the night of the 22nd August I encamped upon the creek having the Pillar in full view.  August 23rd. - We made an early start this morning and made straight for the Pillar which bore nearly north-west-by-north from camp. The appearance of this feature I should imagine to be unique in Australia and it is not likely that any future explorer will ever discover so singular a monument wherewith to immortalize either himself or his patron. For a more detailed account of it I must refer the reader to Stuart's own report of it but cannot pass it by without a brief description. First then to approach the Pillar which can be seen for a long distance from any side except the north the traveller must pass over a series of red sandhills mostly covered with scrub and clothed with that objectionable vegetable production the spinifex (Triodia irritans) or as it may be more easily recognized by some the porcupine grass. In regions more to eastwards this plant usually grows only in mallee; here it obtains alone. The timber near the Pillar is nearly all mulga though a few tall and well-grown oaks of a kind that is new to me (Casuarina) are occasionally met with amongst the spinifex. [11] On our route Mr Carmichael discovered and brought to me a most peculiar lizard the Moloch horridus a true native of the soil. Its colour was mostly yellowish green. It was armed at all points and joints with stout thorns or spines in double rows along its back sides and legs; they were curved and sharp. On the back of its neck was a thick knotty lump with one spine from that and by which I lifted it. Its tail was armed to the point and of proportional length to its body. It was altogether about seven or eight inches long. I put it into a pouch and intended to preserve it but it managed to crawl out of the receptacle and dropped again to its native earth.  By this time we were close to the Pillar and its outline was most imposing. Upon reaching it I found it to be a columnar structure standing upon a pedestal which is perhaps eighty feet high and composed of loose white sandstone having vast numbers of large blocks loose and lying about in all directions. From the centre of the pedestal rises the Pillar composed also of the same kind of stone though at its top and for about twenty or thirty feet from its summit the colour of the stone is red. The column itself must be about 150 feet above the pedestal. There it stands (not indeed quite alone as there are other peculiar eminences near) a vast monument of the geological periods that must have elapsed since the mountain ridge of which it was formerly a part was washed by the action of the ocean waves into mere sandhills at its feet. The stone of which it is formed is so friable that one can cut their names in it to almost any depth with a pocket-knife; so loose indeed is it that one almost feels alarmed lest it should fall while he is scratching at its base. In a small orifice or chamber of the Pillar I discovered an opossum asleep; it was the first I had seen in this part of the country and I was not sure if they inhabited it or no. We turned our backs upon this peculiar monument and left it in its loneliness and its grandeur - 'Clothed in white (sandstone) mystic wonderful'. [12]  From there we travelled on a bearing of south 87° west and in seventeen miles came upon some very high sandhills at whose feet the creek swept; we followed round them to a convenient spot and one where the horses could water without bogging (I should have mentioned before that the Finke is without exception the most boggy creek channel I have ever met). As we had travelled several miles in the morning to the Pillar and the camp was eighteen miles beyond it it was late in the afternoon when we encamped. The country passed over consisted mostly of scrubby sandhills covered with spinifex and we passed between some low hills before we reached the creek - there was a salt channel where we struck it and a long hole of brine existed there - there was plenty of good grass on a flat and we got some tolerably good water near where we fixed our camp; and when we had finished our evening meal the shades of night descended upon us in this our first bivouac in the unknown interior.  August 24th. - The mean of meridian altitudes of Vega and Altair last night placed me in latitude 24° 52' 15". The night was excessively cold and the thermometer had fallen by daylight this morning to 18° our blankets and packs were covered with a thick coating of ice when we awoke the tea left in the pannikins overnight had become solid cakes; the water in the creek was running so it of course did not become frozen. I determined to rest here for a couple of days as I had many matters to attend to - one of which was to unshoe all my horses as having now reached a soft country I would put the shoes away until I might require them again. From the high sandhills near the camp as far as I could discern either with the eye or the glass the creek seemed to be coming from the west. I took some back bearings upon the Pillar - and decided to travel on a north-west course when I started again; for although the creek appeared to come from the west and west was the point I desired to travel upon yet I could not be too cautious in proceeding as I felt certain that eventually it would turn up towards the north or north-west and I should only get caught in a long bend and have to go several miles to get out again. [13] The weather today was most agreeably warm and pleasant with slight breeze from the north-west. We saw the smoke of burning grass set on fire by the natives to the south beyond a line of ranges that lay in that direction; they had a very red appearance are composed of red sandstone - they had a series of ancient ocean watermarks along their sides traceable for miles - I called this Johnston's Range after my hospitable host at the Charlotte. There must be some natives about though we have not seen any since leaving the last-named place.  August 25th Sunday. - Last night was cold certainly but not so intense as the night previously the lowest the thermometer fell to was 30° but there was no appearance of ice or even frost; a very cold puff of wind aroused us from our slumbers about daylight - it continued from the west all day. The sun threw some rather fiery glances upon us about two and three o'clock; the thermometer rose to 110° in the sun but in the shade the temperature was agreeable enough. The flies were rather troublesome at times during the day but after three o'clock they mostly depart. As night approached we could see the brilliant flames of a large grass fire to the north about five or six miles distant; this had been started during the afternoon by some prowling son of the soil.  Monday 26th August. - Last night was again exceedingly cold the thermometer at daylight standing at 20°. Some wild animal or other must have been prowling round the camp in the night for my little dog exhibited great signs of pertubation for several hours. I and Robinson lay awake listening for any sounds that might give us an idea of our intruders and we both fancied we heard the sounds of human voices - we both got up and the little dog continued to bark but we neither saw or heard anything more.  The horses being near we made an early start this morning and bore away to the north-west over a sandhill country covered with spinifex; it was heavy and distressing travelling for the horses making them continually jog and jump from the pain caused by the countless prickings they received from the sharp thorny spines of the vegetation they had to pass through. [14] I continued upon this course for eleven miles; and though from the top of a high sandhill which we reached we could see nothing whatever of the Finke still I determined to continue another mile or two on this course hoping I had taken the right direction and that we should meet the creek in a few more miles. We therefore proceeded on and in two miles we came right upon the top of it running under a ridge of high sandhills - its course from this point appeared to incline a good deal to the northwards. The horses being very heavily packed and the spinifex having distressed them a good deal we followed along the bank of the creek and found a convenient spot where the horses could water without bogging and camped after a day's stage of thirteen miles. We passed a few clumps of the fine-looking oak trees I have before mentioned; they grow to a height of twenty to twenty-five feet of barrel without a branch and then spread out into a fine and shady top. They however appear to inhabit the poorest region as far as soil is concerned for they grow out of pure red sand. A few bushes also grow on these sandhills and the unfailing - or I might say unfeeling - spinifex is the only other vegetation. I also noticed a few specimens of a stunted kind of eucalypt of the mallee species. There was a large sheet of water near our camp and we shot a few ducks which were settled upon it when we arrived. The day was agreeably warm and pleasant with light cool breezes from the north-west. An apparently small tributary from the westward joins the Finke to the southwards from our camp and a rather high dark-looking hill forms its most southern embankment. The horizon to the west is bounded by broken ranges of no great elevation; they extend also up to the north-west The course of the creek from here being so much towards the north our westing is prevented for the present. As we ascend the Finke the country gradually rises and we are here about 250 feet above the level of the Charlotte Waters Station. [15]  Tuesday 27th August. - The early part of last night was remarkably warm; but towards midnight it became cold enough. The thermometer at daylight had fallen to 28° but there was neither frost nor dew. Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the stillness of the camp and we made an early start again this morning at eight o'clock.  Having discovered last evening that the creek not only trended north but more north-easterly I started on a bearing of N 2° E and passed over several high sandhills. In two miles we met the creek almost at right angles. I was unwilling to attempt to cross it on account of its frightful boggy bed: but rather than travel several miles roundabout I decided to try it. We got over it all right certainly - but to see horses sinking bodily in a mass of quaking quicksand is by no means an agreeable sight; and it was only by urging them on with whips to prevent them delaying that we accomplished it in safety; the horses we were riding getting the worst ground as it had been so ploughed up by the packhorses ahead of them. The whole bed of this peculiar creek appears a perfect quicksand; and when my readers are told it is nearly a quarter of a mile wide they will understand that it is not a feature to be slighted. A stream of slightly brackish water was flowing along its bed in a much narrower channel than its whole width; and where the water is there the bog is most to be apprehended. Sometimes it runs under one bank sometimes the opposite and sometimes in the middle; and a horse may walk upon apparently firm sand towards the stream when without a second's warning horse and rider may be engulfed in quicksand. In other places where it is firmer it will quake for yards all around and thus give some warning.  After crossing I proceeded upon the same course having the creek now upon my right hand - over more sandhills and through more spinifex for three miles being five from camp. [16]  Here I changed course to N 17° W and at one and a half miles reached a high sandhill. From this point I sighted a continuous range of hills to the north running east and west; and with the glasses I could see the creek bearing up for them. I changed my course for a conspicuous hill in the range bearing N 55° W again having the Finke close under our feet and lying right in our course. The alternative of travelling round the long bends was not an agreeable one; and as we had so successfully crossed it once this morning I decided to try it again. We descended to the bank and after great trouble in finding a place firm enough and sufficiently large to allow all the horses to stand upon (in the bed) we could not find a place where they could mount the opposite bank for under it was a long reach of water and a perfect quagmire extending for more than a mile on each side of us. Two of our riding horses were bogged in trying to find a getaway. Finally we had to bridge a place over with boughs and sticks and flood drift which took us some time. We eventually got them over one by one without accident or loss We then proceeded on our course and in four miles we touched upon the creek again but had no occasion to recross it as it was not in our road. At three miles further we crossed the dry channel of a small tributary from the ranges to the north of us which formed a junction with the main creek which here swept round an elbow towards the west. We found a good watering place in the course of another mile and encamped having travelled fifteen miles. The horizon from this camp is bounded from the southwest and west round by north to north-east by ranges which I am very glad to perceive; those to the south-west and west being the highest and most pointed. It appears that the creek must come under or through some of those to the north-west. The northern range is distant from camp about six miles: they appear timbered with mulga. Today I observed a most beautiful and to me quite new pigeon on the creek; it is of a dark-brown colour mottled under the throat and on the breast. It is considerably smaller than the Sturt pigeon; it had also a high topknot. [17] It flies in small flocks and runs along the ground for considerable distances.  Wednesday 28th August. - The temperature of the atmosphere last night was warmer than usual and the thermometer did not fall lower than 46°.  We made an early start this morning and proceeded on a north-west course for a pointed and peculiar hill in the ranges to the northwards of us which we reached in five miles and found the creek flowing at its base. We passed over the usual red sandhills covered with spinifex that characterize the Finke country; we also passed a shallow sheet of rainwater in a large claypan which is a rather rate feature to meet with in this part of the country. As we approached the hill I was steering for it assumed the appearance of a high pinnacle and the broken fragments of rocks upon its sides and summit made it too rough and precipitous to allow a person to climb up it; to the north the main line of hills to which this belongs shut out the view in that direction though I obtained a view of the Finke towards the west. I named this peculiar hill after my namesake Mr Christopher Giles who is also an officer on the Telegraph staff at the Charlotte but was absent on leave at the time of my visit there; and as he is an old Barrier Range acquaintance of mine I called this hill Christopher's Pinnacle and the range behind it Chandler's Range after Mr Chandler I met at the Charlotte.  The creek from here seemed to come from the west and the line of hills also trended the same way so I turned my course to N 80° W; in two miles we crossed the dry channel of a watercourse that comes directly from the hills to the N-W and joins the Finke at this spot - it was broad and shallow and had very little timber upon it. For some miles we had met with very little spinifex but here we came into it again to the manifest disgust of our horses. We were now travelling along the foot of the hills on our right with the creek upon our left hand; in six or seven miles we came to the western termination of Chandler's Range when we obtained a view to the N and N-W where I could see another and much higher range running east and west parallel to Chandler's Range but extending to the west as far as I could see. [18] The country hereabouts has nearly all been burnt by the natives; and the horses of course endeavour to pick roads where the dreaded spinifex has been destroyed. We passed a few clumps of oaks and a few stunted specimens of the native poplar today. At the end of twelve miles upon this bearing we struck the Finke again at right angles it here running N-and-S; we travelled seventeen miles today. I found a fine reach of water here and the creek has a stony bed so tonight at least our anxiety as regards the horses bogging is at an end; the stream running over its stony bed produces a most agreeable sound such as I have not heard for many a long month.  Soon after we had unpacked and let go our horses we were accosted by a cooey from a native on the opposite side of the creek - our little dog became furious and two natives then made their appearance. We made an attempt at a long conversation but signally failed as neither of us understood one word the other was saying so I shot a hawk for them and they departed. The weather today was most agreeably fine with cool breezes from the N-E; the sky has been rather overcast and the flies are most troublesome; it is probable we may have a slight fall of rain before long.  Thursday 29th August. - The night was cloudy and warm a few heat drops fell upon our blankets and made me regret I had not had our tents erected; however no fall took place so my anxiety with regard to the stores was at an end. When morning broke the atmosphere felt heavy and there was a sultriness in the air though the sky was clear; the lowest the thermometer fell to was 52° and at sunrise a smoky haze appeared all round the horizon until it pervaded the whole sky.  Whilst we were packing the horses this morning the same two natives made their appearance again bringing with them a third who was painted and feathered in the (as they doubtless thought) most alarming manner. I had just mounted my horse and rode towards them thinking I might get some little intelligence out of the warrior as to the course of the creek etc. but the instant they saw the horse approaching them they scampered off and the bedizened warrior projected himself into the friendly branches of the nearest tree with most astonishing velocity so I perceived it was useless to attempt to get near them with a horse without running them down which as I had no desire to do I left them. [19]  We crossed the creek here on its stony bed and travelled on a north-west course towards a mountain in the ranges that traversed the horizon in that direction; it also appeared the direction from whence the creek came. A breeze sprang up from the N-W also which caused the dust raised by the packhorses travelling upon loose soil where the grass had all been burnt to blow directly into our faces. At five miles on this course the creek returned to us in a bend and at this point we could perceive great volumes of smoke from burning grass rising in all directions; the natives I suppose finding it easier to catch game when the ground is bare or covered only with a short vegetation than when clothed with thick coarse grass or spinifex. At eight miles a tributary creek joins the Finke from the north or east of north. It had a broad sandy bed but was destitute of water at least where I saw it. At another mile on this course the main creek swept round to the westwards under the foot of the hills we had been gradually approaching. From here I changed my course to west and indeed a few degrees south of west and at four miles found we had parted with the Finke and were upon the bank of another tributary whose junction I had not noticed. The water was running along its bed but in a very slender stream. It was exceedingly boggy and we had to pass up a couple of miles before we found a crossing place; which we at length did. I named this McMinn's Creek after Mr McMinn I have mentioned in the opening of my diary. We turned north after crossing this creek over some stony mulga hills and came down upon the Finke again in two miles where we encamped having travelled seventeen miles. [20]   In the evening I ascended a mountain in the ranges to the north of us; it bore N 330 W; it was very stony and precipitous; it was composed of red sandstone; was of some elevation viz. 800 feet; it had no other vegetation upon it than huge plots of spinifex of the most beautiful and vivid green imaginable also having the most formidable spines and whenever one moves they enter one's clothes in all directions making it truly unpleasant to walk through. From the summit of this hill I could perceive that the Finke turned up towards the hills through a glen and entered them in a north-westerly direction from the camp. Other mountains appeared in all directions to the N and N-W; indeed this seemed to be a range of mountains of great length and breadth. To the eastward it stretched as far probably as the telegraph line and to the west as far as the eye could reach. The sun had gone down before I had finished taking bearings. Our road tomorrow will consequently be up through the glen the creek issues from. All day a most objectionable hot wind from the W and N-W has been blowing and clouds of smoke and ashes from the grass fires and clouds of dust from the loose soil has made it one of the most disagreeable days I have ever spent. At night however a contrast obtained - the wind dropped and a calm clear and beautiful night succeeded the hot smoky and dusty day.  Friday 30th August. - A meridian altitude of the bright star Vega last night gave me my latitude as 24° 25' 12"; and though yesterday had been so hot and disagreeable the night proved cold and chilly; the thermometer fell to 24° by daylight but there was no frost or even any dew to freeze. Our start this morning was rather late some of the horses having rambled in the night the feed at the camp not being very good; indeed the only green herb I have met for some considerable distance is the sow thistle which grows to a considerable height and the horses are extremely fond of it; it is also very fattening.  Having at length got under way we proceeded N-W for the mouth of the glen I mentioned yesterday through which the creek issues. [21] In two miles we found ourselves fairly enclosed by the hills which close in upon the creek upon both sides. We had to follow the windings of the channel which is most serpentine the mountains occasionally forming steep precipices overhanging the stream first upon one side then upon the other. We often had to lead the horses over ledges of rocks - crossing and recrossing the creek perpetually. When we encamped we had only made good eleven miles though to accomplish this we travelled more than double the distance.  We camped close to the junction of a branch creek that comes out of the mountain to the westwards. There was a good-sized waterhole at its mouth. I have named this Phillips's Creek after Mr Phillips the telegraph stationmaster at Port Augusta who was kind enough to make me a valuable present when passing through that town. This range of mountains is composed of red sandstone in large or small fragments piled up in the most grotesque shapes. Here and there caves and caverns are to be seen in the sides of the hills. A few pine (Callitris) trees were seen upon the summits of the higher mounts. The hills and country generally inside this glen are more fertile than those outside having real grass instead of spinifex upon their sides. I saw two or three natives just before camping. They were upon the opposite side of the creek which always appears a slight weakness of theirs. Just at the time I saw them I had my eye upon some ducks upon the waterhole I therefore determined to kill two birds with one stone that is to say shoot the ducks and astonish the natives at the same time. I dismounted and got behind a tree (the natives watching me most intently the while) and fired; two only were shot and the remainder of the ducks and the natives (apparently) flew away together. Our travels today were agreeable the day was fine the breeze cool and the scenery continually changing - the creek continually taking the most sinuous windings imaginable; the bed of it as might be expected through such a glen is rough and stony and the old fear of horses bogging has departed from us. By bearings upon familiar hills I find our course in a straight line has been nearly N 23° W. [22]  Saturday 31st August. - Last night was clear and cold the stars those sentinels of the sky appearing intensely bright; and to the explorer they must ever be objects of admiration and love as to them he is indebted for his guidance through the untrodden wilderness he is traversing. The thermometer went down to 24° by daylight but upon the appearance of the sun the temperature rose rapidly. A large flock of several hundreds of pelicans made their appearance upon the waterhole near the camp this morning but immediately they discovered us they made off before a shot could be fired at them; they came from the north-westward and indeed all the aquatic birds that I have seen upon the wing come and go in that direction; though there are plenty of small fish in the Finke yet I do not think they are large enough for mobs of pelicans to exist upon; these birds must have come from some larger waters I should suppose up in the tropic; the largest fish I have seen in the Finke was not bigger than a sardine. I am in hopes we shall get through this glen today for however picturesque and wild the scenery it is very difficult and bad travelling for the horses and consequently more trouble to get them along.  We made but a late start this morning; there was no other road than to continue following the windings of the creek through this mountain-bound glen in the same manner as yesterday. After travelling some miles I observed several natives in the glen ahead of us. Immediately upon their discovering us they raised a great outcry - made several fires and raised great volumes of smoke probably as signals to their friends in the first instance and to intimidate us in the second - which latter effect did not take place. They then considered it their interests to be off themselves and they ran away further up the glen; I saw also another lot of some twenty or thirty scudding away over the rocks and hills to our right; they left all their valuables in the camp which we saw as we passed. [23] One gentleman most vehemently apostrophized us from the summit of a rocky hill and most probably ordered us away out of his country. We paid as may be supposed but little attention to his yells; as his words to us were only wind we passed on leaving him and his camp as mere incidents in a day's march. Soon after leaving his camp I had the gratification to discover a magnificent specimen of the fan palm growing in the channel of the watercourse with the drift of floods washed against its stem its dome-shaped frondage contrasting strangely with the paler-green foliage of the gum trees that surrounded it. It was a perfectly new botanical feature to me nor did I expect ever to have met it in this latitude. Stuart found a specimen in the MacDonnell Range but that was just inside the tropic. I had certainly been on the lookout for such an object as I had noticed portions of palm leaves and branches in the flood drifts against the butts of the trees in the glen. This fine specimen was sixty feet high in the barrel. I obtained a quantity of its leaves for my kind and generous friend the Baron von Mueller which I brought with me. After passing the palm tree we continued our march amongst the defiles of this mountain glen which appears to have no termination for no signs of a break could be seen or anything but a continuation of this range observed from any of the hills I ascended. It was late in the afternoon when we left the palm tree and in two miles further we encamped; the distance we had travelled since starting was considerably over twenty miles but I only made good twelve in a straight line from last camp.  Sunday 1st September. - Last night was bright and cool but the thermometer did not descend lower than 34°. This being Sunday I made it a day of rest at least for the horses. I was myself compelled to make an excursion into the hills to endeavour to discover when and where this interminable glen would cease for with all its grandeur picturesqueness and variety of scenery it was such a difficult road for the horses and so stony that I was getting heartily tired of it. [24]  I climbed some hills to the west of the camp and passed over cliffs and precipices of red sandstone and at length reached the summit of a pine-clad mountain considerably higher than any other near it. Its elevation was 1000 feet above the level of the surrounding country. From here I obtained a view to all points of the compass except the west. From here I could descry mountains from the north-east round by north to the north-north-west at which point a very high and pointed mountain showed its top above the surrounding hills in its neighbourhood; it appeared fifty miles away. To the north and east of north a massive chain with many dome-shaped summits were visible: below me towards the camp I could distinguish the channel of the creek where it forced its way under the perpendicular sides of the hills and at a spot not far above the camp it seemed split into two or rather I should say it was joined by another creek from the north or little west of north. From the junction the course of the main creek turned more directly to the west. At about ten miles along the course of the tributary I could see an open piece of country and I thought I discovered with the glasses a sheet of water not far from the foot of the hills but it was too indistinct to be sure. I was glad to find a break at last in this chain though it was not on the line I should travel; still I hoped a few more miles would bring me out on the main creek also the course of which I could not distinguish for more than a mile and that mile was west from the junction. Having expended several hours in my rambles I returned to camp to impart to my companions the result of my observations.  Monday 2nd September. - Last night was slightly cloudy and warm the thermometer not falling lower than to 60°. There was a heaviness in the atmosphere that felt like approaching rain. We started early and proceeded down the glen still following its mazy windings.  In less than two miles we passed the junction of the northern tributary I had noticed yesterday and continued on over rocks under precipices crossing and recrossing the creek turning and winding to all points of the compass. [25] One bend may perhaps run west for half a mile the next turn will perhaps be south and so on so that nearly three miles has to be travelled to make one good. Today we passed several clumps of the beautiful palm trees growing mostly in the bed of the creek which helped considerably to enliven the scenery. I collected also today and during the other days we have been in this glen a number of the most beautiful flowers which grow in profusion in this otherwise desolate glen. I was literally surrounded by fair flowers of many a changing hue. Why Nature should scatter such floral gems in such a stony sterile region is difficult to understand but such a variety of lovely flowers of every colour and perfume I have never met with previously. They alone would have induced me to name this Glen Flora but having found in it also so many of the stately palm trees I have called it the Glen of Palms. While we were travelling a few slight showers fell upon us giving us warning that heavier falls might be expected. I was most anxious to reach the mouth of the glen if possible by night so heartily tired was I of such a continuously serpentine track. I therefore kept pushing on. We encountered several natives today but they invariably fled into the fastnesses of their mountain homes. They raised great volumes of smoke however and their vociferations only ceased when we got out of earshot. The pattering of the raindrops became heavier; yet I kept on hoping on every turn to see an opening which would form the end or rather the beginning of this glen; but night and rain descended upon us and I was compelled to encamp another night in this valley.  I found a small sloping sandy and firm piece of ground a little off from the creek having some bloodwood trees growing upon it and above the reach of any flood mark. One can never be too careful in selecting a site for a camp on a watercourse for in one night a flood might come and wash everything to destruction. I was very fortunate in finding so favourable a spot as there was sufficient ground for the horses to feed upon and some good feed upon it also. [26] By the time we had our rents erected and everything snug the rain fell in earnest; but we were warm and comfortable and fell asleep in peace and tranquillity thanking Providence we were much better off than many of our fellow creatures in the midst of civilization. The tributary whose junction we passed this morning I have named Ellery's Creek after our well-known and esteemed astronomer Dr Ellery; and the glen through which it meanders into the Finke I have named after another scientific and well-known gentleman Mr Todd the pushing Superintendent of the South Australian Telegraph Department. The actual distance travelled today in a straight line was eighteen miles to accomplish which we travelled from morning until night.  Tuesday 3rd September. - The rain continued at intervals all night but the showers were slight and no great quantity of water fell. In the morning the sky was clear towards the south but to the north dense clouds covered the hills and the weather was too broken to allow of our travelling today. I took another ramble into the hills to the east of the camp and upon reaching the first rise I saw what I was most anxious to see viz. the end of the glen. It appeared the glen continued for only another mile or two and the creek then came winding away from the north-west; dense volumes of clouds and mist obscured the view to the north and it appeared evident that more rain had fallen there or probably was now falling than had descended upon us. At midday the whole sky became overcast and more rain fell; up to night it fell in slight showers but when night had fairly set in it fell heavier.  Wednesday 4th September. - Rain fell throughout the whole night but the showers being light no great quantity of water had as yet fallen; an hour after daylight however it came down in more volume which continued for several hours. At twelve o'clock it held up a bit and I took the opportunity to plant some seeds of various plants and vegetables given me specially by the Baron von Mueller. Amongst them were some blue gum indian grain white maize prairie grass sorghum rye grass etc. etc. also some wattle seeds which I soaked according to instructions before planting. [27] The rain lasted about thirty-six hours and altogether nearly three-quarters of an inch fell. Towards evening the sky became clear and the night was dry though occasionally cloudy.  Thursday 5th September. - It was with great pleasure this morning that we saw the rain had ceased and that we should be able to get out of the glen at last.  In about two miles after starting we debouched upon the plain that ended at the foot of this chain of mountains which I conceive to be the western portion of the two lines of ranges converging into one named by Stuart the James and Waterhouse Range. The horses appeared especially pleased to be upon soft ground again. The length of this glen is considerable as it occupies 31' of latitude which is equal to nearly forty English miles; the main bearing of the glen is nearly N 25° W; it is without doubt the longest glen I ever traversed and it appears to be the only pass through this range. I have called this mass of hills the Krichauff Range after Fred Krichauff Esq. of Adelaide an old university friend of Baron Mueller. Now that we were fairly out on the open country I found we had a higher and more imposing chain of mountains immediately to the north of us and that the extent of country between the two lines of ranges was not much more than about twenty miles if that though some of the foothills of the northern chain came much nearer to us. The northern chain is the western portion of the MacDonnell Range of Stuart; the creek is broader than when in the glen its bed is stony however still. I fancied I noticed the junction of another from the northwards. The country now was pretty level sandy and thinly timbered; nearly all the bushes had been burnt by grass fires set alight by the natives which appears a perfect custom of theirs. We travelled upon the right bank of the creek and cut off the bends which however were by no means so extensive or so serpentine as they were on the south side of the glen or in the glen itself. [28] We met very little spinifex for a great part of the day's stage as we mostly kept near the creek but there was abundance of it not far off. The creek took us to the foothills of the big mountains to the northwards of us and we camped about a mile below a gorge through which it issues.  Our course today was nearly north-north-west and we travelled seventeen miles. As we neared the hills we became sensible that the late rains were beginning to rise the waters of the creek the sound of it rushing over its stony bed lulled us to repose. We shot a few ducks today - six in all; they are very fat and good eating. At about six miles before we camped we crossed the channel of a tributary joining the Finke at right angles from the west. There are also some ranges out in that direction from whence probably the creek takes its source; the rains have caused a slight flood to take place in it. My next anxiety is to discover how and where this creek goes next or if its sources are to be found in this chain of mountains. The day delightfully fine and cool and the sky clear. The country is rather soft after the rains.  Friday 6th September. - Last night was cold and breezy; the thermometer went down by daylight to 30°. I found my position here to be in latitude 23° 40' longitude 132° 31'; the variation I previously found was 3° east. I did not move the camp today but took a ramble into the hills to discover the best route to travel upon next. I have reached the foot of a range of mountains whose eastern portions Stuart called the MacDonnell Range; and at this part of them they are formed of three separate lines of hills all running E-and-W. The most northern of the three are the highest and indeed are of considerable elevation being 2000 feet above the level of the surrounding country and according to my barometrical admeasurements I found that at Charlotte Waters I was 900 feet above the sea; from that point up the Finke to the foot of the MacDonnell Range I found the country rose over 1000 feet so the highest points of that range are over 4000 feet above the sea level. [29] As I said before the most northern line is the highest; the other two lines of hills may be called only foothills to the higher chain; the most southern and lowest is formed of sandstone the middle tier is of basalt and I believe the main chain is of basalt also.  After leaving the camp I climbed for several hours over masses of hills but always found one just a little further on that shut out the view. At length I reached the summit of a high round mountain in the middle tier and a most varied and splendid panorama was spread out before me. To the north was the main chain composed for the most part of individual high mounts with lower ridges between them; there was a valley however between the hills I was on and the main tier and meandering along through this valley from the west I could trace by its timber the course of the Finke for some few miles. To the east a mass of high and jumbled mounts appeared and one bluff-faced mount was more conspicuous than the test. It is probably the Paisley's Bluff of Stuart. Nearer to me and nearly under my feet was the gorge through which the creek passes and it appears to be the only pass through the chain. I approached the gorge and from the top of a cliff I found that the late rains had so flooded the creek that the whole pass was filled with a roaring torrent and that it would be impossible to get the horses up through it at present and that the hills which enclosed it were equally impracticable for it would be next to impossible to get horses over them. The view to the west was gratifying for the ranges appeared to run on in undiminished height in that direction or a little north of it and it appeared to me the creek must run along this valley for some distance if it does not take its rise amongst these hills. From the face of some of the hills I climbed over today I saw several springs of pure water running but if caused by the late rains or permanent I could not decide. One hill which I passed over I found to be composed of what is called puddingstone that is to say a conglomeration of all kinds of stones mostly rounded and mixed up in one mass and formed by the smothered bubblings of some ancient and ocean-quenched volcano. [30] The surface of the places I now more particularly mention have been worn smooth by the action of the passage of water so that it presented the appearance of an enormous tessellated pavement before which the celebrated one at Bognor in Sussex which I remember seeing when a boy when on a visit to Goodwood though more artistically but not more fantastically arranged would be compelled to hide its diminished head. I noticed a great quantity of flowers upon the hills in the course of my walk but as I had collected specimens of the same in the Glen of Palms and no new ones appearing among them I did not gather any today. I saw also two kangaroos and one rock wallaby. By the time I reached camp it was nearly sundown and I felt quite disposed for retiring early to rest. [31]    2. SEPTEMBER 7TH TO SEPTEMBER 30TH  SATURDAY 7th September. - I had come to the conclusion in my own mind that as it was impossible to follow the creek through the gorge in consequence of the flood and that the hills were impracticable to fall back upon the tributary I had noticed the day before yesterday as joining the Finke from the west thinking I might in the course of twenty or thirty miles find a gap in the northern range which would enable me to reach the Finke again. The night was very cold: the thermometer fell to 28° by daylight. The creek had risen still higher in the night and it was impossible to attempt the gorge. I therefore turned away to west-south-west in order to strike the tributary that joined the creek below the camp.  We passed over some rough stony ridges covered with spinifex. We next met a thickly-bushed sandy country and struck the creek in about ten miles. After travelling another mile along it I found it trended too much towards the south as though it came from a different direction to that which I expected; so I camped at a place where another small dry channel joined it from the north - the new range lying west that I spoke of before and which I expected to be the source of this creek being too far to reach in one day. There was little or no feed at this camp; not that there was no grass such as it was - viz. old and dry: the horses will not look at that having generally had green sow thistles all along the Finke where they grew in the lateral channels. This important western tributary of the River Finke skirting the south base of the western portion of MacDonnell Range has received the name Rudall's Creek in honour of an eminent surgeon and promoter of science in the Victorian metropolis and a friend of Baron Mueller. [32]  Sunday 8th September. - The night was cold and very dewy making all the packs and blankets wet and clammy. The thermometer fell to 30°; but instantly upon the sun's appearance it went up enormously. In consequence of the poor feed here the horses rambled and we made but a late start.  I proceeded on a nearly west course direct for the range I said lay in that direction. It appeared isolated and of some elevation. I bore for the centre of it. It appeared six or seven miles long running north-and-south. It seemed about fifteen miles distant. We passed along the bank of the little creek which joins this one for a mile or two. We then entered a mulga-timbered country which ended in a stony ridge of mallee and spinifex which was so dense that it was with great difficulty we forced our way into it. It was fortunately only about three miles through and it ended by forming the eastern bank of the creek we had camped on and which we now met at right angles. The bed here was stony; the slight flood had nearly ceased running but there were several small pools full where we met it. We watered the horses and proceeded having travelled ten miles. The day was one of the warmest we had yet felt and pushing through the scrubs had made both men and horses thirsty. The creek here was trending nearly north-and-south and it seemed it did nor come from the range we were making for; but I thought it only reasonable to suppose that water would be obtained there so soon after rain. The country after crossing the creek consisted of open high sandhills covered with spinifex; and here I noticed for the first time in several hundreds of miles that I had travelled to this point a quantity of the grass-tree (Xanthorrhoea) dotting the landscape. They were of all heights from two to twelve feet. We reached the foot of the range in six miles from the creek. The country round its base is not devoid of a certain kind of wild beauty. A few bloodwood trees with their brilliant green foliage enlivened the scene; and as I noticed a small gum creek issuing from an opening in the range I rode up the glen in search of water; but though I went three or four miles I was perfectly unsuccessful as not a drop of the life-sustaining fluid was to be found. [33] On returning to impart this pleasing intelligence to the others I stumbled upon a small quantity in a depression on a broad sandstone rock that lay in the bed of the creek. Altogether there was about two quarts. It was too late to return to the creek; and as the horses had so recently watered it would nor hurt them to go without for one night especially as there was a quantity of fine green vetch or small pea which they devour eagerly.  After supper which with so small a quantity of water might be justly termed a frugal meal I ascended a small eminence near the camp to the north and with the glasses I could distinguish the creek we had last left about three or four miles off now running east-and-west. I also saw water gleaming in its channel; and more easterly at the spot where the little creek we were camped upon joined the other there was also water but it was equally far away. As the horses were feeding that way and had already got a mile towards it I made sure they would follow down the creek and water themselves; but it is very strange when one wants horses to do a certain thing or feed a certain way they are almost sure to disappoint one and so it was in the present case. On returning to camp by a circuitous route I was fortunate enough to discover in a small rock reservoir an additional supply of water for our own requirements there being in this last reservoir the enormous quantity of nearly a bucketful. However it was sufficient for us and felicity reigned in the camp.  This range is composed entirely of red and white sandstone. A few-pines are rooted in the rocky shelving sides of the hills. It is not of such elevation as it appeared from a distance the highest points being not more than 700 or 800 feet. I collected some botanical specimens of the plants bushes and flowers which however are not peculiar to this range alone. I named this Gosse's Range after Mr Harry Gosse who had been out from the Alice Springs Telegraph Station; but where his travels took him to I did not hear. [34] It seemed that the late rains had not visited this isolated mass. Iris barren and covered with spinifex from turret to basement wherever the stones are not too thickly planted to prevent its growth.  Monday 9th September. - The night like the preceding one was cold and dewy and the thermometer fell to 30°. The horses it seems wandered quite in the wrong direction during the night and it was eleven o'clock before we got away from camp.  We went away north for the sheet of water I had seen from the top of the little hill near the camp in the creek about three miles off to the north. Upon arrival we watered the horses and proceeded up the creek as its course here appeared to be nearly from the west. The country along its banks was level open sandy and covered with spinifex. I passed several grass-trees again today. At various distances several small tributaries joined the creek from the ranges to the north of us but I saw no water in any of them. We found water in the main creek all along its channel; but I do not think we should have been so fortunate had it not been for the late rains. Our course today was nearly west-by-north and the distance thirteen miles in a straight line. The weather was rather warm today and I did not feel comfortable until I abandoned my coat. The lines of foothills of the northern range are still running parallel to our course and they hide from our view the country in that direction.  Tuesday 10th September. - Last night was considerably warmer than any we have experienced as yet except perhaps the night of Sunday the 1st. The thermometer fell no lower than to 50°.  We made an early start this morning and continued along the creek we had been following for the last two days. At four miles I found it turned up to the north-west then to the north and it became confined on both sides by stony mallee hills forming a small glen. I continued up the glen for two or three miles thinking it might open out; but such was not the case and I was compelled to leave it and ascend the mallee hills upon its western bank. [35] The hills from whence the creek issues were not many miles away to the north and the country between us and them was all malice stony hills. I now travelled about west-north-west over malice hills of the most wretched and frightfully barren description. The scrub was very thick and we had very difficult work to keep the horses in a body at all as they each endeavoured to find an easy path for themselves. This continued for several miles until we reached one ridge higher than the rest and which I found to be the highest the horses had ever passed over since leaving the Charlotte. From here with the glasses I fancied I saw the timber of a creek in a valley to the north-west; at all events I could see the country was not stony malice so I made off in that direction and soon came upon the channel of a small gum creek which was the first I had met whose waters flow towards the west - not that there was any water when I saw it but the flood-drifts against the timber on its banks indicated the direction of its fall. I followed the creek down hoping to meet with water; but it ran into another and rather larger one in the bed of which after following it for a mile or two I found a small pool. The water had evidently lain there many months as it was half slime and drying up fast; it was evident the late rains had not fallen here.  We were travelling for a long time today and made a stage of nineteen miles; and our course was a little west of north-west though we made traverses upon nearly all the northern points of the compass during the day. The weather was quite warm enough and when we encamped we felt the benefit of what shade the creek timber could afford. There was good feed here for the horses - some of the small vetch or pea they are so fond of. The grass is useless being old long and withered. Today in the glens formed by the creek we encamped upon yesterday I saw a single quondong tree in full bearing but the fruit not yet ripe. I also saw a pretty drooping kind of acacia tree whose leaves hang in small bunches together giving it an elegant and pendulous appearance. It grows to some height; two or three I saw must have been forty or fifty feet and over a foot through. [36] The flies today were exceedingly troublesome. I have not seen much game lately with the exception of a few emus. I noticed one native orange tree (Capparis) of a very poor and stunted habit.  Wednesday 11th September. - The night was again remarkably warm and the thermometer fell only to 52°. My latitude last night I found to be in 23° 29' S which placed us almost under the tropic line.  The horses having remained within sight of the camp all night I made an early start this morning intending to follow this new creek which received the name of my companion Mr Carmichael and I hoped it would take me some considerable distance on my road to the west. It soon appeared its course was considerably to the south of west. However I followed it for several miles when it turned up again to the north-west. The main line of mountains we had still upon our right or north of us: and to the south of us another line of lower hills trended up in a north-westerly direction towards them and towards the west or west-north-west there seems a kind of gap between the two lines of ranges about twenty-five miles off and I hope this creek will carry us that far. The country along the banks of the creek was open and sandy with plenty of old grass and not much spinifex but to the south malice and spinifex seemed to approach very near. I saw several small ponds in the creek as we passed along but none of any size. Where the creek turned up to the north-west the malice upon the south bank gradually encroached and at length formed its southern bank. I had only followed it seven or eight miles when I found it showed signs of falling off and split into several channels and eventually ran out on an open swamp or plain. Another small creek from the north joined before this finally exhausted itself and they both ended on the plain and there was no water to be got in either channel. The little plain looked green and most agreeable. I found some rainwater in claypans upon it; and as the feed was so excellent I encamped upon it. [37]  There were numerous kangaroos and emus on the plain when I arrived but they did not remain in our company long. I noticed in the malice on the south bank of the creek today a tree I had not before seen; its bark was dark like mulga but its leaves were like the curragong. I brought some away with me. My course today was nearly west though I travelled south-west north-west and north to reach the spot where I encamped distance fourteen miles.  Thursday 12th September. - I remained at this camp today for the benefit of the horses as the grass was excellent; indeed this is the most agreeable and fertile little spot I have met for some time. It consists of a small plain bounded upon the north by the most peculiar-looking mountains. It is also fringed with scrub nearly all round. The appearance of the northern mountains is most singular and grotesque and very difficult to describe. There appears to be still three distinct lines one of which ends in a bluff to the east-north-east of the camp; another line ends likewise in a bluff to the north-north-east named Haast's Bluff after Dr Haast geologist Canterbury New Zealand an old alpine explorer; the third continues along the northern horizon. One higher point than the rest in that line bears N 26° W from camp. The middle line of hills is the most strange looking. It recedes in the distance eastwards in almost regular steps or notches each step or notch being a bluff itself and all overlooking a valley. The bluffs all have a circular curve are all coloured red and looking at them in perspective appear like a gigantic flat stairway only that they have an oblique tendency to the southward caused I presume by the wash of the ocean currents that at perhaps no greatly-distant geological period must have swept over them. My eyes however were mostly bent upon the high peak in the northern line and Mr Carmichael and I decided to walk over to ascend it. We started at two o'clock and though it was apparently not more than seven or eight miles off it was nearly midnight before we again reached the camp. [38]  As the reader is aware I left the Finke issuing through an impracticable (at the time) gorge in these same mountains now some seventy-five miles behind me and during that distance not a break had occurred in the lines of mountains whereby I could either get over or through them and thus meet that stream again; indeed at this distance it was doubtful if it were worthwhile to endeavour to do so as one can never tell what change may take place in the course of a creek in that distance. The last time I saw it it was trending along a valley under the foot of the highest tier of hills and coming from the west but whether its sources are in those hills or it extends still west and a little to the north of me that is to say on the other side of the chain of hills to the north of me is the question I hope to solve by ascending the high point I have said lays about seven or eight miles off. I am the more anxious to reach the Finke (if it is still in this region) as on the route I have been travelling water has been by no means too plentiful and I believe that a better country altogether exists upon the other side of these mountains.  At starting for the mountain Mr Carmichael and I passed over at first the plain upon whose southern edge we were encamped. It was beautifully grassed having good soil upon it and it would make a fine (bush) racecourse or be an excellent spot for hunting kangaroos and emus of which we saw a great number. In about three miles the plain ended in a thick indeed very dense mulga scrub which continued to the foot of the hills. The grass was long dry and tangled with dead and burnt sticks and timber and it was exceedingly troublesome to walk through it. Upon reaching the hills I found the natives had recently burnt all the vegetation from their sides leaving the stones of which it is composed perfectly bare. It was a long distance to the top of this first ridge but the incline was easy and I was in great hopes if it continued like this to be able to get the horses up over the mountains at this spot; but upon arriving at the top of this hill I was soon undeceived upon that score for the high mountain for which we were steering we found completely separated from us by a yawning chasm which lay under an almost sheer precipice at our feet. [39] The higher mountain beyond was girt around by a solid wall of basalt of fifty or sixty feet in height from the top of which the summit rose. It was quite unapproachable except in one place round to the northwards of it. The solid rock of which it had formerly been composed had by some mighty effort of Nature been split into innumerable fissures and fragments both perpendicularly and horizontally and was almost mathematically divided into pieces or squares simply placed one upon another like mason work without mortar; the lower strata of the hill being large the upper ones tapering to pieces not much larger than a brick. The whole appearance of this singular mountain was grand and awful and I could not but reflect upon the time when these colossal ridges were all at once rocking in the convulsive tremblings of a mighty volcanic shock which shivered them into the fragments I now beheld.  I said the hill we had ascended abruptly ended in a precipice. By going further round to our left we found a spot which was practicable but difficult enough to descend. At the bottom of some of the ravines below I could see several small pools of water gleaming in little stony gullies. The afternoon had been warm not to say hot and our walk and climbing exertions had made us thirsty and the sight of water made us all the more so. It was now nearly sundown and it would be useless to attempt to ascend the high mountain as by the time we could reach its summit the sun would be far below the horizon and we should obtain no view after all. It was however evident that no gap or pass existed by which I could get my horses up even if the country beyond were never so promising. A few pine trees dotted the summits of the hills and they also grew on the sides of some of the ravines. We had at least I had considerable difficulty in descending the almost perpendicular face of the bill to the water we saw below. When I reached it Mr Carmichael had had time to lave his feet and legs in a fine little rockhole full of pure water filled I suppose by the late rains. [40] The water indeed had not yet ceased to run for it was trickling from hole to hole. Upon Mr C. inquiring what delayed me so long I replied 'Ah it is all very easy for you you have two circumstances in your favour - you are young and therefore able to climb; and besides you are in the tropic. To which he very naturally replies If I am in the tropic you must be also'. I benignly answer No you are in the tropic clime of youth'.  No view of any kind except along the mountains for a mile or two east-and-west could be obtained. I was greatly disappointed at having such a terrible walk for nothing. We returned by a more circuitous route down a small water channel; we soon however had to take to the scrub. We eventually reached the camp at nearly twelve thoroughly tired out with our walk. I have since named the high mountain which I did not reach Mount Musgrave after His Excellency the new Governor of South Australia. It is of considerable elevation being 1600 feet above the level of the surrounding country and over 3000 above the sea.  Friday 13th September. - Having many small matters to attend to in camp I remained here another day. The thermometer fell only to 50° last night. This morning there was a very cold breeze which we all felt keenly probably because the last few days have been so warm. The sky all day has been overcast and there is a feeling like approaching rain in the atmosphere. There were several emus and kangaroos near this camp and there were a few other birds such as crows and hawks quail and bronze-winged pigeons. Mr Carmichael went out today to shoot a kangaroo but it appeared he was unsuccessful.  Saturday 14th September. - The thermometer at daylight was rather high standing at 55° warning us of the approach of a warm day; the flies were soon very busy at our eyes and soon after sunrise it became hot. We got away early from camp and proceeded across the little plain in the direction of another high bluff-faced mountain which loomed over the surrounding country - to the west-north-west. [41] In three miles we had traversed the plain and entered a mulga scrub which had been recently burnt by the natives - the further we proceeded through this the worse it got. At seven miles we came upon mallee stones and spinifex - the mallee we found so dense that not a third of the horses could be seen together and it was with the greatest difficulty we managed to get through it to the foot of a small pine-clad hill lying under the foot of the high bluff before mentioned. There was a small gum creek which comes down from the high mountains and runs under the little pine-clad hill; we only travelled twelve miles but that distance through such a scrub took many hours. We passed three other small creeks before we reached the pine hill; they all run south-west and form a larger one which I could see from the top of the pine hill about two or three miles off. Mr Carmichael went up this little creek and found a small rocky waterhole with barely sufficient water for our use. Here I encamped as it was very acceptable the day had been disagreeably warm and working in the scrub had made both men and horses thirsty.  I left Mr Carmichael and Robinson to unpack the horses and rode over to the creek I had seen to the south - I found two small puddles in its bed but not sufficient for the requirements of my horses - there was however plenty to be got by digging as the bed of the creek was damp and wet and by scratching with my hands I soon got some. The camp was fixed in a wretched place - in the midst of thick malice and thick plots of spinifex which we had to cut away before we could sit down. We could not see a yard ahead of us in any direction except that of the sky where the big bluff was observable. I was sorry to find that the horses had been let go without hobbles and as they had been in such fine quarters for three nights at the last camp it was more than probable they would make back through the scrub to it and on the morning of  Sunday 15th September not a horse was to be found. The night was sultry and the thermometer did not descend lower than 60°. [42] Robinson and I went in search of them we found they had split up into several mobs. I found three in one lot and at night Robinson returned with only six more; the remainder had been missed in the dense scrub.  The day was exceedingly warm the thermometer stood at 95° in the shade and there was also a warm wind blowing. Robinson and I started on foot and as he had to go back to the last camp before he found his mob and then drive them through that wretched scrub by himself he had a Line day's work of it. I got my three much closer at hand and after returning to camp in the afternoon I attempted the high bluff immediately overlooking the camp. I had a great deal of cliff climbing and reached the summit of one mountain of considerable elevation it being 1300 feet and then found that a vast chasm or ravine separated me from the main mountain chain; it being near sundown when I reached the summit of the one I was on and as it would have taken me two or three hours to get up to the summit of the highest it would be too dark to get any view therefore I did not attempt it; it was of great height as it towered above the hill I was upon and was 500 or 600 feet higher than it. By the time I reached the camp Robinson had but just returned. I collected a few botanical specimens at this camp for my generous patron Baron von Mueller. The mountain I ascended and the higher bluff were composed of basalt - very little timber existed upon them but they were clothed with spinifex to their summits; several beautiful flowers grew upon them which I collected.  Monday 16th September. - The night was again sultry and cloudy the thermometer not falling below 60°; it rose rapidly with the sun and it was evident that we were to have another hot day.  Robinson and I went again on horseback after the missing horses. We had to return through the scrub to our old camp upon the plain and then we found them all with the exception of one which was still absent; by the time we returned with them to camp it was evening again. [43] The weather having been very hot the thermometer in the shade at the camp had stood at 96°. Not hobbling my horses in general - we had some difficulty in raising a pair for each horse - and not being able to do so I left one in the mob without and the consequence was the ungrateful reptile crept away by himself.  Tuesday 17th September. - The night was again exceedingly sultry; the thermometer stood at 62° at daylight. As this camp was the most wretched hole it was possible for any white man to have got into being in the midst of dense mallee and spinifex and stones I determined to escape from it before attempting to look for the two still-missing horses; and as there was the other creek two or three miles away which the one we were on emptied into I packed up and went to it three miles S-W. In fact the water at the camp was completely done as there was only a small quantity when we first camped at it and on that account alone I should have been compelled to leave it. I camped upon the new creek at the little holes I had seen before but the surface water had almost disappeared. We therefore had to dig out the sand and by that means we obtained a sufficiency by a great deal of labour.  In the afternoon Robinson and I again went to look after the two missing horses. We followed up this creek and found some water in it three miles above the camp; presently we found the tracks of one horse and found he had been about there for a day or two as the tracks were old. We made a sweep out round some hills and found the tracks again much fresher. Eventually we found the little horse feeding by himself six or seven miles up the creek above the camp. It was too late then to go further to look for the other horse so we returned to camp. The day was again very hot the thermometer at the camp having gone up to 96°. The sky was very much overcast and rain appeared imminent.  Wednesday 18th September. - In the course of the night some drops of rain fell; it was cloudy and close and the thermometer at daylight stood at 61°. [44] I sent Robinson away back to our old camp upon the little plain feeling pretty sure that as the missing horse had returned there once he would do so again; and as he had had plenty of time to get through the scub I thought it probable Robinson would have only to ride there to get him. There was a hot wind blowing today from the N-W. The sand was flying about in all directions and it was a most uncomfortable and disagreeable day; the thermometer indicated 96° in the shade and I was only too glad when night approached as the wind seemed inclined to lull. Robinson returned in the evening having been successful in finding the horse at the old feeding ground and I took special care to find a pair of hobbles for him for this night at all events. The atmosphere was heavy and overloaded and it seemed probable a fall of rain would occur as the heat we had experienced for the past few days was quite unseasonable the flies also were most insufferably pertinacious not that they were so numerous but I never met even amongst their congeners upon the Darling anything like such persistence and I therefore consider the tropic fly of Australia the most abominable insect of its kind.  At this camp we were about five miles from the high bluff and which was now to the east of north from us. From the top of the mount I ascended on Sunday I found the line (now called the Liebig Mountains after Baron Justus von Liebig from whose great chemical researches Australia has also already so much benefited) of mountains still ran on towards the west - they would not intercept the horizon at that point exactly but they would so at west-by-north. The farthest range I could see from the hill appeared forty or forty-five miles distant and they took a sweep or curve round in a northerly direction; the most distant one I saw appeared still high. I could not discover the conformation of the whole line on account of the curve which I said they took and which some nearer high points intercepted. However as I know they extend forty miles I shall still follow them in hopes of meeting some creek or other ranges that will carry me on towards the west. [45] It is a most remarkable fact that such high mountains whose feet I have been travelling along should send out no creek whose course extends longer than ten or twelve miles. The creek upon which lam now camped I could trace by its timber for a few miles; its course was at first nearly west then it appeared to turn more to the south. The country in its immediate neighbourhood is open and timbered with fine oak trees; the grass is long and dry and the spinifex approaches within a quarter of a mile of the banks. I have now reached the farthest or most western point of the line of hills we have had for some distance upon our left to the south of us. I named this line of hills Gardiner's Range as Mr Carmichael desired me to do so after a friend of his. Though there is still one small isolated hill the furthest outpost of the line some three miles away to the south-west the creek may probably take a bend down under it. This creek is rather well timbered the gums look fresh and young and there is some green herbage in places though the surface water has all disappeared.  Thursday 19th September. - The night was again close and warm. Rain seems imminent but still it hangs off. The thermometer did not descend below 60° and soon after sunrise a disagreeable feeling of oppression and mugginess was in the atmosphere. All the horses were found together this morning; but in consequence of there being so little water at the camp I had to send them to the little waterhole I had found three miles up the creek; therefore it was late by the time they were packed after going there and back. I was not sorry to be moving again; for our stay at these last two camps had been compulsory and the anxiety and trouble and work we had had here left no very agreeable reminiscences of the locality in my mind.  I followed along the creek all day cutting off the bends: but though we travelled some thirteen or fourteen miles I saw no signs of any water. As it was getting late I decided to try if we could obtain some by digging. We set to work and very soon got some wet sand and we got water in about four feet; but the sand being so loose we had to remove an enormous quantity to enable a horse to approach.   [46] Some horses of course would not go near it and had to be watered with a canvas bucket. The supply of water seemed good but it only ran in from the sides. Depth was no object as it did not appear to come from the bottom - which gave us all the more work as after every horse had drank we had to dig afresh. The country was open today and timbered with the fine oaks; spinifex reigned supreme however not half a mile away from the creek. The old grass had been burnt near this place and good young green shoots appeared in its place which was very good for the horses. The day was close and sultry and the rain seemed to have departed entirely though the sky was still clouded especially towards the west.  Friday 20th September. - The early part of the night was hot and cloudy but it eventually became cooler; and towards morning a few heat drops fell. The thermometer stood at 55° at daylight and I thought I saw flashes of lightning in the west; but as our fire was flickering in that direction I thought I must have been mistaken; but as I got up I heard the dull roll of distant thunder which proved it had been lightning I had seen. While we were at breakfast a thunderstorm came up; but it passed immediately close to us on the south bank of the creek only just sprinkling us. I thought it had entirely departed so I decided to pack up and be off hoping to find a better-watered region in the neighbourhood of the line of mountains I was now intending to visit. There was an extraordinary mount a little to the west of north from us; it looked something like a church at about twenty miles off. I called it Mount Peculiar. We had great trouble again in watering the horses; but eventually they were all satisfied and we left the camp behind us at last leaving the creek on our left to run itself out into some lonely flat or dismal swamp known only to Providence and the wretched creatures it has been its pleasure to people this desolate region with.  My course today was about N 67° W over a sandhill country rather open covered with spinifex and timbered with oaks. [47] We had scarcely gone two miles when the thunderstorm returned and the rain fell rather heavily. The country however was so sandy and porous that none remained upon the surface. I had no alternative but to travel on hoping to find some spot where it might lodge. The rain continued to fall heavier and heavier; still we could not stop for not a drop of water was to be had - the ground sucking it up as fast as it fell. We continued our voyage and travelled on this course twenty-five miles it raining hard nearly all the time. At that distance we came in sight of the mountains I was making for; but they were too distant yet to reach before night so I turned up a little to the north to the foot of a low bare white-granite hill - hoping to find a creek or some ledges in the rocks where we might get some water; but none was to be found so we had to camp without although we had been travelling in the rain the whole day and accomplished thirty miles. There was good green feed here where the old grass had been burnt; and as it was still raining the horses could not be very much in want of water. We fixed up our tent and retired for the night the wind blowing furiously - which of course might be expected as it was the eve of the vernal equinox and this I suppose our share of the equinoctial gales. It rained once or twice only in the night but not very heavily. The last few miles we traversed was through a thick mulga scrub which ran up to the foot of the hill near which we camped.  Saturday 21st September. - This morning was dull and cloudy and the thermometer was still rather high standing at 55°. As there was no water here I was compelled to leave this camp rain or no rain. Indeed unless it descended in perfect sheets the country would not hold it being all pure red sand. The hill near us had no rocky ledges to catch water so I made off for the higher mountains we were steering for yesterday; but now I determined to make for their nearest or most eastern point which was not more than four miles off. I did not wait for the horses but walked away immediately after breakfast with the shovel thinking I might find some place where water might begot by digging having pointed out a hill to Mr Carmichael to bring the horses to when packed. [48]  From the hill near the camp with the glasses I noticed a few gum trees apparently in a small channel issuing from the ranges I was approaching. I therefore made for it and followed it up to the rocky ledges from which it obtains its source and down which at times no doubt leaping torrents roar. Very little of the rain we had had fallen here but I found most fortunately one small rock reservoir with just sufficient water for all my horses. There was none either above or below it in any other basin and there were plenty of better-looking holes but all dry. The water in this one must have stood for some time yesterday's rain not having affected it in the least. Where I found the water was in a most difficult place for horses to reach; indeed it was almost impracticable. After finding this opportune supply I walked or rather climbed to the top of the mount on whose sides I had found the water. On the summit was a native fig tree in full bearing. The fruit was ripe and delicious; it is about the size of an ordinary marble - yellow when unripe gradually becoming red then black: it is very like the English medlar only rather sweeter - is full of small seeds.  I was disturbed from my repast by seeing the horses several hundred feet below me going away in the wrong direction so I had to descend before I had time to look around me; but the casual glance I obtained from the top of the hill gave me the most gloomy and desolate view imaginable and almost enough to daunt the explorer from penetrating into such a dreadful region. To the eastwards I discovered that I had long outrun the old main chain of mountains which had turned up to the north or rather north-north-westward; between me and it a mass of jumbled and broken mounts appeared each separate hill almost surrounded with scrubs which came up to the foot of the hill I was upon. To the north the view was very similar - some isolated and some joined ranges appeared but all having dense scrubs between them. [49] To the west the picture was the same - ranges loomed above the intervening scrubs. Those further to the west appeared a considerable distance away - probably fifty miles - and they also appeared of the greatest elevation. The country between was also filled in with ranges; the whole horizon looked dark and gloomy. I had to abandon my scrutiny of the country however and descend to the horses as they were going away in the wrong direction. There appeared no creeks of any kind - the most extensive not running more than a mile from the hills it might issue from. Though there no doubt is an ample rainfall in this region the water sinks into the earth as fast as it falls from the heavens.  Watering the horses proved a difficult and tedious task as many of them would not approach the little basin in which the water lay; it therefore had to be carried to them in buckets. By the time they were all watered and we had descended from the rocky gully it was time to camp - the day having passed in a most miraculous manner. The horses fortunately did nor drink all the water; indeed there was nearly sufficient to give them another drink. The feed was very good here as there was a little flat that had been burnt and it was covered with yellow flowers which the horses like.  Sunday 22nd September. - The night set in very cool clear and calm. I was enabled to take a meridian altitude of Vega which placed me in latitude 23° 15' 12" S. We were distant now from the last water in the creek nearly thirty-five miles. The mercury in the thermometer fell as low as 28° by daylight this morning being much colder than we had experienced for some time; there was also a slight frost. I determined to rest the horses here today and let them drink up what water was left in the rocks whilst I went away to inspect some other gorges or gullies in the hills to the west of us to see if any more water was to be found. The day was most agreeably cool and fine and I set out in great expectation of finding a fresh supply. [50]   I climbed to the summit of one of the highest hills in the range. I found it was 800 feet from the base. The view obtained from its summit was nearly similar to that mentioned yesterday only I could see rather more of the horizon towards the west. It appeared that the ranges I was now on ran on for about twelve or fourteen miles then a lot of low jumbled ridges were visible above the scrubs and the farthest range to the west or rather west-north-west appeared rather more inviting than before but the intervening country was a mass of dense scrub; a few low ridges also appeared here and there to the south and an odd flat-topped tent-shaped hill showed about N 30° W some twenty-five or thirty miles away. No sign of any creek appeared to issue from any of those hills except indeed little gullies having an odd gum tree here and there in them and their course seldom reached a greater length than one mile before they were swallowed up in the scrubs - most of their little channels were not more than six feet wide and the trumpery little streams that descend from them in their most flooded state would be of little service to anybody. I had travelled over hills and through gullies and up mountains all the morning yet I had not met with a single drop of water and was returning disappointed to camp when on pushing up another small scrubby dreadfully rocky little gully which I had missed in going out I was at last fortunate enough to find a few small rocky holes full of the purest fluid; but what pleased me most was the rather strange fact that the water was running from the one into the other but the stream was so weak that I should more properly call it trickling. Above and below where I found the water the gully and rocks were as dry as the desert around. Had the water not been running and thus the supply kept up half my horses would have emptied all the holes at a draught. The approaches to the water were even more rough and impracticable than those near the camp. I was however most delighted to have found it otherwise I must have retreated to the last creek. Having however found this supply I determined not to touch upon it so long as I had a drink at the camp for the horses; and in the hills farther west I intended to travel to I hoped to get more so I kept this small supply as a reserve to fall back upon should I be unfortunate in obtaining more further on. [51]  When I returned to camp I got all the horses together and took them up the rocks and by the time they had all drank - some from canvas buckets and some from the hole - there was not a drop left in the whole gully. It was therefore imperative upon me to be off as this supply was gone.  Monday 23rd September. - The night was again cool and clear and the thermometer stood at 30°. A heavy dew fell but no frost appeared. The horses wandered a bit it appears in the night and it was late in the day when we got away from the camp.  I proceeded along the foot of the ranges which here ran nearly W-N-W. Close to their foot the country is all stones but open and thickly covered with enormous bunches of spinifex which by this time the horses dread like a pestilence; I have encountered nothing but spinifex for more than 200 miles. All round the coronets of most of the horses in consequence of being so continually punctured with the spines of this vegetable it has caused a swelling or tough enlargement of the flesh and skin giving them the appearance of having ring-bones many of them having the flesh quite raw and bleeding; they are also very tender footed from traversing so much stony ground as we have had to pass over. Bordering upon the open spinifex ground to the south of us is the scrub composed chiefly of mulga though there are various other shrubs and bushes growing amongst it; it is so thick that we cannot see one-third of the horses at once - they of course continually endeavour to make for it to avoid the stones and spinifex for generally speaking the spinifex and mulga appear antagonistic plants; the ground however is usually soft in the scrubs and on that account the horses also seek it. I have occasionally allowed them to travel in the scrub out of kindness to them until some dire mishap forces us out again for the scrubs are mostly so dense that the horses are compelled to crush through it tearing the coverings off their loads and occasionally - indeed frequently - forcing sticks in between their backs or sides and their saddles; then we hear a frantic crashing through the scrub and the sound of the pounding of horse hoofs being the first notice we receive that some frightful calamity has occurred; then as soon as we can get through it ourselves and round up the horses we find one missing whose tracks have to be found; then portions of the load are picked up here and there and perhaps in the course of an hour the horse is again found and repacked and we push on again. [52] Sometimes it is varied by there being two horses that have disencumbered themselves instead of one; when those accidents occur we push out again immediately for the open though stony ground for there at least we can see what is going on. These scrubs are really dreadful and one's skin and clothes get torn and ripped in all directions.  After these mishaps one of which occurred upon this day's travels I continued on and travelled ten miles to the foot of a hill I had been steering for. There were numerous gullies or miniature creeks coming from the hills. A few pine trees were scattered here and there upon them the hills themselves having a glistening sheening laminated appearance caused by the vast quantities of mica which abound in them their sides being furrowed and corrugated and the upper portions of them almost bare rock. I made a search for water amongst the gullies and expended some time in doing so but was quite unsuccessful Another range of the same kind lay three or four miles further on apparently higher and therefore I supposed more likely to have water near it. We therefore went over to it and halted the horses while Mr Carmichael and I ascended to the summit of the highest which I found was 900 feet above the level of the surrounding country. We had already searched all round its base for water and found none.  The view from the summit was such as I have described before - that is to say an ocean of scrubs with ranges appearing above in most directions. [53] It gave however no hopes of any water. The horses had already been twenty-four hours without any. I saw that it was useless to push further with all the packhorses through the vile scrubs which intervened between this and the ranges further to the west-north-west. One point of the ranges in that direction was high and pointed and I decided before abandoning this line of march to visit it; but I must first find a place to leave the main body of the horses under the care of my companions. The ranges in question seemed twenty-five or thirty miles away. No watercourse was visible in any direction except indeed the little runnels that come down from all the hills here and there and which as I have before remarked scarcely run a mile before they become lost in the scrubs. To the south the country seemed to have been more recently visited by the natives than any other part as burnt patches could be distinguished as far as the vision could be carried; and in the far distance over the top of some low ridges (probably forty miles away) we saw the ascending smoke of grass fires still attended to by the natives. I had no alternative but to retreat upon the small supply of water I had left behind me as a reserve so I turned the horses' heads again in that direction. This time we travelled upon the northern side of the hills we previously travelled south of to make sure of not missing any creek that might flow from them. We camped in an oak grove where the old grass had been burnt and some young stuff was springing but of course there was no water. We have been so short of that commodity for some days that the merest attempt at a wash has been out of the question.  Tuesday 24th September. - A fine dewy night made me hope the horses would nor feel the want of water so much as to induce them to ramble; but somehow this appeared foredoomed to be an unlucky day in my calendar for it really appeared as if everything must go wrong by a natural law. In the first place while making a hobble peg when Robinson was away after the horses the little piece of wood slipped out of my hand and the sharp blade of my knife went through the top and nail of my third finger and stuck in the head of my thumb. [54] They bled most profusely and it took me until the horses came to sew my mutilated digits up. It was late when we retreated from camp.  As there was a hill with a prepossessing-looking gorge I left Mr Carmichael and Robinson to bring the horses on and went to see if I could possibly find water in it. I went some distance up through the stones and ridges; however there was none. I then made down to where the horses should have passed along and found some of them standing in a small bit of open ground surrounded with dense scrubs with nobody near them. I cooeyed and waited and at last Mr Carmichael came up and told me that when he and Robinson with the horses debouched upon this little opening they found that two of the horses were missing and that Robinson had gone to pick up their tracks. The horse carrying my papers and instruments was one and I was very anxious on that account. Robinson soon returned not having found the tracks. There was another mount we passed yesterday two or three miles to the north of us and I requested Mr Carmichael to go there and see if he could find water while Robinson and I found the missing horses and then we would bring them all on. So for fear any more should retreat into the scrub we tied the horses up in two mobs to trees on the little plain. I tied one lot and Robinson the other some little distance apart. We then separately made sweeps round always returning to the packhorses the opposite side we started from. We then went again in company and again on opposite sides singly but no tracks or horses could be found. I was in a most undesirable state of mind for five hours had elapsed since I first heard of their absence. I determined to take one more sweep out beyond any I had already taken so as to include the spot we had camped at which took me more than an hour; and when I returned I found Robinson had found the two horses in a small but dense bunch of scrub not twenty yards from the trees he had tied his horses up to. [55] During my last absence he had gone on top of a small stony eminence close by and from its summit had obtained a bird's-eye view of the scrub below and thus perceived the two missing animals. On my return I was pleased enough to know that everything was alright though such a length of time had been wasted for nearly seven hours had been lost during which I was riding my horse the whole time at a rather fast pace; it was getting quite late and I was afraid we should be unable to reach the gully where the water was now before night which would be an additional suffering for the horses. We at length pushed on and Mr Carmichael joined us in the course of a few miles he having been unsuccessful in finding any water. As it was getting dusk we reached the small creek up in the rocks of which I had seen the water on Sunday.  At a certain point the creek split into two or rather two channels joined and formed one and I suppose it was by the same ill fate that had pursued me all day that I mistook the proper channel and we drove the unfortunate and limping horses up a wretched rocky vile scrubby almost impenetrable gully where there was not a sup of water. On discovering my mistake (for even explorers are liable to these kinds of error) we had to turn them back over the same most horrible places - all rocks scrub and spinifex. At last I got them into the proper channel not that it was any better than the other indeed it was worse. When near the place where I had last seen the water I dismounted and walked up to see how it had stood during my absence and was horrified to discover that the lowest and largest hole was nearly dry. I bounded up the rocks to the next and there by the blessing of Providence there was still a sufficient quantity as the slow trickling of the water from little basin to little basin had not yet entirely ceased though its current had sadly diminished since my last visit only some seventy hours since. By this time it was nearly dark and totally impossible to get the horses up the gully so we had to get them over a horrible ridge of broken and jumbled rocks having to roll away huge boulders to make something like a road to enable the animals to approach the water. [56]  Time accomplishes all things and in time the last animal's thirst was quenched and the last drop of water was sucked up from every basin and I was afraid it would not be replenished by morning. We had to encamp in the midst of a thicket of a kind of willow with pink bark all in little curls with a small and pretty leaf it is of the most tenacious nature you may bend it but break it won't; we had to cut away sufficient to make an open square for us to lie down on and then remove the great bunches of spinifex - then when the stones were cleared we had something like a place for a camp and by that time it was nearly midnight and we retired all heartily tired with our day's work.  Wednesday 25th September. - The night was again clear and delightfully cool the thermometer at daylight standing at 38°.  My first thought this morning was to know how the water-holes looked and to ascertain if the slight flow of water still continued as if not my intended trip to the mountains out westward would be prevented as I should be compelled to retreat to the gum creek we got our last water at which was nearly forty miles away. Mr Carmichael went up into the rocks to discover and on his return reported that they had all been refilled in the night and that the trickling flow of water continued but slightly less in volume. This was a great relief to my mind. I only trust it will last until I return from those dismal-looking mountains and enable the packhorses to remain here in the meantime I can expect no more.  It was necessary to try and discover some more water if possible; so after breakfast I walked away but after travelling up gullies and gorges hills and valleys I had to return quite unsuccessful and I can only conclude that this water was permitted by a kind Providence to remain here in this lonely spot for my especial benefit for no more rain had fallen here than on any of the other hills in the neighbourhood nor is this one any higher than others about here nor is the gully in any way different to dozens of others which I visited except that this one had a little water and all the rest none. [57] I have in gratitude called this hill Mount Udor as being the only one in this region where a drop of that requisite element was to be obtained; and when I left the udor had departed also. I had to get two of my riding horses shod today as the country I intend to travel over is about half stones and half scrub and my riding horses are very tender footed. I have marked a gum tree in this gully close to the foot of the rocks where I found the water 21  as this is my twenty-first camp from Chambers's Pillar. My position here is in latitude 23° 14' and longitude 13 1° variant 3° (nearly) E.  Thursday 26th September. - I was glad to find this morning that my water supply is still holding out as well as could be expected the trickling not yet having ceased. The thermometer was high this morning viz. 54° and the day rather warm though the thermometer in the shade at three o'clock did not rise higher than 86° yet as we were in such a confined gully not a breath of wind could get to us which I suppose made it feel warmer. In the sun the thermometer stood at 124°. I remained in camp today to enable the newly-shod horses to get used to their shoes as one of them was dead lame when shod; there was but poor feed about here and the horses wandered a good distance away into the scrub and four of them could nor be found.  Friday 27th September. - The first part of last night was close and sultry when a slight thunderstorm passed over us; the rain merely sprinkled down for nearly an hour during which time not sufficient fell to damp a pocket handkerchief. In the morning the thermometer stood at 60°; the sky was much overcast in many places and it seems possible we may have a change. The flies in this gully have been most tormenting for the last two days. The water in the rocks I am glad to say is still holding out and I trust it will do so while I am away and that the party will nor have to retreat during my absence. [58]  The horses did not arrive very early and it was long past midday when after watering them I started away by myself to the ranges out west. I proceeded on our old tracks as far as we went the other day that is to say nearly west for twelve miles. At that point some other hills bore in the direction of N 77° W which was nearly the line the far ranges lay upon. I reached the foot of the first hills in fifteen miles further. The country alternated between open stones near the hills and dense scrub a mile away from them. The far range now lay right ahead of me and bore N 75° W with a bed of scrub all the way between. It was near evening when I entered the scrub which consists of mulga and other bushes. It was the thickest scrub I think I ever encountered; it was almost impenetrable especially in spots and it was with the greatest difficulty I could get the horse I was leading to come on at all as I had no power over him whatever; he would drag so on my arm that he nearly pulled me off my horse and made it most difficult to use the compass and continue in a straight course. Night at length overtook me in the scrub and I was compelled to encamp in the midst of it having travelled thirty-nine miles from camp.  During the evening the sky was overcast and very slight sprinkling rain fell and at intervals it sprinkled me during the night. It was a good thing for the horses as it moistened the dry grass upon which they were hobbled out. I hoped at the camp they would have had a good shower as it appeared to be raining in that direction.  Saturday 28th September. - I was up early enough from my solitary couch but was compelled to wait until daylight before I could commence to track my horses. The thermometer stood at 60°. The horses wandered back nearly to the last hills we had passed seven or eight miles and it was rather late when I returned to my night's resting place and saddled up. The sky was still cloudy and the weather warm and sultry; no signs of rain appeared upon the ground. [59]  I left this wretched camping place behind me at last and continued pushing on through the scrub and in about seven or eight miles I at length came nut of it at the foot of the mountain I had been steering for. There was a little gum creek or gully rather where I struck it and I rode up it. It was as all the others had been scrubby rocky and dry. I left the horses and ascended to the top which was between 900 and 1000 feet above the scrubs which surrounded it. The horizon was broken by low ranges nearly all round but scrubs intervened between them all. I descended again and walked into dozens of gullies and rocky places and found some small basins that would hold water for some weeks but at the time of my visit they were all dry. I was at this spot nearly eighty miles from a sufficient supply of water; that at the camp forty-five miles away would probably be gone by the time I returned if indeed my companions had nor already been compelled to retreat. I could nor go any further west on this line under these circumstances for my horses had already been one night without water. It was now evening again and they would get none tonight as I had found none during my walk about the hills so I left this desolate range which I called the Ehrenberg Range after a scientific friend of Baron Mueller and retreated into the scrub again. I travelled upon a different line this time going nearly east hoping to find a rather less thick part of it but it was all alike. Night again overtook me and I had to remain again in this scrub not very far away from where I had slept the night before. I had not travelled very far today only having accomplished about twenty miles but the day was wasted in an ineffectual search for water round the base of the ranges.  Sunday 29th September. - I had so short hobbled my horses last night that though the scrub was as thick as possible yet they did not go out of sight in fact I might as well have tied them up for they scarcely went a yard. I continued my east course for seven or eight miles further which brought me to the north side of a range round whose southern base I had passed yesterday. I had gone this way in hopes of meeting some small creek or place where I might find a little water but none such seemed to exist. [60] I also went round the northern side of the hills (we had been at upon the south side with the packhorses) for the same reason but no water could be found. It was late in the afternoon when I reached the camp and I was gladdened to find the party still there and that the water supply had held out so long. I had travelled thirty-three miles today.  Monday 30th September. - The water supply this morning was at a very low ebb the trickling having ceased from the upper holes though it was still oozing over the rocks into the lower ones. I intended to pack up and be off from this place where we have had such misery for I never was camped in a worse place I believe. It was an expedition in itself to get water for the camp from the rocks; the horses dreaded to approach it on account of their feet being tender. It required also much work to get sufficient firewood to boil a quart pot; for although we were camped in a dense thicket it was all green and useless for firewood.  I intended to retreat from here today but just as Robinson was starting to find the horses a shower of rain came on and I was in hopes it might end in a reasonable fall so I decided to remain one day longer especially as the horses would not now (in consequence of the shower and nor being brought to it) touch upon the last remains of our water supply. The trickling had at length ceased altogether but the little holes were full and there was just a bare drink for the horses and no more; the rain fell in such slight and gentle showers for two or three hours that it left no trace of its fall even upon the rocks so that our water supply was not increased by one pint. I have no alternative but to retreat from this den back to the creek I came from.  When I left the creek its course was (or rather had been) nor far from a west point though from there it seemed to incline more to the south. I thought by going a south course from here to intersect it in the course of twenty-five to thirty-five miles supposing its course carried it so far to the westward of where I left it; so upon starting from here I decided to travel upon that bearing. [61] A few quandong trees exist amongst these gullies; also a tree known by the name of the corkwood tree. The wood certainly is soft and light but it is by no means a handsome tree. Those I saw were nearly all dead; they grow in the little water channels. The ants here as in nearly all tropical Australia build their nests from four to five feet high to escape I suppose from the torrents of rain that at times fall in those regions; it also protects their stores and eggs from the fires the natives continually keep going. This fact probably accounts for the absence of insects and reptiles so conspicuous here. One night however I actually saw some glow-worms. The native poplar is also found in the scrubs and water channels of this part of the country. The climate of this region appears very peculiar - scarcely a week passes without thunderstorms and rain; but the latter falls in such small quantities that it appears useless. I should like to know how much rain would have to fall before any could be discovered upon the surface of the ground. In a saltbush country with the rains I have met since I started water could be got at almost every turn in claypans and crab holes but here no such thing exists it is all either pure sand or pure rock. The native orange tree grows here but the specimens I have met are very stunted; the bloodwood trees which always enliven any landscape where they are found also grow here; but they are nor the magnificent vegetable structures that are known in Queensland but are mostly gnarled and stunted; they also grow near the watercourses. [62]  Melbourne Home  Little Lonsdale Street Melbourne  June 1872  My dear Miss Lewin At the risk of again incurring your anger I write once more to you. When this reaches you I shall have sailed (D.V.) for England and I do not think even you would blame me under the circumstances did you know what life in Australia for a Governess is - its sense of intense loneliness and unprotectedness - utter friendlessness. All whom I have met in the same position reiterate what I write. I have saved sufficient money to take me back 2nd Class would have had more but sent money home. I would most willingly go as a Nursery Governess children or teaching is no trouble to me - I do teach French & Music. I enclose you a testimonial from Mrs Scott. It is a favourable one & without boasting she could not have done less but my life there was a difficult one in every respect.  How deeply grieved have I been in having left England the intense selfishness of all classes the great want of intellect & in so many cases the utter want of truth straightforwardness & frankness is most trying. The great expenses of everything travelling especially often hundreds of miles by Coach constitution & purse suffer alike. [210]  Will my appeal be in vain this time or will you still say you will not help me? I am so unhappy for my family are very poor & I am wretched out here alone. Granted that I should have weighed all this before leaving home still I could not foresee much that has occurred & I was sanguine thinking that I could battle against everything. If you would kindly help me! and you have so much influence! May I ask if it were possible for me to obtain employment in London in the City I dont care where. It has always been to me such a wonderful place.  I have been since I left the Scotts in a School in Tasmania into the detail of which I need not enter the Principal (lady) as is usual with Bush ladies no mind or thought and in consequence is fast losing her Pupils. Hoping you will kindly think me over & not too severely.  I remain  Yours sincerely  Rosa Payne  Colony of Victoria Huntly - Sept 10 / 72   My Dear Lucy   It is a very long time since either of us heard from each other. I am very sorry to have to relate that I heard of the death of your son by drowning some years ago but it was a long time after the sad calamity occurring that I heard of it. I was not then nor yet in communication with Richd. in consequence of some letters being mislaid between us both but I am after receiving two letters from his son Edward for the first time. He says with sorrow that he sees your delicate health ever since the Boy was drowned and eulogises upon the cousin as not having his equals in Kenmare at the time of the fatal occurrence.   My Dear Sister we all here felt much at the shock you received when I got notice of it from Richd Donnelly. I dont wonder such a calamity would be disastrous to your health but I hope as it is Gods will that you will reconcile yourself and not help to altogether break down your health and be satisfied with these that God has left you. I have not heard how many Children you have but I think I once heard you had a good many and hope they are in good health as well as John.   Young Ned would wish to go to America or Australia and he wrote me for my advice. There appears to be a large family of them there and I suppose Richard will have to allow some of them to emigrate to look for a living. I am given to understand that they are a fine lot of children. He had a great many. I learn there are three dead and that there is nine more living.  It is well he had so many as Stephen if now living and myself are not very likely to increase the human race in numbers. Your Brother Florence had only four children two boys and two girls. The girls were the youngest and the younger of the two died of Diptherea [diphtheria] eighteen months ago. The three living are in good health so is he himself and Ellen. I am myself enjoying good health thank God - we are pulling along like all Australians who purchase land to make a home. Flor has 80 acres of land which is his own private property and on part of this is a vineyard for the making of Wine. It takes a large outlay and brings no returns for the first 5 years but this term is past and we are making Wine for the last 2 or 3 years.   Flor is looking old and very grey but very healthy. I am too giving way to old Father time as you will see by the carte I send you. I am not yet grey but I am afraid you wont Know me and is it to be wondered at when I am 17.5 years in Australia a climate that is dry and withering to the face whilst in Moister climates the face will look rosy and fresh. But still Australia except the tropical parts of it is as wholesome as any part of the World. [185] Fevers or many sicknesses in the old country are unknown here. Flors eldest boy is or will be 11 years in November next and the biggest of his age I have seen.   Dear Lucy you must excuse me for my long negligence and hope you will soon write and let me Know how yourself & John and the children are and how you are getting on. I had not even a letter of My Fathers death from Richd - I only heard it from Richd Donnelly. I never expected Richd would be so unkind or at least so careless as not to write on that occasion. I hope Denny Hallasy & Mother is well also Ellen Mack and any other friends. I hope your Brother in law James Downing & family are well also Mr Murphy and Mistress. I heard of John's sisters death I beleive she was nurse of the Fever Hospital. I was sorry when I heard from Edmond Donnelly I saw it on a Kerry paper but did not Know it was she not Knowing her married name. Flor and Ellen Joins in sending their love to John yourself & the children and remain Dear Lucy your affectionate Brother   Edwd O'Sullivan   address - Huntly post office - Colony of Victoria - Australia   I was near to have looked for work when about 3 months ago I caught a chance of finding gold; since I have been making from 3 / 4 to 1 / 2 and sometimes 1 dwt. a day for which I am thankful. I am unable to know how long it will take me to work out my claim should it continue to pay.  I lives in a little wooden hut on the near top of a hill in a nice view of Castlemaine and surrounding country about a mile off from town but I have not many neighbours by me. The miners are my best friends. One of the wives of one is a good tailoress and dressmaker. She makes suits of clothes for them and me.   I enclose you the official letter I rec.d - . . only yesterday. I think it quite satisfactory in putting the Nurses under my 'directions' not under the doctors wh: [sic] the resolution of last week appeared to do.  Lady Belmore and her sister have again been to see me and brought a number of nice interesting books for the patients. I am invited to dine at Government House on Tuesday next.  Thank you for all the trouble you have taken in this matter indeed for the position I hold in this place altogether. I feel and always shall feel most grateful to you. [219] When I said goodbye to my friends at home I said goodbye also to my position in Society not expecting it to be recognized in a new country where the English idea of ladies undertaking this kind of work had not yet been tried. I cannot tell you what a relief I find in a little refined society.  [11 July] - . . I am in great distress and whenever I am I know how willing you always are to help me. This wretched Mr Roberts has been examined by the Commission and you would hear says he has Miss Nightingale's authority for abusing me. There must be some great mistake I am sure. He probably has given Miss Nightingale to understand I have behaved in an arbitary [sic] manner and am very much disliked when no doubt she would say she was much disappointed to hear it and now I am afraid he will write to Miss N. this Mail and manage to get from her something confirmatory of what he has said which he could publish. Of course I would not hold my position for a day if the country was given to understand my work did not meet with Miss N's approval and therefore it is I want to know if you would be so very kind as to write a line this Mail to Miss N. telling her th: [sic] the doctors and members of the Board are well satisfied and asking her if she thinks the work has been a failure in what respects she considers it to have failed. Such a sweeping charge I feel to be so cruel when I have fought so long against many difficulties.  [15 July] Thank you very much for all the trouble you have taken. You might well doubt your propriety in letting me see all the good things you have said but instead of being conceited I will try and deserve them. I must say for N. S. Wales if there are loud talking blustering enemies there are also the truest and most constant of friends. In spite of the annoyance this quoting of Miss Nightingale's opinion has given me it is the greatest encouragement and comfort to me to find that those friends whose opinion I value have formed a different estimate of my work to that given by Mr Roberts.  At length we reached Yambuck and here ended my journey overland in exactly two months from the day we quitted Yesabba; and as we drove up to our tiny hut at our new home I could not avoid wishing we had been returning to our old one. A young man made his appearance at the door of the domicile in his shirt sleeves and they none of the cleanest. This was our superintendent. Out of a second hut ran five or six men and three small children. As we approached the dogs barked men ran here there and everywhere and the children screamed and hid themselves behind a dray.  We dismounted and walked into our small abode comprising two rooms. It was thatched with the long native grass and the inside was plastered and white-washed. A small deal table was in the middle of the sitting-room covered with a dirty rug pannikins and crumbs of damper. A fire was in the fireplace but as much smoke came into the room as went up the chimney and this added to the total look of discomfort made me feel inclined to cry.  We were very hungry and as there was nothing for us to eat a man went to the opposite sheep station and procured some mutton. When the meat came and some chops were brought in Mr Baxter who was particular in what he ate looked at them and then asked the servant how they were cooked. The man answered - "In the bottom of an iron pot."  This was Dutch to me then but I've seen the operation since. [129]  A rug was put up to the doorway as there was no door between the two rooms and I took possession of the inner room. I then found out where the gridiron of the establishment was; it composed my bed! How I did ache after lying on that split-wooden-gridiron. I could not rest for the first night at all; nor indeed until I made some alterations in it. The inner room had large cracks between the slabs of which the hut was composed and these made it very airy. A pair of blankets was nailed round it but they did not much prevent the draught. Opposite to my berth was a cask of corned beef a chest of tea and a bag of salt.  A little window place having no glass in it had a bag nailed up to keep out the rain or sun. On the mantelpiece in the sitting-room were sundry dirty clay pipes knives ink and so on. The floors were earthern and from not having been swept and watered regularly were in small heaps and fleas abounded.  There was a vegetable garden in front of the hut and cabbages did grow certainly. Our superintendent was not a great florist and the flowers consisted of stocks only; in fact nothing is discussed but stock from fat cattle to garden flowers. I hear of nothing but stock! First it is about the great weight of some bullocks; then as to what wool fetched at home and strongly recommending sheep-farming; and when I turn to see the garden alas! stock again is presented to my mind.  About two miles from Yambuck the sea dashes against rather an unsafe shore so that we could distinctly hear its roar. I liked that as I think turbulence in nature very grand and I often used after being settled to go down and look at the waves which caused the roaring. Just before coming to the beach there was a salt water lake and there were quantities of good fish in it; and on it black swans and wild ducks. We also had the wood-duck which builds in a tree and numbers of snipe quail and pigeons. Strange to say the river that ran at the foot of the garden was beautiful fresh water and about 500 yards from the hut there was a hill of sand and on the side towards the sea the water was quite salt. We had another river the Eumeralla at the back of our run. The fish in the fresh water river were most plentiful and like smelt. I used to send a black boy down with a crooked pin fastened to some twine and he used to collect his bait i.e. worms and catch a large dish of fish in a few minutes. The wild ducks used to be very plentiful there also and I had a shot now and then at them with success; that was when I could sneak on them and shoot them from behind the trees.  In the afternoon of the day after our arrival our horses came up to the river to water and I went to pat them and say "How do you do" to them. They evidently thought they were to be harnessed as usual but when they found this not to be the case one of them commenced kicking up his heels with joy and galloping off was soon followed by the others. [130]  We began building a new and larger hut immediately and it was a very pleasant one when finished as many a traveller can aver. It consisted of six rooms and a large veranda and we made the old hut into a kitchen. We had then to build a store as we were obliged to get flour tea sugar and all other necessaries in large quantities in the bush as there are no shops to send to.  A gentleman was staying at Yambuck when we arrived for whom I formed on acquaintance a sincere friendship. He was the son of a Major Smetham. If ever a kind heart dwelt in man he had it. He was left in England at school under the care of guardians when his father mother and younger brother came to New South Wales. After being eight years at home and hearing nothing from his parents he determined on going to Sydney to see them and before starting received a Government appointment from England. On his voyage he dreamed that he saw some letters in the post-office in Sydney and one was addressed to his father opposite to whose name was placed the word "dead" in large letters.  On his arrival in Sydney the first person whom he visited confirmed his dream; his father was dead. He was naturally much shocked but immediately set out to see his remaining parent. When he got to her house she disowned him. Unnatural woman! What her reason was continued always a mystery to him; but he fancied as she was an exceedingly vain frivolous woman that his age might have something to do with her not owning him as her child. She told him that he was Major Smetham's son by some foreigner but not hers. It was supposed that his father had left him some property but the supposition is all he ever knew of it. Poor fellow! he was of a most affectionate disposition and has often told me that if even then she would only own him as her child he would give her all he either possessed then or was likely to possess. This so preyed on his mind that at night in his sleep he would repeat aloud what he had said to her on their meeting in Sydney - "Cruel mother to disown your son! You'll break my heart! I am your son!" He would remain silent for a time and afterwards in a subdued tone would say "My poor father! would you were alive."  His friends recommended him to write to England for the certificate of his baptism and to go to law to recover any property that might be his by right; but he was unwilling to bring shame to his father's name by citing his worthless mother to appear before the public. Some time after we arrived at Yambuck Mr C. Smetham remained with us and a few years later he studied for the church and became a missionary to some of the South Sea Islands where he died.  I have often talked over my travels in Australia and my friends have said "You should publish them." [131] But now that I am doing so I feel that my small journal is so poor and uninteresting that few will give themselves the trouble of buying or reading it.  My time in the bush passed sometimes very merrily sometimes very sadly. Being of a happy temperament I made friends and every now and then some queer incident would occur to amuse me. I was very fond of riding and hunting had some beautiful dogs and plenty of kangaroos and dingoes to hunt.  A clerical friend of mine who is now living in Portland Victoria and for whom I entertained the sincerest friendship came to stay a day with us and I was mischievous enough to plan a hunt for him. He said in answer to my invitation to go for a ride that he would be most happy but that he never hunted I must remember. Accordingly we went; and when we got some distance from home I saw the dogs keeping a steady lookout and presently they went after a forester kangaroo or what we call "an old man". I cantered on and heard my friend close behind me but not a word did I say. The dogs some of them followed a second kangaroo but Ada my greyhound kept to the old gentleman and seeing that he was too strong for her and fearing lest she might be injured I jumped off my horse and caught the animal by the tail to stop him from getting away. I put my arms around a sapling tree to prevent his moving but he was too much for me and away we went together he taking me such hops as even Kent never saw. My friend could not move for laughing and I don't know how the affair would have ended had not my shouts of "Hold him" brought the other dogs back to my assistance and the forester's death.  Another time I remember we had to drive some cattle to a river about twenty miles from Yambuck on their way to Portland as they had been purchased by a butcher there. My clerical friend was going to the same place and rode behind the cattle with Mr Baxter and the stockman. My place was in front of the bullocks and as we got to a large swamp they broke in all directions. I found myself at one side of them and tried to keep them together but they were bent on going to their old haunts on some hummocks so I followed and tried to head them. I had done this for my horse was really a good one and could go the pace when he and I chose and we had steadied the cattle a little when the stockman rode up from behind me thinking I should not be able to come up with the runaways.  "Why what possesses the cattle Will; I never knew any so tiresome before?" said I to the man.  "Ah! they knows they has a parson behind 'em and that always do make 'em wild ma'am" returned he.  I was told an admirable story in England of a clergyman who was very fond of following the hounds but always did this to the letter as he never could afford a horse which would keep up to them. The Bishop of O-- spoke to him about it and said how sorry he was to hear of his attending balls and joining hunts. [132]"You would think it strange to hear of my doing such things" said his lordship. "My lord if I mistake not" humbly suggested the young minister "I saw your name at the last ball at Buckingham Palace." 'True but the sovereign's invitation is an order you know and nobody ever saw me in the same room as the dancing" returned the bishop. "And I'll defy anyone my lord to say they ever saw me in the same field as the hounds" said the clergyman; to which I believe those around bore testimony and smiled.  We had been at Yambuck about three weeks; and it being then the commencement of winter the small hut with four regular inmates was anything but comfortable; and as I could have no female servant I had to act in that capacity myself. I can fancy in my mind's eye that I see poor Mr Smetham assisting me in my work by cleaning the knives and a pair of brass candlesticks. We were very merry over our work. The other gentlemen went Out after the stock when possible but one day all were at home owing to the downpour of rain and one or other would go constantly to the door give a look out and then remark "What a fine day for young ducks!" About two o'clock to our astonishment up drove a lady and gentleman in what is popularly called a "spring cart" but this in which they were seemed anything but that. Their horse a very jaded one appeared to relish the stop more than some of us did. The lady was wrapped up in a large plaid shawl over that a silk cloak lined with fur and to cover all a policeman's cloak. Of course they were invited into our mansion and I took the lady into my room to take off her bonnet. She said she felt much ashamed to trespass on my kindness that if it cleared up they would try and go on to Belfast sixteen miles further and a great deal more which I listened to without answering. At last I said - "You'll have to sleep on my gridiron; but I promise not to heat it."  She appeared amazed and told me after that she thought I was quizzing her.  We returned to the sitting-room and passed a merry evening and it would have been even merrier had we known that we were then entertaining a couple married that morning. Such a honeymoon!  The superintendent nearly found out the fact by saying to the bridegroom - "Why Mr Allison you have not been long making up your mind to marrying; I heard of your intention to get spliced but thought the day named was not until tomorrow."  Mrs Allison said quickly "You see we took Portland by surprise and were married sooner and are now going to pay some visits."  She told me the secret when we were alone and I did not divulge it for some days after they left. 'They were weather-bound for three days with us and Mrs Allison was distressed when she awoke each morning to see me lying on the floor between a mattress and a feather bed quite in the German style only the upper covering was not composed of eider down and it nearly suffocated me; added to which Ada seeing me on the floor thought it was camping in instead of out and insisted on lying by my side and on the bed. [133]  The most laughable thing was to hear the people in the outer room groaning in their sleep with the hardness of their beds for I had had the floor made very level and clean and all these unfortunates had between them was a large tarpaulin which would not soften their position much. I used to call these outcries "the groans of the wounded".  One night before going to sleep I heard someone of them say "Oh! but it is hard! If Mrs Baxter would only let me scratch out a place for my hip to rest in I should be grateful." I answered "Then indeed she won't!"  At the end of three days our young couple went on their way I should think rejoicing to Belfast and gave us a call on their return home and very warm thanks they gave me for what they termed my hospitality.  Your aunt and cousins had a letter wrote about 6 months ago. I would not let them send it because they were encouraging you to come out and that was what I did not like because I had not a way that time to keep you from the strangers but thanks be to God it is not so now for I have selected 160 acres of land. I have one year's rent paid on it and has got my licence. I am not labouring it nor won't till November. [53] The rent is only 2s. an acre and in ten years I have it free so thanks be to god it won't be so bad with you as it is a present if the Lord spares me for dear Margaret I am going to send you £2 now and Ann Jane's husband Mr. John Sherry is going to send you £1. If you be a wise good girl and stop single. The assistant emigration is stopped for a time; we expect it will commence again. Make up your mind and send me word if you will come out to this country and I will pay your passage [...] It is a great deal better out here for a girl than at home.   The HON. T. ELDER AND W. W. Hughes ESQ. - As it is scarcely worth troubling you with any detailed account of the proceedings of your exploring party whilst traversing the known country from Adelaide to Alice Springs near the centre of the continent I shall give merely an outline of that part of our journey.  We left Adelaide on the 21st September 1872 reached Beltana Station on the 26th and started thence for Alice Springs on the 3rd October.  A fortnight was spent in examining the country about the Neales westward of Mount O'Halloran; but finding nothing fit for permanent occupation we struck off for the Alberga river running it down to its junction with the Stevenson on which we were detained for a few days by rain and thunderstorms. [138]   Ascending the Stevenson which was well watered and fringed with excellent pastoral country we reached Charlotte Waters on the 25th November where we were very kindly received by Mr. Johnstone in charge of the telegraph station.  On the 21st December 1872 we arrived at the station which was to be our starting-point for our journey westward namely Alice Springs. Long. 133° 53' 14' east; lat. 23° 40' south. About 1120 miles distant from Adelaide.  Being assured by those who had resided two years in that part of the country that the summer rains would prevent my moving till the early part of April I sent Mr. Burt down to Adelaide and Beltana for four months' additional supplies to meet the expenditure of the forced detention. [139] I had much reason to regret this measure; for instead of long-continued tropical rain as prognosticated there was none at all and I might just as well have started at once.  Mr. Burt on his return from Adelaide declined to accompany the party and my son as next in seniority took his place.  The party now consisted of myself my son (Richard Egerton Warburton) J. W. Lewis Sahleh and Halleem (two Afghan camel-drivers) Dennis White (cook and assistant camel-man) and "Charley" (a native lad). We had four riding twelve baggage and one spare camel with six months' provisions and started from Alice Springs on the 15th April 1873. From this date I shall offer you extracts from my daily journal which will enable you to follow out our course on the map more readily.   April 15th 1873. - As was to be expected our first day's work was a mere getting under weigh. Two saddles broke and the loads were unsteady. [140]  Partly owing to the camels being so fat the saddles would not fit over their humps. This is a fault on the right side. Camped on the telegraph line about five miles from the springs. Our road over low rocky hills with mulga scrub (acacia aneura) a gentle ascent all the way. [141]  16th. - The first six miles over similar country to that of yesterday. Took in a supply of water at a creek then entered a scrubby flat. The scrub is not of that formidable description it had been represented to be and would have been quite passable even had there been no road cut through it. [142] The light rain which fell on the 12th though leaving no surface-water made parts of the road so boggy that we could not have crossed them had we started a day earlier. One saddle broken again to-day. We camped in the scrub and have had a treat which few in like circumstances get - rum and fresh milk. I have often abused camels and persecuted or rather prosecuted sly grog-sellers. I will never do so again.  17th. - On the telegraph line. Road still boggy in places. Country good but especially the last ten or twelve miles to Burt Creek consisting of fine open grassy plains. We camped on the Burt. There was a little water in a hole from the late rain but the government well was quite dry. Have again reason to praise camels and contrabandists. Weather looks like rain but none has fallen.  15th. - West-south-westerly direction towards the western end of the Mount Hay Range. We had unfortunately neglected to collect the small addition to our water which we might have got; indeed the Burt had been represented such a sure creek for water that I thought I could turn in to it at any time if I found no water on the more direct course to Mount Hay. The first part of the journey over good open grassy plains the same as yesterday but no water. [143] Then the scrub commenced. It became thicker and the grass worse as we went on. Seeing no prospect of water on our direct course we turned to the north-west to cut the "well-watered Burt;" but after a few miles the country became still worse and spinifex took the place of grass. Halted and though we had but little water the want did not trouble us as we fully expected to cut the Hugh river next day.  The Burt is not a creek at all in the proper meaning of the term; it is merely a slight superficial depression on flat ground carrying off the surface-drainage when the rain is sufficiently heavy and continuous to leave more than the soil can soak up or the shallow pans hold. When there is plenty of water all over the country there is some in the Burt too no doubt.  19th. - Started on our old course west-southwest for Mount Hay full of hopes that we must tumble into the Hugh which had been represented as running through the McDonnell Ranges under Brinkley's Bluff. Travelled all day but there was no such creek as the Hugh nor indeed was there any creek at all properly so called though there were one or two just appreciable depressions over which water would flow when it could not go anywhere else. [144] At six or seven miles' distance from the foot of Mount Hay we emerged from the scrub and entered on the finest grassy plains I have ever seen. There are some shallow water-courses which take off the surplus water and I dare say carry it to feed the Hugh but that the Hugh as a creek does not exist north of the McDonnell Ranges I am quite satisfied. We camped or rather threw off the loads and laid down in the dark after nearly thirteen hours' unbroken riding. We have not seen a drop of water and have only about one quart kept for any one who may fall ill for want of it. No fire lighted as we could not cook without water. Hungry and thirsty we lay down in silence. I did not speed a pleasant night.  Sunday 20th - Our first consideration on waking was how to supply our urgent need of water. We could not find any near us I therefore sent Lewis with the two Afghans and four camels our empty casks and water-bags to make their way to "Hamilton Springs" twenty-five miles distant. I knew merely the direction and probable distance of these springs it was therefore doubtful whether they could be found at all but if successful the party could not return till late at night. [145] We were in great want both of good food and water but lay down to wait patiently some of the party suffering much from want of food and water. We had little hope of speedy relief but by the goodness of Providence a blessed shower of rain fell upon us at 1 p.m. All the tarpaulins were quickly spread and we got two or three buckets of water. What a change ! All was now activity cheerfulness and heartfelt thanksgiving. A cake and a pot of tea wore soon in the hands of each and we were as happy and contented as kings. About 3 p.m. Lewis returned with a full supply of water from clay-pans without having to go so far as the springs. I hope we may never forget this day.  In the early part of the night rain fell again. We are camped on a low level flat. and have to dig a trench round the fire. All were wet through but we laid down where we could and slept in peace.  21st. - Spent the day in drying our clothes and baggage.  22nd. - We skirted the north side of the Hay Range crossed three small gum creeks all dry; at twelve miles came to a good-sized creek with sandy bed. We followed it down till it turned north-east and then camped. In ordinary seasons this creek would have given a fair supply of water and we obtained a little by sinking. [146]  23rd. - Started in a west-south-west direction varying slightly now to the southward and now to the westward. Country lightly scrubbed and beautifully grassed in parts open glades and good plains; grass in abundance but no water. Camped under a hill about 200 feet high from whence we fixed to-morrow's course. Had there been permanent water a radius of three miles from this hill would have made as pretty a small run as could be desired.  24th - Hitherto the camels have been tied up every night but this did not allow them sufficient time to feed so we left them loose. One broke its hobbles and refused to be caught in the morning which delayed our departure.  I have been hoping for some days to cut the Finke and am bearing in towards the McDonnell Ranges for this purpose. At two miles we struck a small creek coming from the range. Altered the course a little to clear some hills. Country good. [147] At noon came to a large sandy gum creek but its course was wrong for the Finke.  This creek is a very fine one with old wide-spreading gum-trees and would in ordinary seasons furnish a good supply of water but there was none now on the surface. We ascended it for two miles and found a native well. Camped and sunk another getting plenty of good water. This water must be permanent as we are travelling in a year of drought. I shall remain here until Monday the 25th to rest the camels arrange our loads and issue rations. This is the first water of a permanent character we have met with for nine days.  I went with Richard up to the head of the creek which runs in a narrow gorge; we found no water but many marks of there being plenty in usual seasons.  25th and 26th. - I have taken every means of fixing our position as accurately as possible because this place Will become a fresh starting-point; the latitude is 23° 25' 27'; the longitude by account 132° 34'0''; and the variation of the compass 2° 30' 0' east.  Sunday 27th. - Resting in part. Rations issued for a week. Map and journal brought up. Water bags filled. [148] Dampers baked and meat boiled. Camels brought in and saddled. Everything ready for an early start to-morrow.  A pleasant ride through a well-grassed country. Camped at 4 p.m. on a fine gum creek - -the Dashwood. No surface water.  29th - Several camels strayed so we could not start until 1 p.m. At a short distance up the creek we found a native well in the sand and filled all our bags. After travelling a couple of miles south-west by south we turned south to examine a cascade 280 feet high with some nice pools of water in the rocky ledges. Struck the creek again and camped on it but it contained no surface-water.  The country to-day has been beautiful With park-like scenery and splendid grass. Water procurable at easy depth in the creek. Strong south-easterly wind all night.  30th. - Thermometer down to 41° Fahrenheit this morning. Travelled up to head of the creek finding a good pool of water in a rocky glen. As the present has been a year of drought I think this water must be permanent. Both banks of the Dashwood abound in springs and water might be got anywhere in ten minutes. [149]  Leaving the glen had to return nearly to our camp before we could head westward. Turned south in the afternoon to try whether the Finke really did run through the McDonnell Ranges as confidently stated by some. We camped at 4. p.m. under a granite hillock. Country not so good.  May 1st. - Following a south-westerly course we found a shallow clay-pan and watered the camels. We came upon a large creek but running the wrong way for the Finke; two hours afterwards struck another creek also running in the wrong direction. This is our last hope and it is now quite certain that the Finke does not run through the McDonnell Ranges but takes its rise in the midst of them.  It was necessary to settle this question as my future course depended upon it. Had the Finke come from anywhere north of the McDonnell Ranges I should have steadily run it up. We shall trouble ourselves now no more about this fable. Obtained a midday observation and started afresh to the northward and westward. At 2 p.m. struck a small poor-looking creek but it had a pool of surface water so we camped here congratulating ourselves upon our first camp near surface water. [150] The camels drank with apparent satisfaction but when it came to our turn the water was so intensely bitter we could not use it. This water was beautifully clear and had every appearance of being perfectly drinkable. Its bitterness was most intense though none of the party were able to ascertain from whence this arose. This creek crosses the Tropic of Capricorn.  2nd. - Rounded what we supposed to be Haast's Bluff of Giles and at 9 a.m. struck a fine sandy creek fringed with gum-trees but with a clear level bed. At a distance of four or five miles down the creek we found water and shot two black cockatoos (probably either Calyptorhynchus funereus or C. Baudini Gould). We continued down the water-course and camped on its left bank. This is certainly a beautiful creek to look at. It must at times carry down an immense body of water but there is none now on its surface nor did its bed show spots favourable for retaining pools when the floods subsided.  3rd. - We still continued down the creek hoping to find a lake at its mouth. It continued for ten or twelve miles farther - a magnificent watercourse - but after that it fell off. As it reaches the lower level its banks cannot confine the floods which inundate the flats; the channel narrows trees take root and sand-banks intercept the stream which finally splits into narrow water-courses and spreads itself over the plains and so it ends as a creek. [151]  Camped at the end of the creek. No water.  4th. - Sent two of the party with spades up the creek to look for water and followed myself shortly afterwards with the rest. Water was found in a clay hole on the right bank and we halted for Sunday.  5th. - Started north-west by west over sandy scrub. At eight miles the country became more open with spinifex and casuarina-trees. Crossed low sand ridges running east and west.  Nothing but spinifex mulga scrub and casuarina forest all day the latter giving a melancholy beauty to the scenery more resembling a Turkish cemetery than anything else. The trees are straight-stemmed and tall. I should think they would be well suited for telegraph poles if it were possible to cart them away. They stand in thousands and thousands but there is not a scrap of feed nor a drop of water in the country.  6th. - The camels went off in the night; no great wonder as they had nothing else to do. [152]  Starting at noon we travelled eleven miles over the same sort of country as yesterday and reached the western end of Central Mount Wedge. We could not find any water and things were not looking well. Camped in the afternoon under the mount and on the edge of our first salt - lake. In the night wild dogs were heard and water-birds flew over us - both good signs.  7th. - Thinking it possible we might have to return to Sunday's camp I halted for the double purpose of resting the camels and searching for water. I sent out in three different directions and one of the party returned quickly having found a rock-hole with a soakage spring near the camp.  Thus relieved from anxiety I proceeded to measure Central Mount Wedge. It is a very remarkable hill in the Mount Wedge Range. When I first saw it from a moderate elevation at a distance of seventy or eighty miles no other part of the range was visible and it stood out as an isolated hill from a sea of scrub bearing a striking resemblance to Mount Wedge Island (a small island situated near the coast of Western Australia) as seen from a distance at sea.  Measuring with all the care I could its total height from the high saddle on which it stood proved to be 1650 feet; the eastern point being a perpendicular scarp of red rock 615 feet above the slope of the mountain; it was this sharp-cut face that I had seen from a distance. [153]  The hill was too formidable for me to ascend. Two of the party however went up for me as I wanted the bearing of some hills to check my longitude; it was a very arduous task and on reaching the summit a thick haze prevented anything being seen distinctly. The barometer also was of little use as it fell below its marked scale. In descending one of the men had a narrow escape from a large piece of rock which grazed him as it fell.  One of the water-searchers returned in the evening having found some splendid waters in glens in the range. The Afghans who had also gone out in the morning returned; they had found no water but what was much worse had contrived to lose a camel or rather to let it run away With saddle and all equipments. This camel was a serious loss. It seems from the account given by its rider that he dismounted to pick up some object which attracted his attention and tied the animal up but that it broke his nose-rope and immediately made off. [154]  5th. - I sent off the Afghan on my riding camel to recover the runaway animal and moved the camp in the afternoon seven miles along the range opposite the glens found yesterday promising to remain there till he returned. He joined us again in the evening but without the camel; he stated that he had ridden sixty miles and lost the tracks. This accident never ought to have happened at the hands of a professed camel-driver; the loss was very heavy the animal being one of our best riding camels.  9th. - Saddled the camels and took them as far up the first glen as they would go; but they were so frightened at the stupendous rocks that they could not be got to the water; we therefore sent them round to the second glen which is more easy of access but the same thing occurred there the perpendicular walls of rock which towered above them excited such terror that they would not taste the water even when brought to them in a bucket. This was unfortunate as we particularly wished them to lay in a good supply to carry us through the dry country we are now in.  We went to explore the glens. I might perhaps by degrees convey to another person in conversation some idea of these places but I cannot attempt it in writing; they are very grand and imposing. [155] At the entrance of the first glen a huge column of basalt has been launched from a height of about 300 feet and has stuck perpendicularly in the ground; the base has been worn away by the torrent and cannot much longer support this heavy top. It stands a sentry to guard the beautiful pool which occupies the whole width of the entrance to the glen. I had no time for accurate measurements and give only estimates. The pool is about fifteen feet wide fifty long and the basaltic walls which enclose it are about 300 feet in perpendicular height. Looking from the entrance the view does not extend beyond thirty yards but after scrambling that far another turn in the glen at a right angle to the first shows a still grander split in the mountain with a large circular pool of deep clear water almost wholly roofed over by a single huge slab of basalt. As the sun cannot reach this water it never can fail.  The second glen is on the whole less rugged and grand but more picturesque. We ascended to the head of this glen finding many springs and much running water. It is impossible to do these grand places justice by any verbal description; they must be seen to be rightly appreciated. [156] I have called the first "Glen Elder" the second "Glen Hughes" after the public-spirited projectors under whose auspices this expedition has been sent out.  I could have spent a week at this interesting place pleasantly and in the afternoon left it with regret. We travelled over eleven miles of alternate porcupine-grass (triodia pungens or spinifex) and scrub towards a low hill to the north-west. No signs of water; but we seemed to have passed out of the region of the salt lagoons.  10th. - North by west over this wretched country no water-courses no grass nothing but porcupine-grass and scrub. Advanced seventeen miles towards what I suppose to be a part of the Reynold's Range our latitude being 22° 25' 5'. [157]  Sunday 11th. - Obliged to move to try for water for the camels. Sent two of the party on ahead in different directions to look for it. They each found a little and we camped on a rock-hole that in ordinary seasons would have supplied all our wants.  12th. - Pursued a westerly course along a well-grassed valley between two ranges. Halted at the end of the valley to await the return of two water-seekers in the ranges. Some water had been found in the upper part of a sandy creek. I went to see it and then settled to send the camels at daylight next morning bare-backed to feed and drink all day.  I was much vexed at my carelessness in not knowing there was to be a total eclipse of the moon. I might have been prepared to some extent by rating my Adelaide timekeeper and getting my true time at camp and though I had no telescope that would note the different contacts and phases accurately I might have approximately corrected my longitude. [158] Taken by surprise when the eclipse commenced I could get nothing to be safely relied upon though I tried. It was a splendid sight and our view was perfect. The moon was at its full and the eclipse commenced shortly after sundown lasting for about two hours during half of which time it was total. After an hour the shadow began to move off.  15th. - Halt. Recruiting camels and filling water-bags.  14th. - Travelled twenty miles towards a granite range over good country grassy scrub with patches of salt and cotton-bush. For the last six miles the plain was dotted over with large granite mounds and intersected by several creeks running northward.  In the evening two of us scrambled up some steep bare smooth sheets of granite which formed the southern face of part of the range. [159] I did not like the task being obliged to take off my boots and clamber up on hands and knees. We found a fine hole in the face of the rock perfectly round and nearly full of water. This hole was entirely a work of nature and strange to say was on the point of a smooth projecting part of the rock where it might have been supposed impossible for any water to lodge. How it could have been formed in such a place I cannot conceive but so prominent was its position as to be visible from the plain at a considerable distance. The descent was to me nearly as bad as the ascent; a sitting slide feet and fingers acting as skids. The portion of the rock in which this hole was situated presented a convex form and was more than 100 feet above the level of the plain.  One camel useless from sore back. This never ought to have happened but the fault cannot now be remedied so it need not be laid upon any particular shoulders.  15th. - Proceeding on a westerly course over a scrubby plain between two ridges we struck a fine creek and camped of course upon it. There was no surface water but we found fine springs about a mile or two up the creek. [160]   16th. - Sent camels and water-bags up to Annie's Springs. We started in the afternoon and made ten miles of good westing; passed a likely-looking place for water but not being in immediate want of it I did not stop to examine it.  We did eighteen miles to-day but not on one course; the final result however was nearly west there being only a few seconds' difference between our latitudes of to-day and yesterday.  Our camp is on very high ground at the foot of granite rocks in the range; the spot is very pretty and the hill under which we are located has two immense boulders of red granite at the top. This is a marked hill and though of no great altitude above us is still very high and can be seen from a great distance.  Lewis though far from well discovered a fine water-hole in a gap in the range and as we have also found water near the camp we are all thankful and happy at the prospect of a fine Sunday.  Sunday 15th. - Halt. Weekly rations issued; true time at camp taken variation of compass 10 16' east; lat. 22° 11' 48" south; long. by account 130° 40' east.  19th. - Proceeding north a short way to round the hills then turned west ten miles. Struck a small creek which we went up six miles but found only a little water not enough for our wants. [161] Camped in thick scrub; our general course upon the creek was south-east but we made little headway; Sunday's camp bearing north 63° east about seven miles.  20th. - We are now amongst a jumble of low granite hills surrounded with thick scrub. No leading water-course and the country due north and west looks bad; little hope of water. Sent the empty bags to the mall drainage-hole down the creek to be filled and ascended a neighbouring hill to see what course would  be the best. Two out of the three sides open to us looked very dismal; therefore altered the course S.S.E. for a promising-looking break in the range we had been leaving behind us. This is a great disappointment and it keeps us hanging about the same locality but there is no help for it.  Went six miles through thick scrub and camped at the foot of the range. My two assistants looking for water found likely places but they were all dry.  21st. - Kept the camp standing to save the camels and again sent out my two companions to examine the range ahead. They found a splendid water-hole in a gorge about six miles off so our minds are now relieved from the fear of having to make back-tracks. [162]  22nd. - Five miles south-west along the foot of the range brought us to the water found yesterday. This is a fine place and the source of a long creek; the whole ground over which the waters first emerge from the hills may be called one spring as water is procurable anywhere on the flat. The centre water-course was running though there could not have been any rain for a long time. It is the best place we have yet seen for a camp; running water bulrushes and gum-trees with good feed for the camels are not found every day in the centre of Australia in a year of drought.  The name "Eva Springs" with our camp brand W. and the year are carved on a tree. This gorge has two branches in both of which there is water; but that in the right-hand one though more abundant is not accessible to animals. It could never however be wanted as the springs would give an inexhaustible supply. Some parts of the water are covered with a greasy slime from what cause I know not; the water itself is quite pure and good the oily scum not mixing with it. This greasy covering was iridescent but perfectly tasteless. [163]  The place being so favourable I left the camp standing under Lewis's charge with directions to do his best to mend the camels' backs and their saddles to re-arrange their loads and throw away everything we could safely dispense with whilst my son and I went out for a week to try what the country ahead could produce.  23rd. - I started with Richard and Charley (the black boy) south-west along the range over villainous country. Something in the scrub frightened the leading camel it turned suddenly round and ran off as fast as it could; of course the other two followed its example and shared its fright though they could not have seen what caused it. Three men rushing wildly through the bush on runaway camels which they dared not try to pull up for fear of breaking the nose-ropes must have been a ludicrous sight and when we collected our scattered forces and recovered our dropped articles we all had a hearty laugh at each other. [164]  Luckily camels are not much given to running away otherwise it would prove a serious matter. If the rider pulls at the single string that forms the means of guiding the animals the only result is that its head is brought round to the fore part of the saddle without in the least diminishing its headlong career; and as the camel can form no idea of where he is going either a heavy fall or the laceration of the cartilage would be the most probable effect of an attempt to pull up. Though these animals prefer travelling in single file they scatter wildly in every direction when terrified. On this occasion each of the three camels took a different course and the ludicrous effect was much heightened by the peculiar position of the riders on the hind seat of the saddles.  Passing through an opening in the range we reached a better travelling country and camped in the afternoon on a high plain with more scrub. South by west were three remarkable hills distant about twenty-five miles one table-topped quite flat and scarped all round the middle one saddle-backed and the third wedge-shaped and scarped at the point. [165] All three seemed very high and high also were our hopes of finding something good about them. A few drops of rain fell in the evening.  24th. - Started for the hills over good travelling country lightly scrubbed. At twelve miles struck a large gum-creek bordered by exuberant vegetation and forming a very fine piece of country. We crossed the creek expecting to find water amongst the gum-trees ahead but found none. Coming upon some good patches of cotton-bush we camped thinking to do the camels a kindness but they would not remain on them because we had put them there.  It was a most uncomfortable place for us; the ants swarmed over everything and over us; indeed they wanted to take away the cockatoos we had for dinner but we rescued them. We had a little drop of rum and did not forget to drink the health of "the Queen" this being her Majesty's birthday. Finding the camels would not stay where we wanted there was no inducement for us to remain so we saddled up and went back to the creek where we had at least clean sand and no ants.  Sunday 25th. - We were obliged to move not having found any water since leaving our depot. We examined the mouth of the creek which expended itself by inundating a large tract of level country the vegetation exuberant but dry with dry beds of back-water lagoons. [166] Were it not a year of absolute drought we should here have found plenty of water.  At 9. a.m. started for Table Mountain but on getting near it could see nothing that indicated a lodgment of water nor any water-course; so as we were nearly at the end of our own supply we could not afford to run the risk of losing the whole of next day in what might turn out a fruitless search. Under the circumstances it was better to shorten our distance from the depot rather than to increase it we therefore turned so as to cut our creek higher up than we had at first struck it and then run it up.  Camped in the creek again near a native well in which at first a few drops of water were visible; but it was only the drainage of a light shower on Saturday and disappeared on the removal of a little sand from the bottom.  26th. - Rode ten miles up the creek without seeing any place that promised water. At last our eyes were gladdened by a comparative verdure at a spot on the right bank. Here we found a native well and clearing it out came upon a splendid spring of excellent water. [167] Thus relieved we were at liberty to extend our trip instead of returning crestfallen to the depôt.  27th. - West by north eight miles. Scrub all the way. Examined some low granite hills found a drainage-hole dry also native tracts some sticks burning at a camp and a chopped tree but no water.  We travelled ten miles farther through scrub between low hills until reaching a dead flat expanse of sandy scrub I deemed it hopeless to look for water in such a locality. We camped in the scrub tormented with flies worked hard to cut out a native bees' hive but got no honey their house was empty.  The weather all day was cloudy and very hot unlike a tropical May day. At night we were blessed with a heavy thunder-storm and drenching rain. [168]  25th. - It rained all night and we spent the whole morning drying our clothes. In the afternoon we started eastward on our return to the depot. After eleven miles partly through bad scrub we camped under the lee of a low granite hill; it rained again heavily during the night but being now on a slope we were not obliged as we had been the night before to dig trenches round our blankets to prevent being flooded out. The rain is a blessing; personal discomfort therefore is of no consequence.  29th. - Returned to the depot through a good deal of scrub but there was abundance of water all about and the creek which we had left so dry two days before was now running.  30th. - Hoping to push through the bad country before us on the rain that had fallen I broke up the camp and started west. Bad scrub part of the way; camped near a small creek we had passed on our return yesterday. There was every appearance of rain in the evening but it turned off into heavy dew.  31st. - Foggy. Travelled west. Found a creek running east and west which we had not seen before when up here. There was no surface water although the heavy rain was so recent. [169]  Turned south and camped on some clay-pans.  Sunday June 1st. - Rest and water.  2nd. - Travelled west thirteen miles through scrub all day more or less thick. We found a small clay hole just sufficient for a night's supply and camped.  3rd. - Sixteen miles over high sandy table-land moderately scrubby. There was no hope of water in such a country; no water-course was met with all day and no hills seen to the westward. Bad place for camels but no better to be found.  4th. - Continuing west we saw some crested doves and spent an hour looking all round for water but found none. [170] After travelling twenty miles camped under a sand ridge.  The sand ridges here have gum-trees of an inferior description growing on the top of them; I never saw this before and hoped to obtain water by sinking but all our efforts were useless. [171]  There being so slight a prospect of water ahead I did not like to take the party farther away from the clay pans on which we had camped on the 81st. [172]  5th. - Left the camp standing. Took Lewis and started west for four miles through level scrub country between sand ridges; five more through a burnt bare casuarina forest. Two miles farther a slight but extensive depression under a sand ridge. Here the vegetation was exuberant tea-tree (Leptospermum or Melaleuca) spinifex and scrub; searched all over it diligently for water but found none; in fact surface water cannot lodge on this country much longer than ten minutes it must sink through the sand. This was a place which evidently received such excess of water as the surrounding country could not at once absorb but it held none within our reach. We continued our journey; country slightly changing and apparently improving. Camped after doing forty miles under a low stony hill. We were now some few miles within Western Australia; being the first I think who had entered that province from South Australia excepting just on the coast line. I greatly wished to go on next day but our camels were not over-fresh and it would have entailed an extra two days' halt on the main party and have made it ten days before we could reach our nearest known water. [173]  6th. - Ascended again the hill under which we had camped. The setting sun of the previous day had painted the prospect ahead in fairer colours than the reality of the rising sun confirmed and I had less reason to regret my inability to go forward. The Table Mountain which I had visited on the 25th ult. was visible at eighty or ninety miles' distance.  Reached the camp at 7 p.m. The only result of our eighty-mile ride being a conviction that for the present at least we must return to the clay pans of the 31st ult. and if dried up then back to the depot creek.  7th. - The morning broke with an appearance of rain but it will do us little good beyond what we can collect in a tarpaulin. As usual when most wanted ten camels had strayed back on the track and delayed our start.  Rain came on in the afternoon when we were on better holding-ground and enabled us to water the camels. On to camp at eighteen miles.  Sunday 5th. - Continued on our back-tracks. All the surface water of the previous afternoon was dried up and there was a cold south-easterly wind all day. [174] Ascended a hill a few miles off the track to examine what appeared a distant range to the northward running east and west. We thought very favourably of it and hoped to make west again into West Australia by its aid. Camped at the place where we had been on the 2nd.  9th. - Started for the range seen yesterday; found some clay pans and watered the camels. Sunk some holes for the water to drain into should we again have to come back.  After travelling fourteen miles we unexpectedly struck a short creek running east and west; it had plenty of water from the late rain this will give us a depot should the range prove unprofitable.  10th. - Proceeded down the creek; it had a good holding bottom of indurated clay and sand with plenty of water and many native wells. But it ran out in a couple of miles and lost itself in a flat. We continued towards the range which we reached in the evening and found to be worthless consisting only of low broken hills standing on very high ground. There was no sign of water except the sight of two wild dogs. [175]  11th. - Returned to camp of the 9th examining the country right and left for water without success.  12th. - Halted to-day in order to rest the camels and prepare for an eight days' trip to the northward.  12th. - I started with my son and Charley towards a prominent bluff in the range seventeen miles distant; the ground as we approached appeared to improve in its firmness but the rain had run off it into a flat that would not hold. We looked in vain for water and ascending the bluff about 350 feet high the prospect all round (except where we had come from) was far from exhilarating; a flat sandy scrubby country lightly dotted here and there with clumps of casuarina and covered with the never-failing spinifex was all that could be seen. There were however natives in the neighbourhood but we cannot get near them and they won't come to us. They must have water somewhere but we can find no trace of it.  14th. - North course twenty-four miles; camped under a sand ridge. On our way we surprised three blacks who fled from their camp at our approach. They left their fire burning and their weapons behind them. [176] We took a Boomerang for Oharley and left a piece of blanket in exchange.  15th. - Travelled twenty-eight miles through thick spinifex a most hopeless country indeed.  16th. - Travelled thirteen miles north; the spinifex thicker than ever and covering the whole country as far as could be seen. Found a few small Leichhardt trees for the first time. It being useless to fatigue the camels by taking them any farther through this interminable spinifex we camped and decided to retrace our steps next day. We had travelled eighty miles due north and the country was getting worse and worse.  17th. - Returning.  15th. - Returning. Caught sight of a Lubra (a native woman) with a small boy and an infant. My companions gave chase but their camels did not like leaving the track and would not step out; they bellowed lustily which made the woman run faster; she tossed away everything but the baby and escaped. Oharley however captured the lad who showed not the slightest fear but looked at us and our camels as if quite accustomed to the sight. We put him on the camel in front of Oharley and made signs for him to show us where we could find water. Even this unusual exaltation and mode of progression did not seem to frighten the urchin who kept chattering and pointing to the west. [177] We turned in that direction but before we had got far Charley's sharp eyes detected some diamond-sparrows rising from the ground and he immediately ran off to look for water. [178]  He found a native well with some water and we soon saw another close by. [179] This discovery caused us immense joy for we saw the water draining in as fast as we drew it out and we thought we had now got the key of the country and would be able to get water by sinking in any suitable flat. The lad only indirectly benefited us as he was going past the wells but we here offered him some food and let him go; he refused to eat and sneaked away thinking no doubt how cleverly he had eluded us when he got out of sight. Watered the camels and filled our bags then went on our way rejoicing that our long ride had not been useless. These we named the "Waterloo Wells." [180]  19th. - Returning to main camp.  20th. - We made a detour round the bluff range to look on all sides of it for water but found none. Reached our depot on "Ether Creek" in the afternoon.  21st and 22nd. - Spent these days resting our three camels and preparing to start for the wells. Lewis had been up the creek which he found spread out into flats and got lost then picked itself up again and became a creek once more. This being the case up the creek I thought probable it might be the same down it but on examination this proved not to be so; it was finally lost in the flat to which we had before traced it.  23rd 24th and 25th. - Returned with the whole party to Waterloo Wells. We enlarged cleared and deepened them getting an abundant supply of delicious water. [181] Sahleh one of the camel-men was now very ill with scurvy; the other one is also lame and ailing but not so bad. Towards evening Sahleh made his will which he dictated to me in Hindustanee.  26th. - Sahleh is no worse to-day but he won't allow that he is any better. The two wells which we cleared and enlarged yesterday have an abundant supply of water; they have sufficient for a depot should we be driven back again in our endeavours to cross this high table-land; but I hope we shall not be compelled to use them.  We started at 10 a.m. towards the west. After five miles' march we turned north-west across a sand ridge; the country becoming slightly undulating with low hills visible to the north-west. Camped at 4 p.m. after travelling eighteen miles between two widely separated sand ridges. Spinifex scrub and sands as usual.  27th. - I sent the camels on and went with one companion to the top of a small ironstone hill; the view was anything but cheerful. Found two stone slabs marked and a round stone hidden in a hole on the top of the hill; brought them away as curiosities. [182] Heard a wild dog in the night but found no water.  25th. - Cloudy; a few drops of rain fell. - Travelled seventeen miles in a north-westerly course. [183] The country to-day has been improving if tea-tree plats be an indication of water. At 3 p.m. we crossed a stony ridge and camped in a tea-tree plat where we expected to find as much water as we wanted; but on sinking we were soon undeceived - there was none.  Sunday 29th. - Cloudy. We deepened last night's well but with no better result than yesterday. Started in a north-westerly direction and sunk another hole near a sand-ridge but found no water. Went on a little way then turned southwest as the country ahead gave no hope of water. We then camped and dug three more wells in different places all with the same unsuccessful result. We did not make more than five miles to-day as it was unadvisable to increase our distance from the last known water already fifty miles away; but we hoped by digging on the return journey not to be obliged to go so far back as the Waterloo Wells.  30th. - Whilst at the wells the camels were not thirsty and would not drink when water was offered to them so they have had none since leaving "Ethel Creek." Now that there is none for them they want it and as the feed is both scanty and dry they wander and when we particularly wish to make an early start on their account they are absent without leave. [184] We started at 11 a.m. on our return - a great disappointment! Dug three more useless wells on the way and camped at 5 p.m.  July 1st. - Camels again absent. Started at 9 a.m.; more digging to-day and no water.  2nd. - Dug two wells on the way - both dry. But we found two native wells at about two miles west of the Waterloo Wells; they had however very little water and would have required many hours' labour to fit them for our service so we went on. One of our wells was found in good order half of the other had fallen in. We fished out the drowned rats and watered all the camels before sunset. [185]  3rd. - Sahleh is so very ill that I must remain here several days to give him a chance of his life.  4th 5th and 6th. - Sahleh has been nearly dead; he has lost the use both of his legs and arms; cannot move; can scarcely speak and cannot take any food but rice-water. He is utterly powerless and unable to travel unless I strap him on to a camel like a bag of flour and this would probably kill him; so I shall remain here and send out a reconnoitring party to-morrow.  7th. - I sent Lewis and Dennis with three camels a good supply of water and ten days' provisions. Lewis' instructions are to hunt and dig for water in any likely-looking places in any direction except one with casting in it.  I think Sahleh looks a little better to-day.  5th. - Sahleh looks worse; he is in a critical state and must either mend or die. We have nothing but citric acid to give him; he cannot eat.  9th and 10th. - Sahleh is certainly better; we have discovered a small yellow berry in the scrub which after proving it not to be poisonous we have made him eat.  11th and 12th. - Ice a quarter of an inch thick in the buckets in the morning. [186]  13th. - Induced a black to come to our camp but he trembled with fright particularly when he saw the camels.  14th 15th and 16th. - Sahleh fast recovering. Lewis ought to be back to-day.  19th. - Lewis is not yet returned and I am getting anxious about him. Six natives came to the camp but we could not understand each other. We watched these scamps with the utmost care and closeness as we thought but they were too much for us and stole an axe; this of course put an end to their visits. These blacks had been seen prowling about in the neighbourhood of the camp and by means of shouting and beckoning were induced to visit it. They were fine well-made men most of them bearded and considering the wretched hand-to-mouth life they lead were in very fair bodily condition. Clothing they possessed none; they were armed with spears and waddies or short clubs the latter of which they use to knock over the wallabies a small species of kangaroo on which they seem mainly to subsist.  After sunset Lewis returned to our great relief. He brings good news having found a place 100 miles distant where water is procurable by digging. [187]  This is all we want and gives us another secure step in our journey. He went forty miles farther westward and came upon a dry salt lake; I shall be careful to round this to the northward.  Sunday 20th. - A happy day at the prospect of leaving this place to-morrow.  In the evening our native Charley who shepherds the camels reported that three had run away southward. He had followed the tracks for several miles and one camel had broken its hobbles. This was bad news but Halleem the camel-man requested to be allowed to go after them and said he would bring them back. I lent him "Hosee" my riding camel and he started a little before 5 p.m. I expected him to push on five or six miles then camp for the night and to run the tracks smartly at daylight on Monday when he would overtake the runaways and bring them back by midday.  21st. - Looking every moment for Halleem and the camels. Sahleh who had been seen walking in the vicinity of the camp with a gun returned in the evening with the astounding intelligence that he had seen "Hosee's" return tracks coming near the camp and then branching off to the northward of east; he professed to be intimately acquainted with the tracks of each camel and quite able to distinguish one from another. [188] This alarming news threw us into a maze of perplexity and doubt.  It was now also told me for the first time that Halleem was occasionally subject to fits which rendered him quite unconscious of what he was doing or where he was going. This made the matter worse as such a man was unfit to be trusted alone and it became a question whether Halleem had lost his camel or his wits; the latter seemed to me the more probable as I could not believe that Hosee would come so near the other camels and not join them.  22nd. - I sent my son and Charley with a week's provisions on our back-tracks to try for Halleem first; but in the event of not finding his foot tracks to continue on and endeavour to recover the camels. Lewis also went in the other direction to run up Hosee's tracks so that I hoped that by one or other of these means I should learn what had become of Halleem. Unfortunately Lewis supposing he had only a few hours' work took neither food nor water. Now 6 p.m. it is beginning to rain and Lewis has not returned. I know he will stick to the tracks as long as he can but I wish he were back; if Halleem be demented he may urge the camel on sixty or seventy miles without stopping and thus get a start in his mad career that will make it impossible for Lewis to help him. [189]  23rd. - It has rained lightly all night. Lewis is still absent; I am greatly grieved at his having nothing to eat.  1 p.m. - Lewis returned; he had camped with Richard and so was all right.  It appears from his report that Sahleh whilst out "birding" must have stumbled upon a mare's nest for Lewis soon abandoned the track he started on and turned after Richard to find Halleem's first camp. They did not find this but they fell on his tracks of next day steadily following the runaway camels; it is clear therefore that Sahleh has done his countryman some injustice and caused much unnecessary alarm. His mistake however has done good for a second party is now out with food which will relieve Halleem (when they find him) from starvation. Richard returned having seen Halleem and promised to take out provisions to meet him on his return.  24th. - Stormy; clouds and light rain. Found several more wells a short distance north of our camp. [190] We must have passed close to these on the 15th June without seeing them; it is scarcely possible to find these unmarked holes without some clue.  25th. - Cold wet and stormy; rain all night.  26th. - The weather cleared up. Sahleh shot an emu (Dromaius Novae Hollandiae) - a welcome addition to our larder. Every scrap of this bird was eaten up except the feathers. The liver is a great delicacy and the flesh by no means unpalatable.  27th and 25th. - Sent provisions to Ethel Creek for Halleem.  29th. - The camel-hunters returned in the evening but without the camels. This is a double loss; the camels are gone and so is our time; our means of locomotion are much reduced whilst the necessity of getting on is greatly increased. Halleem has however done all he could do; he followed the camels nearly 100 miles but as they travelled night and day whilst ho could only track them by day he never could have overtaken them. No doubt these animals will go back to Beltana where alarm will be created as soon as they are recognized as belonging to our party.  The bolting of the camels was caused by a young bull who cut off two cows and drove them away before him. [191]  I had hoped to have been close to Perth by this time; how greatly have my expectations been disappointed! Difficulties and delays have beset us ever since the 23rd May and but for these we should have been near our journey's end for though we have not progressed we have one way with another ridden 1700 miles.  30th. - Lewis when last out sunk a well about twelve miles from here the only one out of nearly fifty in which water was procured. We started for it to-day. After deepening the well and cleaning out dead rats we had not time to get the water before one whole side fell in and the work had to be done over again. I hope we have now bid a final adieu to the Waterloo Wells; they have been as a city of refuge to us in our distress but one does not wish to reside permanently in a city of refuge however pleasant a short stay may have been. The day has been cloudy and threatening rain.  31st. - Travelled eighteen miles west-north-west. Bad ground and sand-hills. Weather cloudy with a few drops of rain.  August 1st. - We continued the same general course for seventeen miles. [192] Weather very sultry; rain seems to be near. The spinifex is so slippery the camels cannot keep their footing on it. Rain in the morning and continued all night.  2nd. - Raining still so we did not move and are thankful for it. It cleared up in the afternoon; the clouds are very low and there was a fog at night.  Sunday 3rd. - Halted for the day.  4th. - The camels were away in the morning and we made a late start. Accomplished twenty-one miles in a direction a little north of west.  5th. - Travelled towards Mary Springs passing a fine rock-hole with water. Mount Russell an isolated hill of no great altitude but a good landmark for finding the rock-hole lies south-west from the water distant about twelve miles. Mary Springs is a notable place; it is the nearest permanent water on the boundary. The supply is abundant and easily got at in a sandy gully between two sandstone hills. Unfortunately I have lost the book containing the calculations of astronomical observations but to the best of my recollection the variation of the compass was so slight at Mary Springs (under thirty minutes) as to justify the belief that the line of no variation runs very close to that place. [193] This is the third time we have crossed into Western Australia; I hope our footing there is at last secure.  6th. - Pursued a north-west course for fourteen miles. Camped early in consequence of finding tracks of natives which gave promise of water not far off. Found a shallow clay pan about two miles to the west of our camp. We found good feed here for the camels but the sand-hills appear to be increasing in number and size. We have got amongst the half-dried salt lagoons so our further progress north-west is cut off. We must keep clear of these or they may drive us still farther north.  7th. - A camel calved this morning. We cut the calf's throat and deferred the start till the afternoon. This is our second calf; the camel-men ate the first at Waterloo Wells. We started with full water-bags from the clay pan. Halted close by a salt lagoon the edge of which looked as though we might get water by sinking. We are quite amongst salt lakes - a large one lies to the westward of us sending out its arms to every point. [194] We must round the eastern end of them as camels and salt bogs do not agree at all. The country in no respect so good as yesterday; still I hope to find a clay pan here and there.  5th. - We tried to cross the salt lagoon but had to turn back. Went thirteen miles. Country is very bad - dense spinifex high steep sand-ridges with timber in the flats and nothing but the bushes that camels eat. Any man attempting to cross this country with horses must perish.  9th. - Travelled fifteen miles northward and westward. A strong easterly wind prevailed blowing up clouds of sand and ashes from the burnt ground. Truly this is a desert! We camped on a salt lagoon on the south side of which water was procurable but it was quite salt.  Sunday 10th. - Continued towards the northwest to an isolated hill. Country opening out. Reached the mount at 12. p.m. We had great expectations of this place but distance had deceived us - the hill is rubbish and we obtained no hopeful view from it. There are signs of natives on some yarn-ground near it. From this place we continued our course towards an apparent gap in a broken basaltic range and camped near it. [195]  11th. - I sent three parties out to look for water in different directions. Countless thousands of shell and other small parrots flew over the camp disturbed by the riders. Our water-searchers returned in the afternoon unsuccessful those who had examined the range pronouncing that part of the country hopeless for water. We were however induced to think there must be water somewhere in the direction taken by the third searcher as he reported having seen flock-pigeons. He may have been mistaken and the chance would have led us farther from the last water; so we should run the hazard of losing time and lengthening the distance should our opinion prove wrong. I sent two men in the evening on our back-track to see if they could trace to water the natives whose yam-digging marks we had seen yesterday at Yam Hill. This is our last chance; if it fail we must go over those terrible sand-hills again to our last water! It will ruin the camels and place us in an ugly predicament but there is no alternative. I dare not work them on a chance. What they can do must be all on a certainty of getting water at the end. [196]  12th. - I took the party on our back-tracks to meet those I sent out yesterday evening and found them at breakfast near Yam Hill. They had tracked the natives to their camp near which they had a well. This is a blessing indeed to us. I had a perfect dread of again crossing the frightful desert we had got over. I trust that all may now be well with us for the present. The camels must have some days' rest as they have not had their weekly spell for a long time.  13th. - Halt.  14th. - We ran up some blacks' tracks for twelve miles discovered their well and camped near a bluff. Found afterwards two other wells not far off.  15th. - On rounding the bluff a high hill came in view in front of us towards which we travelled over pretty easy ground which had been burnt. Near the bluff the country presented a more hopeful appearance but it soon fell off into sandy desert. Camped about fifty-two miles south of the hill.  16th. - We had scarcely travelled five miles to-day before a thick smoke arose close before us. How the blacks let themselves into this trap I don't know; they never would have set fire to the country had they seen us so close. [197] Of course they paid the penalty of their carelessness for we soon invaded their camp and took possession of an excellent well. This gave me an opportunity of fixing the camp for some days whilst my son and I went out to see if we could find any break in the country to indicate the vicinity of Sturt Creek discovered by A. C. Gregory in 1856. We started in the afternoon and camped under a hill. Unfortunately my rough book in which I worked my observations has been lost but I remember taking a lunar which gave a longitude within four or five miles of that by account. I therefore concluded we must be somewhere near the salt lake into which Sturt Creek empties itself; and as this lake is stated to be only 300 feet above the level of the sea whilst the barometer and our own convictions told us we must be on very high land I had expected to find some very marked depression in the country.  17th. - Ascended the hill but could see no sign at all of Sturt Creek or the lake. As far as eye could reach high land alone was visible. We had long been on elevated ground and were now on a high hill but there was no fall in the country such as required by a lake on a low level. Went part of the way back to camp having neither food nor water for further search. [198]  15th. - Returned to our standing camp. A reed-topped spear and an old iron tomahawk had been found in the camp of the natives apparently significant of Sturt Creek not being very far off. [199]  19th. - My son and I started again north by east towards a high-looking range in search of some signs of Sturt Creek. Travelled twenty miles over a most desolate burnt country. Camels will eat almost all sorts of scrub but we had difficulty in finding a mouthful for them here and we ourselves were tormented all the afternoon and night by small black ants. We could get no firewood so altogether had a pretty miserable time of it.  20th. - Continued our course towards the range a gale of wind blowing the dust and ashes of the burnt ground in our faces. To our surprise after travelling about seven miles we struck a gum creek with good trees but no water. We had never anticipated such a find in such a vile country but it did us no good. Reached the range and ascended the highest point but there was no probability of such a lake as we were looking for. All was high table-land. Camped under the range.  21st. - We followed the gum creek through the range and ran it up to its head. Not a drop of water! Rode all day in different directions looking for signs of the lake but in vain. [200] Returned to the west side of the range through a long bad gap and camped near the same place as yesterday. We could not afford to spend any more time looking for the lake and I presume there must be some error in the longitude. The Basaltic hills looking very high from a distance were there but they were worse than useless having no water near them.  I had been under an impression that these "fine Basaltic ranges" as they are called by Baron von Mueller would lead us into a better country but I was disappointed. Whatever they may be in good seasons they are as bad as they could be now and there is more hope of water in the sand-ridges than amongst these hills.  22nd. - Returning to our standing camp we came upon some soft boggy ground on which the camels would not put a foot. It is a surface-water channel branching into the gum creek. In good seasons there must be water about and I dare say we might have found it by digging but we had no spade. It was dry enough for horses but the camels would not cross it. Our return line was over a better country and we camped within a few miles of our companions. [201]  23rd. - Reached the standing camp.  It would appear now that we were about ten miles east of the dry Salt Lake into which Sturt Creek empties itself. The sand-hills prevented our seeing it.  Sunday 24th. - Halt.  25th. - Proceeded west-south-west five miles to a native well found by Lewis during our absence.  26th. - Thirteen miles west by south to a well in black soil. It was a strong spring. We dug dogs' bones out of it and when cleared it was a fine well. As far as we could judge the water is permanent.  27th. - Eighteen miles west. Ascended a small hill hoping to see something cheerful. We were disappointed but still I know there is no dependence to be placed on a cursory view from a height. The country may turn out better than it looks.  25th. - Travelling west. Lewis found a plot of ground where water was procurable at about a couple of feet. This would have been a fine place had we been in want of water but we had some with us and our great anxiety now was to get on. Crossed a large plain and saw for the first time flock-pigeons. They were very wild and we could only kill three or four: These pigeons are excellent eating. [202] We have accomplished eighteen miles to day and hope from the change in the country and the pigeons to find something good soon.  29th. - Sent Lewis south of our course to examine a likely-looking place and took the rest of the party fourteen miles west camping between sand-ridges. Lewis on his return reported having found a glen and a beautiful pool of water. I had made preparations to go to this place but in the evening the existence of a lake ahead of us being reported I thought it better not to go backward. I give the following extract from Lewis's account of the place he found which I have called "Bishop's Glen :" - "After travelling six miles we reached a beautiful clump of large gum-trees growing in a swamp at the bottom of a small creek which was hemmed in by a high sand-hill and then ran through a rocky ridge in which there were fine clear deep water-holes 100 feet in circumference. The green foliage of the gum-trees contrasted pleasantly with the red sand-hills on either side and the barren rocky ridge in front. Bustard bronze-wing pigeons owls and other birds were seen in the glen and the whole formed a most gratifying sight after the dreary sand-hill country over which we have travelled. [203] [204]It was a sight which would well repay a few miles' journey in any country."  30th.-Proceeded thirteen miles north-north-west to a fine fresh-water lake - large but not deep all over. [205] There were plenty of ducks flock-pigeons and parrots. This is indeed a rare treat to us and considering the present size of the lake it must be very large (for fresh water) in a season when three months' tropical rain has fallen. [206]  31st. - Halted for the day. Shot all we could but the lake is too large for good sport.  September 1st. - We left the lake and at four miles west-north-west found another; this second was circular with beautifully clear fresh water resting on a pebbly bed. The shelving banks were dry but there was a considerable body of deep water in the centre. From here we made fourteen miles with very thick spinifex part of the way.  On the 30th just before reaching the lake we had captured a young native woman; this was considered a great triumph of art as the blacks all avoided us as though we had been plague-stricken. We kept her a close prisoner intending that she should point out native wells to us; but whilst we were camped to-day the creature escaped from us by gnawing through a thick hair-rope with which she was fastened to a tree. We wore quickly on her tracks directly we discovered our loss but she was too much for us and got clear away. [207] We had not allowed her to starve during her captivity but she supplied herself from the head of a juvenile relation with an article of diet which our stores did not furnish.  2nd. - West again to-day eighteen miles over bad sand-hills and rough spinifex. Ran up a smoke and found a native well. There are hills in sight; those towards the north look high and hopeful but they are quite out of our course. Other detached broken hills lie to the west so our intention is to go towards them.  3rd. - North-west by west to a sandstone hill but arrived at the top nothing was to be seen from it except several "hunting smokes" in different directions. Found a deep well in a gully some distance up the hill but we could not use it for when cleared out the sides fell and it was dangerous for any one to descend.  4th. - Marched six miles west and found a native camp and a well. Could not catch a native there they being too quick for us; not far however from the camp a howling hideous old hag was captured and warned by the former escape we secured this old witch by tying her thumbs behind her back and haltering her by the neck to a tree. [208] She kept up a frightful howling all night during which time we had to watch her by turns or she would have got away also. I doubt whether there is any way of securing these creatures if you take your eyes off them for ten minutes. North of us there is rather a good-looking range running east and west with a hopeful bluff at its western end; but I cannot go farther north whilst there is a hope of getting west.  5th. - Made eighteen miles westing over bad country - and no water.  6th. - Followed a general westerly course eight miles. Smoke being seen a little to the south we ran it up and found a camp and well but could not see any natives.  We let the old witch go. She was the most alarming specimen of a woman I ever saw; she had been of no use to us and her sex alone saved her from punishment for under pretence of leading us to some native wells she took us backwards and forwards over heavy sand-hills exhausting the camels as well as my small stock of patience. The well we found was in the opposite direction to the one she was taking us to.  Sunday 7th. - I had hoped for a halt and a good rest for the camels but our well turned out badly being very deep and containing not enough water for us or for a single camel. [209] We could not find anything better so at sunset I sent the camels back to our last water remaining myself with one companion at the camp in charge of our baggage and as our last well was not a good one I fear the camels cannot get back for three days. This not only causes great loss of time which is the same as loss of provisions but it gives the poor camels too much extra work. We are now on short allowance of flour and the camels have more before them than they can well do so they do not stand in need of additional work by going back; there is however no help for it.  5th 9th and 10th. - I and my comrade remain at camp. At 11. a.m. the party and camels returned; there had been much difficulty and hard work in watering them the supply being scanty and it took a whole night as well as the day to satisfy them. The heat is now very great and the camels are suffering from travelling during the day over the hot sand and steep hills; we are therefore obliged to send them on in the evening but I shall continue day travelling myself as long as I can get a camel to stand up. [210]   11th. - I started the baggage camels last night under Lewis. My son and I left this morning and made twenty-one miles of westing with no sign of water anywhere on the march.  Charley has been taking a turn round our camp and reports a native well and a camp of blacks about four miles off. I shall start at day-light so as to surprise their camp and endeavour to catch one of the natives.  12th. - We reached the native camp six miles distant just at day-light but our black-birds had taken wing. The wells are excellent; shallow in a sandy hollow with plenty of water. There is a small salt lagoon near us; it had some ducks when we arrived but they declined our company. We got a few bronze-wing pigeons. There are two more small soda-holes near us. Baggage started when the moon rose.  13th. - My son and I found two dry wells and a dry tea-tree swamp. We reached our camp after a twenty miles' march. The Leichhardt trees are increasing in number and size. Casuarina trees there are none; oak few but sand-ridges and spinifex continue to unabated vigour. The country though very dry is yet a little more hopeful and though perhaps unable to find wells we may be able to make them. [211] The weather is getting very hot; the natives cannot hunt far from water we shall therefore turn north-west by north tomorrow in hope of finding something.  Sunday 14th. - Having no water to halt upon we are obliged to move on. Baggage started with the moon; the course variable so as to cross the sand-hills at the easiest slope.  On reaching our camp eighteen miles distant we found that the advance party had found a splendid well or rather had made one in a good place; we have reason to be thankful as this well saves us from going back over the stiff sand-hills we have crossed. The country has not improved as I had hoped. I shall resume a west course to-morrow; my riding-camel has completely broken down and could not bring me into camp to-day. She lay down and we could only get her on her legs again by lighting some spinifex under her tail; but it was of no use she could not travel so I tied her to a bush and walked in.  I sent a man to lead in my camel; it is quite clear I must give up day travelling the camels will be ruined by it. [212] [213]  15th. - Obliged to halt; our master bull camel has eaten poison and is very ill; this animal is of immense value not only on account of his great strength but because without his aid we shall scarcely be able to keep the young bulls in order and they may run off with all our camels Our lives almost depend on this sick camel. We have nothing to give the poor beast but a bottle of mustard and that does not seem to do it much good. I hope a day's rest may help both it and my own riding-camel. At 4 p.m. the young bulls already began to be troublesome and we are obliged to take extra precautions to keep them fast; the old one seems worse will not be able to move to-morrow and I cannot stay longer for want of provisions. [214]  16th. - Made fourteen miles west. The old camel is unable to stand so we are obliged to leave it. We cut a ramp down to the water in the well that it might get water if it lived. [215]  Passed two small ponds strongly impregnated with soda. We have been obliged to knee-halter the young bulls.  17th. - Progressed fifteen miles towards the west and reached a well found by one of the camel-men; it is a very poor one. The weather gets hot; this moment it is 104° under my fly.  By lunar distance taken yesterday on the march our longitude was observed to be 124° 30' E.; by account it is 124° 37' 0'' E. Lunars are not much to be depended on but as the two longitudes come near each other I think their mean may approximate the truth and if they don't no great harm is done.  15th. - Made eleven miles more to the west. Obliged to abandon two riding-camels at our last camp; they could not stir. We at first thought they were poisoned but it now appears that they have been struck in the loins by the night wind. My son's riding-camel is also struck it cannot drag its hind legs after it so we kill it here for meat instead of leaving it to die. What destruction to us! our strongest bull and three riding camels all gone in a day or so! What is to become of us if this continue I know not.  We do our best by covering their backs at night. [216]  The camel-men say the disease is common in their country; that it always comes in the night and prevails when a certain star is in the ascendant but what star they cannot tell me and as I am not a believer in the malign influence of the stars it does not much signify.  19th. - Happy to say we have no more sick camels this morning. We started so as to reach a smoke we had seen yesterday about ten miles off. Found a dry well but the country at times very bad. We jerked our camel-meat as well as we could; but it is very poor food; the animal was old and quite worn out. The travelling these dark nights over such bad ground is necessarily very slow; hitherto I have allowed the sand-hills to be my guide; not only on account of the difficulty of crossing them but also because the smokes we have seen have been mostly a little north of west; I cannot however go any farther with them as they are running more to the north of west whilst my proper course lies a little to the south of it; and thus by and by I should have to cross them nearly at right angles which would be ruinous. [217] [218]  Though now relieved from the immediate want of food we are much in need of the camels; they suffer greatly from the heat and cannot travel by day. As I will not move any farther from water on an uncertainty we have decided in council to halt here to-morrow; two going out on camels to hunt for water on some tracks of natives we have seen this morning and two more on foot to search towards the south. [219] Should both parties fail then we must try a night march back to No. 86 get all the water we can there and then press on next night to No. 84.  20th. - It is one year to-day since we left Adelaide! The two parties started as determined upon yesterday; owing to the reduced number (two only) and weak state of our riding-camels we have been obliged to throw away the tents and most of our private property - keeping only guns and ammunition and clothing enough for decency. The party on foot returned unsuccessful. They found a well but could not dig to water as the sand poured in from the sides faster than they could take it out.  At 1 p.m. Charley returned with news that they had tracked the natives round from northwest to south-west and found their well. Lewis remained there to clear it out and I shall move on towards it this afternoon in time to water the camels.  Those only who have been in like circumstances can rightly estimate the blessing this well is to us; we should have been obliged to go back fifty miles giving the camels an extra hundred before we could have recovered our present position and we have neither time nor strength for so heavy an addition. [220] We ourselves are all quite well but very hungry. Reached the well at 5.; it is a very fine one and we watered all the camels.  21st - Closely as I am pressed for time I think it best to remain here a few days. The season is one of drought the country thickly covered with sand-hills and spinifex the destructive heat makes it impossible to work our few camels during the day and it is almost equally impossible to get over this rough ground in the dark. By remaining a few days I shall refresh the camels and the waxing moon will help us over the ground; unfortunately I cannot make the best of my time as I cannot use the camels to scour the country round our front.  22nd. - Halt. Our sick camel is not improving much the others are doing well.  23rd. - Halt. A small bit of hoop iron sharpened at one end like a chisel has been found here; I can only suppose it to have been obtained from the kegs which Mr. F. Gregory abandoned some twelve years ago on his way to Mount McPherson. Two of our party have been away to-day; they have just returned and report the discovery of a good well about seven miles off. [221]  24th. - Cloudy with a hot wind blowing; the flies innumerable to-day which is a tolerably good sign of rain.  25th. - Travelled to-day parallel to the sandridges to the well which we found to be a very good one.  26th. - Progressed nine miles. Richard is ill to-day; indeed we are all more or less afflicted with diarrhoea. The ants are very troublesome.  27th. - Made twelve miles but met with no water; it is useless to go farther from our last water till we have secured another in front.  The sick camel that had detained me five days has now given in although it has carried nothing for the last fortnight. Slight as our progress is the work is too hard for the camels yet they are the most patient and enduring animals. We have now only eight left out of the seventeen we originally started with. A flock of wild geese flew over in the evening from the west; we hail it as a good omen; but our speculations have not as yet turned out very happy ones.  Sunday 25th. - Halt to-day for the purpose of trying the country all round for water before we turn back; as we must do if unsuccessful. I sent out two of the party to search. The sand-hills are running us down too much to the north but we cannot cross them in the dark without great danger to our camels. [222] In addition to the common flies which are quite bad enough and the ants which nearly eat us up we have the Australian bee or honey-fly to torment us. These insects stick to one most perseveringly and though they don't sting they smell badly which is perhaps the reason they persist in walking up our nostrils.  Our water-searchers returned unsuccessful. Painful as retrogression is it is the only safe course under the circumstances in which we are placed so that in ten days we shall only have made a few miles progress. We are now on very short allowance and seem to have the prospect of starvation before us.  29th. - Started with the moon. Halted when she sank and went on again in the morning. Reached camp No. 90 by 9. a.m. on Monday the 29th. We saw nothing of the knocked-up camel we had left on Saturday and suppose it had turned aside to die. We crossed the tracks of two natives this morning and shall endeavour to run them up.  30th. - Sent Lewis and Charley at daylight to follow up the native tracks; Oharley returned at 10 a.m. with news of a good well about five miles to the north-west. [223] Lewis stayed at the well to save the camel.  Took the party to the water in the evening; it is by far the best we have seen for months; it is more a rock-hole than a well though it is certainly fed by a spring.  October 1st. - An immense number of bronze-wing pigeons came to water at this hole but they are most difficult to get; we are obliged to shoot for the pot as our supply of ammunition will not allow of reckless or doubtful shots.  Our hopes are raised at finding a different class of water and although it has taken us down to latitude 200 2' we must follow its line; our great disadvantage lies in being unable to make any extensive search in our front for want of camels or to travel by day on account of the heat which utterly prostrates them; when we move we can't see when we stop we can't search.  Travelled ten miles west along the flat then camped as one of the riding-camels got lame.  Night cloudy with a suffocating heat; the ants enjoy this weather the creatures never sleep and won't let us either.  2nd. - It is very hot to-day but less cloudy. [224]  Two of the party went out on foot a few miles and saw several smokes but no water; the smokes were most probably many miles farther than they appeared to be and trudging over these hills of loose burning sand is enough to kill a strong well-fed man. A very short walk is all we can manage.  Before leaving Perth I received from the Surveyor-General the following outline of instructions for my general guidance [...]  'The chief object of the expedition is to obtain information concerning the immense tract of country from which flow the Murchison Gascoigne Ashburton DeGrey Fitzroy and other rivers falling into the sea on the western and northern shores of this Territory as there are many good and reasonable grounds for a belief that those rivers outflow from districts neither barren nor badly watered.  Mr. A. C. Gregory coming from the northwards by Sturt's Creek discovered the Denison Plains and it may be that from the head of the Murchison River going northwards there are to be found near the heads of the rivers above alluded to many such grassy oases; and looking at the success which has already attended the stocking of the country to the eastward of Champion Bay and between the. heads of the Greenough River and Murchison it will be most fortunate for our sheep farmers if you discover any considerable addition to the present known pasture grounds of the colony; and by this means no doubt the mineral resources of the interior will be brought eventually to light. Every opinion of value that has been given on the subject tells one that the head of the Murchison lies in a district which may prove another land of Ophir.  In tracing up this river from Mount Gould to its source and in tracing other rivers to and from their head waters detours must be made but generally your course will be north-east until you are within the tropics; it will then be discretionary with you to decide on your route. [447] [...]  [April 18 1874] By half-past nine on the morning of the 18th we had made a fair start. The day was intensely hot and as we had only three riding-horses half of the party were compelled to walk. We travelled in a north-easterly direction for eleven miles and reached a spring called Wallala which we dug out and so obtained sufficient water for our horses. I may mention here that Colonel Warburton and other explorers who endeavoured to cross the great inland desert from the east had the advantage of being provided with camels - a very great advantage indeed in a country where the water supply is so scanty and uncertain as in Central Australia. As we ascertained by painful experience a horse requires water at least once in twelve hours and suffers greatly if that period of abstinence is exceeded. A camel however will go for ten or twelve days without drink without being much distressed. This fact should be remembered because the necessity of obtaining water for the horses entailed upon us many wearying deviations from the main route and frequent disappointments besides great privation and inconvenience to man and beast.  The 19th was Sunday and according to practice we rested. Every Sunday throughout the journey I read Divine Service and except making the daily observations only work absolutely necessary was done. Whenever possible we rested on Sunday taking if we could a pigeon a parrot or such other game as might come in our way as special fare. Sunday's dinner was an institution for which even in those inhospitable wilds we had a great respect [...]   22nd. - Continued northerly; at twelve miles crossed the dividing range between the Sandford and other creeks flowing into the Murchison. Camped at a granite hill called Bia with a fine spring on its north side. Got a view of Mount Murchison which bore N. 70 E. mag. from camp. Fine grassy granite country for the first eight miles to-day. Splendid feed at this camp. Travelled about fifteen miles. Latitude by meridian altitude of Regulus 27° 7' S. Walking in turns every day [...]  24th. - At one mile reached the Murchison River and followed along up it. [448] Fine grassy flats good loamy soil with white gums in bed and on flats. Travelled about fourteen miles and camped. Rather brackish water in the pools. Latitude of camp 26° 42' 43" by Regulus. Shot seven ducks and eight cockatoos. Saw several kangaroos and emus. Rain much required. [...]  28th. - Followed up the river. Fine pools for the first six miles with numbers of ducks in them. After travelling about twenty miles we lost the river from keeping too far to the east and following branches instead of the main branch in fact the river spreads out over beautifully-grassed plains for many miles. Fearing we should be without water I pushed ahead and after following a flat for about six miles got to the main river where there were large pools of brackish water. As it was getting late returned in all haste but could not find the party they having struck westward. I got on the tracks after dark and after following them two miles had to give it up and camp for the night tying up my horse alongside. Neither food nor water and no rug.  29th. - I anxiously awaited daylight and then followed on the tracks and overtook the party encamped on the main branch of the river with abundance of brackish water in the pools. Shot several cockatoos. [...]  May 1st. - Followed up river keeping a little to the south of it for about fifteen miles. We camped on a splendid grassy flat with a fine large pool of fresh water in it. Shot several ducks. This is the best camp we have had - plenty of grass and water - and I was very rejoiced to find the month commence so auspiciously. [...]   2nd. - Steered straight for Mount Gould N. 580 E. for sixteen miles when I found I had made an error and 'that we bad unknowingly crossed the river this morning. After examining the chart I steered S.E. towards Mount Hale and striking the river we followed along it a short distance and camped at some brackish water Mount Hale bearing N. 178° E. and Mount Gould N. 28° E. Barometer 2896 thermometer 77° at 5.30 p.m. [...]  5th. - We travelled up easterly along the river which spreads out and has several channels sometimes running for miles separately then joining again. There were many fine fresh pools for the first four miles after which they were all salt and the river divided into so many channels that it was difficult to know the main river. [...] [449]  6th. - Three of the natives accompanied us to-day. We travelled east for six miles when I ascended a rise and could see a river to the north and south; the one to the north the natives say has fresh water. As the natives say there is plenty of water ahead N. 700 E. we continued onwards to a hill which I named Mount Maitland. After about twenty miles we reached it but found the spring to be bad and after digging no water came. For our relief I tied up the horses for some time before letting them go. Ascending the hill close to the camp I saw a very extensive range and took a fine round of angles. The compass is useless on these hills as they are composed of micaceous iron ore with brown hematite which is very magnetic. To the east a line of high remarkable ranges extend running eastwards which I have named the Robinson Range after his Excellency Governor Robinson [...]  7th [...] Got an early start and steering N. 700 E. for about twelve miles we reached the river and camped at a fresh pool of splendid water. This is a fine large branch; it is fresh and I believe if not the main is one of the largest branches. The country is now more undulating and splendidly grassed and would carry sheep well. The whole bed of the river or valley is admirably adapted for pastoral purposes and will no doubt ere long be stocked [...]  9th. - Continued along river which is gradually getting smaller for about thirteen miles over most beautiful grassy country the best we have seen. White gums along bed. I believe the river does not go more than twenty miles from here it being now very small. Found a nice pool of water and camped..  11th. - Continued up river which is getting very small over beautifully-grassed country and at seven miles came to a fine flat and splendid pool of permanent water. Although a delightful spot I did not halt as we had come such a short distance. Here we met six native women who were very frightened at first but soon found sufficient confidence to tell us there was plenty of water ahead. As they always say this I do not put any faith in it. [450] We continued on about east for eight miles to a high flat-topped hill when we got a view of the country ahead and turned about N.E. towards some flats and at about eight miles camped on a grassy plain with some small clay-pans of water. Splendid feeding country all along this valley - I may say for the last 100 miles.  12th. - Started E.N.E. for four miles then north three miles to the range where we searched over an hour for water without success. We then travelled S.E. for five miles and south one mile and a half to a water-hole in a brook by digging out which we got abundance of water. About a quarter of a mile farther down the brook found a large pool of water and shot six ducks. As soon as we unloaded it commenced to rain and kept on steadily till midnight. I am indeed pleased to get this rain at last as the country is very dry. Splendid open feeding country all to-day and the camp is a beautifully-grassed spot.  14th. - Steered S.E. for about fourteen miles to a stony low range thence E.N.E. and east and south for six miles turning and twisting looking for water. Windich found some in a gully and we camped. Spinifex for the first fourteen miles and miserable country. The prospect ahead not very promising. [...]  18th. - Steered S.S.E. for four miles then S.E. generally towards the flat-topped hills seen yesterday and which bore E. mag. from Spinifex Hill. At six miles crossed a low range covered with spinifex after which we passed over country generally well grassed some of it most beautifully and white gums very large in clumps were studded all over the plains. At about twenty-two miles reached the flat topped hills and camped finding some water in a clay-pan The line of white gums I find are only large clumps studded over extensive plains of splendidly-grassed country. No large water-course was crossed but several small creeks form here and there and afterwards run out into the plains finally finding their way into the Murchison.  20th. - Steering N.E. for five miles over fine grassy plains came to a low stony range ascending which we saw a little to the south a line of (colalya) white gums to which we proceeded. Then following up a large brook for about five miles N.E. we camped at a small water-hole in the brook. [451] In the afternoon I went with Pierre about one mile N.E. of camp to the summit of a rough range and watershed which I believe is the easterly water-shed of the Murchison River. All the creeks to the west of this range (which I named Kimberley Range after the Right Honourable Lord Kimberley the Secretary of State for the Colonies) trend towards the Murchison and finally empty into the main river. From this range we could see a long way to the eastward. The country is very level with low ranges but no conspicuous hills. Not a promising country for water but still looks good feeding country.  21st. - Continued on N.E. and travelling over the watershed of the Murchison we followed along a gully running N.E.; then passing some water-holes travelled on and ascended a small range from which we beheld a very extensive clear plain just before us. Thinking it was a fine grassy plain we quickly descended when to our disgust we found it was spinifex that had been burnt. We continued till three o'clock with nothing but spinifex plains in sight. I des-patched Windich towards a range in the distance and followed after as quickly as possible. When we reached the range we heard the welcoming gunshot and continuing on we met Tommy who had found abundance of water and feed on some granite rocks. We soon unloaded and were all rejoiced to be in safety the prospect this afternoon having been anything but cheering.  25th. - Travelled onwards about N. 400 E. for eight miles passing a low granite range at six miles. Came to a fine brook trending a little south of east which we followed downwards seven miles running nearly east. This brook was full of water some of the pools being eight or ten feet deep ten yards wide and sixty yards long. It flowed out into a large flat and finally runs into a salt lake. I named this brook Sweeney Creek after my companion and farrier James Sweeney. Leaving the flat we struck N.N.E. for four miles and came to a salt marsh about half a mile wide which we crossed. Following along came into some high ranges which I named the Frere Ranges after Sir Bartle Frere the distinguished President of the Royal Geographical Society. [...] [452]   26th. - Ascended the Frere Ranges and got a fine view to the north and east. Fine high hills and ranges to the north; a salt marsh and low ranges to the east and S.E. Continued on N.E. for four miles then N.N.W. for three miles passing plenty of water in clay-holes and clay-pans in bed of marsh we camped at a fine pool in a large brook that runs into the marsh which I called Kennedy Creek after my companion James Kennedy. The prospect ahead is very cheering and I hope to find plenty of water and feed for the next 100 miles. [...]  27th. - Followed up the Kennedy Creek bearing N.N.E. and N. for about seven miles passing a number of shallow pools when we came to some splendid springs which I named the Windich Springs after my old and well-tried companion Tommy Windich who has now been on three exploring expeditions with me. They are the best springs. I have ever seen - flags in the bed of the river and pools twelve feet deep and twenty chains long - a splendid place for water. We therefore camped and found another spot equally good a quarter of a mile west of camp in another branch. There is a most magnificent supply of water and feed - almost unlimited and permanent. A fine range of hills bore north-west from the springs which I named Carnarvon Range after the Right Honourable the present Secretary of State for the Colonies. The hills looked very remarkable being covered with spinifex almost to their very summit. We shot five ducks and got three opossums this afternoon besides doing some shoeing [...]  29th.. [...] Spinifex in every direction and the country very miserable and unpromising. I went ahead with Windich. Steering about N. 15° E. for about eight miles over spinifex sand-hills we found a spring in a small flat which I named Pierre Spring after my companion Tommy Pierre. It was surrounded by the most miserable spinifex country and is quite a diamond in the desert. We cleared it out and got sufficient water for our horses. [...]   [June] 2nd. - Early this morning went with Pierre to look for water while my brother and Windich went on the same errand. We followed up the brook about south for seven miles when we left it and followed another branch about S.S.E. ascending which Pierre drew my attention to swarms of birds parroquets &c. about half a mile ahead. [453] We hastened on and to our delight found one of the best springs in the colony. It ran down the gully for twenty chains and is as clear and fresh as possible while the supply is unlimited. Overjoyed at our good fortune we hastened back and finding that my brother and Windich had not returned packed up and shifted over to the springs leaving a note telling them the good news. After reaching the springs we were soon joined by them. They had only found sufficient water to give their own horses a drink; they also rejoiced to find so fine a spot. Named the springs the Weld Springs after his Excellency Governor Weld who has always taken such great interest in exploration and without whose influence and assistance this expedition would not have been organized. There is splendid feed all around. I intend giving the horses a week's rest here as they are much in want of it and are getting very poor and tired. Barometer 28.24; thermometer 71° at 5 p.m. Shot a kangaroo. [...]   11th. - Rested at the Weld Springs. Shot an emu; about a dozen came to water. My brother and Windich intend going a flying trip E.S.E. in search of water tomorrow [...] 13th. - About one o'clock Pierre saw a flock of emus coming to water and went off to get a shot. Kennedy followed with the rifle. I climbed up on a small tree to watch them. I was surprised to hear natives' voices and looking towards the hill I saw from forty to sixty natives running towards the camp all plumed up and armed with spears and shields. I was cool and told Sweeney to bring out the revolvers; descended from the tree and got my gun and coo-eyed to Pierre and Kennedy who came running. By this time they were within sixty yards and halted. One advanced to meet me and stood twenty yards off; I made friendly signs; he did not appear very hostile. All at once one from behind (probably a chief) came rushing forward and made many feints to throw spears. He went through many manoeuvres and gave a signal when the whole number made a rush towards us yelling and shouting with their spears shipped. When within thirty yards I gave the word to fire: we all fired as one man only one report being heard. I think the natives got a few shots but they all ran up the hill and there stood talking and haranguing and appearing very angry. [454] We re loaded our guns and got everything ready for a second attack which I was sure they would make. We were not long left in suspense. They all descended from the hill and came on slowly towards us. When they were about 150 yards off I fired my rifle and we saw one of them fall but he got up again and was assisted away. On examining the spot we found the ball had cut in two the two spears he was carrying; he also dropped his wommera which was covered with blood. We could follow the blood-drops for a long way over the stones. I am afraid he got a severe wound. My brother and Windich being away we were short-handed. The natives seem determined to take our lives and therefore I shall not hesitate to fire on them should they attack us again. I thus decide and write in all humility considering it a necessity as the only way of saving our lives. I write this at 4 p.m. just after the occurrence so that should anything happen to us my brother will know how and when it occurred. - 5 p.m. The natives appear to have made off. We intend sleeping in the thicket close to camp and keeping a strict watch so as to be ready for them should they return to the attack this evening. At 7.30 my brother and Windich returned and were surprised to hear of our adventure. They had been over fifty miles from camp E.S.E. and had passed over some good feeding country but had not found a drop of water. They and their horses had been over thirty hours without water. [...]   14th (Sunday). - The natives did not return to the attack last night. In looking round camp we found the traces of blood where one of the natives had been lying down. This must have been the foremost man who was in the act off throwing his spear and who urged the others on. Two therefore at least are wounded and will have cause to remember the time they made their murderous attack upon us. We worked all day putting up a stone hut ten by nine feet and seven feet high thatched with boughs. We finished it; it will make us safe at night. Being a very fair hut it will be a great source of defence. Barometer 28.09; thermometer 68° at p.m. Hope to have rain as without it we cannot proceed. [...] [455]  15th. - I intend going with Windich to-morrow easterly in search of water. Barometer 2909 at 5 p.m.; thermometer 62°.   16th. - Left the Weld Springs with Windich and a pack-horse carrying fourteen gallons of water [...]  17th. - As the horses did not ramble far we got off early and followed along and through the ranges E.S.E. about the distance being eighteen miles. Passed some splendid clay-pans quite dry. The flats around the ranges are very grassy and look promising eastwards but we cannot find any water. Kangaroos and birds are numerous. Being about seventy miles from camp we cannot go any farther or our horses will not carry us back. We therefore turned keeping to the south of our outward track and at about eleven miles. found some water in some clay-holes and camped at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon. There is sufficient water to last the party about a week but not more. The weather is dark and threatening and I believe there will be rain to-night which will be a great boon and will enable us to travel along easily. It is in circumstances such as I am at present placed that we are sure to implore help and assistance from the hand of the Creator; but when we have received all we desire how often we forget to give Him praise!  18th. - Rained lightly last night and we had a nice shower this morning. Yet did not get very wet as we had our water- proofs. Fearing that the rain would obliterate the tracks and the party be unable to follow them I decided to return towards Weld Springs [...]   20th. - Started at 9.30 a.m. and steering S.E. towards the water found on the 17th for twenty-four miles; thence E.S.E. for eight miles and camped without water on a small patch of feed. The last ten miles was over clear spinifex country of the most wretched description. The country all the way in fact is most miserable and intolerable.  21st (Sunday). - Got an early start and continued on E.S.E. At about three miles reached a spring on a small patch of feed in the spinifex and camped but found after digging it out that scarcely any water came in. I have no doubt that it will fill up a good deal in the night; but our horses being thirsty I re-saddled and pushed on to the water about sixteen miles ahead which we reached at 4 p.m. [456] There is not more than a week's supply here therefore I intend going ahead with Pierre to-morrow in search of more. The country ahead seems promising but there is a great deal of spinifex almost everywhere. From Weld Spring to our present camp is all spinifex with the exception of a few flats along short gullies [...]  22nd. - Left camp in company with Tommy Pierre with a pack-horse carrying fifteen gallons of water. [...] Fine grassy country all round and very little spinifex. To the south about nine miles we saw a lake and farther off a remarkable red-faced range which I named Timperley Range after my friend Mr. W. H. Timperley Inspector of Police from whom I received a great deal of assistance before leaving Champion Bay. A remarkable peak with a reddish top- bore S.S.E. which I named Mount Hosken after Mr. M. Hosken of Geraldton a contributor to the expedition. I made south towards the lake and at one mile and a half came to a gully in the grassy plain in which we found abundance of water sufficient to last for months. We therefore camped for the night with beautiful feed for the horses. I was very thankful to find so much water and such fine grassy country for if we had not found any this trip we should have been obliged to retreat towards Weld Springs the water where I left the party being only sufficient to last a few days [...]  30th. - Left camp F in company with Tommy Windich taking one pack-horse to find water ahead eastward. Steered E.N.E. over salt marshes and spinifex sand-hills and at about eleven miles found water in some clay-pans and left a note telling my brother to camp here to-morrow night. Continued on and found several more fine water-pans and fine grassy patches [...]   July 1st. [...] The last forty miles was over the most wretched country I have ever seen; not a bit of grass and no water except after rain; spinifex everywhere. We are very fortunate to have a little rain-water or we could not get ahead.   2nd. - Steered towards the range seen yesterday a little south of east and after going twelve miles my horse completely gave in Mission doing the same also. I had hard work to get them along and at last they would not walk. [457]I gave them a rest and then drove them before me following Windich till we reached the range. Found a little water in a gully but no feed. Spinifex all the way to-day; most wretched country. We ascended the range and the country ahead looks first-rate; high ranges to the N.E. and apparently not so much spinifex. We continued N.E. and after going four miles camped on a patch of feed the first seen for the last sixty miles. I was very tired having walked nearly twenty  miles and having to drive two knocked-up horses. I have good hopes of getting both feed and water to-morrow for if we do not we shall be in a very awkward position...  3rd.:. [...] Steering N.E. towards a large range about fifteen miles off we found a great deal of spinifex although the country generally was thickly wooded. I rode Mission who went along pretty well for about twelve miles when Williams gave in again and Mission soon did the same. For the next six miles to the range we had awful work but managed with leading and driving to reach the range; spinifex all the way and also on the top of it. I was very nearly-knocked up myself but ascended the range and had a very extensive view. Far- to the north and east the horizon was as level and uniform as that of the sea; apparently spinifex everywhere; no hills or ranges could be seen for a distance of quite thirty miles. The prospect was very cheerless and disheartening. Windich went on the only horse not knocked up in order to find water for the horses. I-followed after his tracks leading the two poor done-up horses. With difficulty I could- get them to walk. Over and through the rough range I managed to pull them along and found sufficient water to give them a good drink and camped on a small patch of rough grass in one of the gorges. Spinifex everywhere; it is a most fearful country. We cannot proceed farther in this direction and must return and meet the party which I hope to do tomorrow night [...]   4th. - We travelled back towards the party keeping a little to the west of our outward track; and after going five miles found some water in clay-holes sufficient to last the party about one night. Two of our horses being knocked up I made up my mind to let the party meet us here although I scarcely know what to do when they do arrive. [458] To go forward looks very unpromising and to retreat we have quite seventy miles with scarcely any water and no feed at all. The prospect is very cheerless and what I shall do depends on the state of the horses when they reach here. It is very discouraging to have to retreat as Mr. Gosse's farthest point west is only 200 miles from us. We finished all our-rations this morning and we have been hunting for game ever since twelve o'clock and managed to get a wurrung and an opossum the only living creatures seen and which Windich was fortunate to capture.  7th. - Early this morning Pierre and I and my brother and Windich started off in search of water as there was scarcely any left at camp. Unless we are fortunate enough to find some retreat is inevitable. Pierre and myself searched the range we were camped in while Windich and my brother went further south towards another range. We searched all round and over the rough ranges without success and reached camp at one o'clock. To our relief and joy learnt that my brother and Windich had found water about five miles S.S.E. sufficient to last two or three weeks. This was good news; so after dinner we packed up and went over to the water. The feed was not very good but I am truly thankful to have found it as a retreat of seventy miles over- most wretched country was anything but cheering [...]   13th. - Steering straight for the water found by my brother about E.S.E. for twenty-five miles over most miserable spinifex country without a break. Just before we got to the water Windich shot an emu. We saw two natives; who made off. Many fires in every direction. Latitude 260 5' 10' S. longitude about 124° 46' E. Fine water at this place. I have no doubt water is always here. I named it the Alexander Spring after my brother who discovered it. Abundance of water also in rock holes [...]   26th. - Left Alexander Spring in company with Windich; to look for water ahead. Steered east for twelve miles over spinifex sand-hills with some salt-marsh flats intervening. We then turned S.E. for seven miles to some cliffs and followed them along east about one mile and a half when we saw a clear patch a little to the N.E. on reaching which we found a fine rock water-hole holding over 100 gallons of water. [459] We had a pannican of tea and gave our horses an hour and a half's rest. Left a note for my brother advising him to camp here the first night. We continued on a little to the south of east for about fifteen miles over spinifex plains when we camped on a small patch of feed.  17th. [...]-. We continued about east for two miles; found a rock water-hole holding about fifty gallons and had break--fast. After this continued on a little south of east for twelve miles when we turned more to the north searching every spinifex rise that had a rocky face first N. and then N.W. and W. all over the country but not over any great extent as my horse (Brick) was knocked up. About one o'clock we found enough to give the horses a drink and to make sonic tea for ourselves. We saw some low cliffs to the north and proceeding towards them we saw ahead about N.N.E. a remarkable high cliff. I therefore decided to make for it. I had to walk and drive my horse before me and before we reached the cliff we had hard work to get him to move. When we got close we were rejoiced to see cliffs and gorges without end and descending the first hollow found a fine rock hole containing at least 250 gallons. We therefore camped as it was just sundown. I am very sanguine of finding more water to-morrow as our horses will soon finish this hole. There was very little feed about the water. 18th. - This morning we began searching the ranges for water. First tried westerly and searched some fine gullies and gorges but without success. My horse soon gave in again and I left him on a patch of feed and continued the search on foot. I had not walked a quarter of a mile before I found about 200 gallons in a gully and following down the gully we found a fine pool in a sandy bed enough to last a month. We were rejoiced at our good fortune and returning to where we left the horse camped for the remainder of the day. There is not much feed anywhere about these cliffs and gullies but as long as there is plenty of water the horses will do very well. To-morrow I intend going back to meet the party as the way we came was very crooked and I hope to save them many miles. It is certainly a wretched country we have been travelling through for the last two months and what makes it worse the season is an exceptionally dry one; it is quite summer weather. However we are now within 100 miles of Mr. Gosse's farthest west and I hope soon to see a change for the better. [460] We have been most fortunate in finding water and I am indeed very thankful for it.. [...]  22nd. - Started in company with Pierre to look for water ahead steered a little north of east for about twelve miles to the points of the cliffs and ascended a peak to get a -view ahead. The line of cliff country ran N.E. and to the east spinifex undulating country; nevertheless as I wished to get a view of some of the hills shown on Mr.- Gosse's map I bore E. and E.S.E. for over thirty miles but could - not find a drop of water all day and we had come nearly fifty miles [...]   23rd. - Decided not to go any further although I much wished to get a view further to the east but our horses would have enough to do to carry us back. [...] My brother and Windich intend going to-morrow in that direction in search of water.  26th (Sunday). - Rested at camp. My brother and Windich returned late this evening having been over sixty miles to the E.N.E. and having found only one small rock water-hole with water in it.  28th. - Left camp in company with Windich to look for water ahead. [...]  29th. - Rained lightly during the night; my rug got wet. Thinking we could get plenty of water ahead I left the drums and water as the horses would not drink. We steered about east over miserable spinifex country and cut my brother's return tracks.. [...] No sign of water and apparently very little rain has fallen here last night. [...]   30th. - Very thick fog this morning. We bore north for four or five miles and then S.E. for about five miles when we got a fine view to the east and could see some hills which are no doubt near Mr. Gosse's farthest west. They bore S.E. about eighteen miles distant. I could not go on to them as I was afraid the party would be following us on the strength of the little rain we had the night before last. Reluctantly therefore we turned westward. [...] [461]  August 1st. [...] Pushed on and reached the party a little after dark and found all well having been absent five days in which time we had travelled about 200 miles. -  2nd (Sunday).. I now began to be much troubled about our position although I did not communicate my fears to any but my brother. We felt confident we could return if the worst came although we were over 1000 miles from the settled districts of Western Australia. The water at our camp was fast drying up and would not last more than a fort-night. The next water was sixty miles back and there seemed no probability of getting eastward. I knew we were now in the very country that had driven Mr. Gosse backs I have since found it did the same for Mr. Giles. No time was to be lost. I was determined to make the best use of it if only the water would last and to keep on searching. (Even now months after the time sitting down writing this journal I cannot but recall my feelings of anxiety at this camp) Just when the goal of my ambition and my hopes for years past was almost within reach it appeared that I might not even now be able to grasp it. The thought of having to return however brought every feeling of energy and determination to my rescue and I felt that with God's help I would even now succeed. I gave instructions to allowance the party so that the stores should last at least four months and made every preparation for a last desperate struggle [...]   6th. [...] we passed a rock hole full of water about sixty gallons. I left a note telling my brother to camp here on Sunday night and to follow on our tracks on Monday. We continued on about five miles and camped not far from Mount Charles without water for the horses; but they were not thirsty. So far we have been most fortunate although there is very little to fall back on should we be unable to proceed; in fact as Soon as the surface water dries up it will be impossible. [...]   7th. [...] We followed down gullies and over hills passing two rock holes dry until the dark but could not find any water. The country is most beautifully grassed and is a great relief after travelling over so many hundreds of miles of spinifex; but the season is very dry and all the gullies are dry. We camped for the night without water for ourselves or horses. [462] I have since learnt that these ranges were seen by Mr. Giles and were named the Warburton ranges.  8th. - Early this morning Windich and I went on foot to search the hills and gullies close around as our horses were knocked up for want of water. We returned unsuccessful about 8 o'clock. Close to where we found our horses we found a tree with the bark cut off one side of it with an axe which was sharp. We were sure it was done by a white man as the axe even if possessed by a native (which is very improbable) would be blunt. We are now in the country traversed by Mr. Gosse although I am unable to distinguish any of the features of the country not having a map with me and not knowing the latitude. [...] We saddled our horses and continued our search about S.E. over hills and along valleys - the distance or direction I am unable to give - our horses scarcely moving and ourselves parched with thirst. The sun was very hot. At about noon we found some water in a gully by scratching a hole but it was quite salt. As our horses would not drink it it can be imagined how salt it was. We drank about a pint of it and Windich said it was the first time he ever had to drink salt water. I washed myself in it which refreshed me a little. Our horses could not go much further without water but we crawled along about north and shortly afterwards found a small rock hole in the side of a large rough granite hill with about five gallons of good water in it. We had a good drink ourselves put half a gallon into a canteen and gave the rest to the horses. From here our usual good fortune returned. We had not gone far when Windich called me back and said he had found horses' tracks and sure enough there were the tracks of horses coming from the westward. Windich took some of the old dung with him to convince our companions that we had seen them. We followed westward along the tracks for half a mile when we found two or three small rock holes with water in them which our horses drank. Still bearing to the north we kept finding little drops in the granite rocks - our old friend the granite rock has returned to us again after having been absent for several hundred miles. We satisfied our horses and rested a short time to have something to eat not having had anything for forty-eight hours. We bore N.W. and soon afterwards found a fine rock hole of water in granite rocks sufficient to last the party a day. [463] Plenty of water on rocks also from recent rain here. We were rejoiced as we now had a place to bring the party to. But our good fortune did not end here: continuing on westerly or a little north of it we came on a summer encampment of the natives and found a native well or spring which I believe would give water if dug out. This may make a good Depot if we require to stay long in this neighbourhood. We were overjoyed; and I need not add I was very thankful for this good fortune. When everything looked at its worst then all seemed to change for our benefit. [...]  13th. - Found a rock hole with about forty gallons of water in it close to camp. After watering our horses we followed along the old tracks going nearly N.E. and passed a gnow's nest where they had apparently got out eggs. Shortly afterwards found where the party had camped without water and continued on to some high hills and ranges; then we left them to follow some emu tracks which after following up a gully and over a hill brought us to a fine spring of good water in a gully. We camped here and intend waiting for our party which will reach here to-morrow. We watched at the water for emus and after waiting about four hours saw two coming one of which Windich shot. Fine grass although old and dry down this gully. Ranges in every direction. The country contrasts strikingly with what we-have been travelling through for the last three months. The party whose tracks we followed this morning have not been to this spring so they must have missed it. All my troubles were now over inasmuch as I felt sure we would accomplish our journey and reach the settled districts of South Australia; although as it afterwards proved we had many days of hard work and some privation yet to endure. Still the country was much improved and not altogether unknown. I then gave out publicly to the party that we were now in safety and in all human probability in five or six weeks would reach the telegraph line. I need not add how pleased all were at having at last bridged over that awful desolate spinifex desert. [...]   Dear cousin Margaret I think long to see you out here till you and I takes a horse each and a kangeroo's dog and has a good hunt after the kangeroos and emus. The girls here does no outside work. It is all housework. If you were in this country you would never see porridge any more. In this country you would have to learn to ride for you cannot go to your next neighbour without riding it is so far. When I go out always ride on horseback.   If you were here you could not sleep in the mornings for laughing jackasses and cockatoos and parrots and curlews and native companions and a lot of other birds. Father shot some emus and it took three men to lift it into the cart. The old man kangeroo is much about the same weight.  I wish you were out here cousin Margaret. We would have such fun. We have our house built in about 10 acres of pine trees. They are about 8 foot high. We have about 100 large trees father is going to cut down and get sawed for building purposes. Here is a feather of an emu and one of a cockatoo. The yellow one is the cockatoo's and the other is the emu's. My dear cousin I am sorry to hear that you a alone with strangers [...] We would all be so glad to see you. My kindest and fondest of love to you dear cousin. I have a lot of cousins but none I think so much of as you from your fond and loving cousin till death.  