 Head Quarters - Port Jackson  At a Meeting of two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Territory of New South Wales - 19th Febr. 1788. - Present - David Collins Esq . - Augustus Alt Esq'. - Mary Jackson a Convict was brought before them charged with detaining a Shirt a Pair of Trowsers and a new Frock and a Pair of Stockings - the Property of Edward Dease a Seaman belonging to the Lady Penrhyn Transport. [80]   Edward Dease a Seaman being duly sworn deposes that he gave the Articles mentioned in the Charge to the Prisoner Mary Jackson for the Purpose of getting them washed on or about last Tuesday night - giving her at the same Time 1/2 a Pound of Tea to satisfy her for her Trouble - and some Soap to wash them - On Saturday night last he procured a Pass from the Master of the Transport to go on shore and get his Things from the Prisoner who told him at first that they were lost out of the Tent but that if the Corporal (who was sent with the Evidence) would go with her she would endeavour to find them - that when she came to the Tent she said she would not restore them giving at the same Time much abuse - that the Evidence not being able to get his things from her went away - returning again on the next Morning applying to Major Ross - who sent a Private Man to the Prisoner with Directions to her to deliver the things or he would send a File of Men for her - that the Prisoner would not comply with these Orders & a File of Men was sent for her - that then she gave up the Things first cutting or tearing the Frock & throwing the other Things out of the Tent & that he then returned to the Major and informed him of his having got his Things producing to him the Frock where it had been cut.  (Two marines give evidence of having gone under orders to seize the clothes which Mary Jackson eventually gives up under protest.)  Mary Jackson being asked what she had to say says that Dease gave her the Shirt - and told her the Frock she might have for a Shift if she would bleach it and the Trousers she might have to mend her Stays - that she told him she would mend whatever he had that wanted mending that in Return for the Trowsers he gave her he asked her for a Canvas Petticoat she had which would make him a good Pair of Trowsers - that the Stockings he gave her for a Pair of worn Ones he had worn often in the Cold Weather - that he asked her often to go on Board with him one Night bringing a Hat and great Coat to take her off in Disguise - and that she refused to go with him & that in consequence of such Refusal he came to demand his Things of her - that she told him she would speak to some of the Officers & tell them her story & if they thought she should she then would give them up.  The Prisoner was reprimanded for not giving up the Things when she was sent to by the Major - and it appearing that the Prosecutor had cohabited with her during the Passage had given her the Articles for her own Use & required them again on her refusing to go on Board ship with him she was discharged.  ADDRESS &c.  [1] (An Address &c.) Part I. I BESEECH you brethren suffer this word of exhortation. Your souls are precious. They are precious in the sight of God. They are precious to the Lord Jesus Christ. They are precious in my esteem. Oh that you yourselves were equally sensible of their value.   We have now been here almost five years. During this time I trust I have been faithful in the discharge of my duty faithful to my God my country my conscience and to your immortal souls.   [2] I would nay I do humbly hope that my labours have not been wholly in vain. Some of you I trust have been convinced of your folly sin and danger; you have earnestly sought and happily found mercy with God through a Mediator. You can now approach him as a God reconciled a merciful Father and Friend and are evidencing the reality of you conversion by an upright life and conversation.   But I must express my fear that those of you who are thus convinced of sin and converted to God and reformed from your evil courses are comparatively very few. It is too evident that the far greater part of you discover no concern for religion. The Great God the Lord Jesus Christ the Holy Spirit death judgment eternity heaven and hell - these are subjects which seldom if at all engage your attention; and therefore you spend days weeks months and years in a profane and careless manner though you are repeatedly informed and re- minded in the most plain faithful and alarm- ing language I can use that the wages of sin without repentance is death the curse of God and the eternal ruin and damnation of your souls! [3]   Oh I intreat you brethren to consider what is contained in these two words salvation and damnation! The one implies every thing that an immortal soul can want or de- sire to make it happy. The other includes an idea the most gloomy and dreadful that can be conceived. The former will be the admiration of angels and the song and joy of the redeemed; the latter will be the torment of devils and of all impenitent sinners for ever and ever.   Remember likewise that ere long either this endless inconceivable happiness or unutterable misery will be your portion or your doom and mine. Our glass of life is running away apace. Our time is fast hastening to a period. Death is making sure and speedy strides towards us daily judgment is at hand and the judge himself is at the door. And oh! consider when the breath we now draw shall depart the tender thread of life be cut our state will be unalterably and for ever fixed; either to live with God with angels and glorified saints in heaven; or to dwell with devils in the darkness and torments of hell. [4]   On these accounts your souls are as I have already observed very precious not only in the sight of God but also to me. My brethren God is my record how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Next to the salvation of own foul nothing in this world lies so near my heart as the conversion and salvation of my fellow creatures; and especially of you over whom I am appointed more immediately to watch as one who must give an account. [5]   And oh my friends if this affectionate though plain address should answer my ardent wishes and prayers if it should prove the happy means of converting even one soul to God I should indeed rejoice as one that findeth great spoil. For once at least endeavour to lift up your hearts with me in prayer to Almighty God the bountiful giver of all grace. He only can make this or any other means effectual; and should it please Him of his abounding mercy to make a saving impression upon your hearts you will reap the happy fruits of it in life at death and to eternity. Oh that the gracious spirit of the Lord may open the eyes and the ears of all who may read or hear what I am writ- ing. May they who are asleep awake! May they who are spiritually dead be made alive!   [6] May backsliders from God be reclaimed! May every one be stirred up to consider What will become of him in another world! For who amongst us can dwell with everlasting burnings? Yet such must be our lot unless we repent. May the Lord God give to each of you repentance unto life that you may be holy in this world and happy in that which is to come!   My brethren I trust I can say in truth and with a sincere conscience That I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. It is a knowledge and I hope an inward experience of this precious gospel that bears up my spirits when I am ready to sink as in deep waters and when I am almost overwhelmed by the many heavy and daily trials crosses difficulties and disappointments that I meet with in this alas! most uncomfortable situation. An acquaintance with this gospel an experience of its truth and power sweetens every bitter makes my crosses comforts and my losses gains. It is by this knowledge that I am enabled to bear the cross of Christ not only with some degree of patience and resignation but at some seasons with consolation and joy; while I at one time reflect on what our dear Lord and Saviour endured for me and at another anticipate the unspeakable honour and pleasure which through grace I hope ere long to enjoy at his right hand for evermore. And to endeavour to bring you my dear friends to a saving knowledge of what is contained in this gospel is not only my duty and inclination as a minister but also my earnest desire and pleasure and that which I long for more than for any other thing that can be named. [7]   I have often explained to you according to my sentiments what is contained in the gospel. But as I fear and am indeed well aware that many of you after all you have heard still remain ignorant I will now tell you again briefly and plainly what my views of the gospel are; that by putting this book into your hands you may if you please more carefully and attentively examine and search for yourselves whether what I lay before you be agreeable to the holy scriptures or otherwise; and consequently whether you ought to believe or to reject it. [8]   The gospel I conceive in its most extensive sense comprehends the whole revealed will of God recorded in the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament.   This sacred book which we call the Bible describes the original state of man as a state of perfect purity and innocence. He was made in the image of God. He was made upright. His understanding will his affections and conscience his body and soul were free from defilement guilt or guile and while he continued so he was not liable to pain misery or death. [9]   But man did not continue in this state. Our first parents disobeyed their Maker. By sinning against God they lost their original righteousness and became earthly sensual devilish. Such are all his posterity: for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Man is now the very reverse of what he was when first created. His understanding is darkened yea darkness itself; his will his carnal mind is enmity against God; his conscience is defiled; his afflictions no longer fixed upon God his Creator and Benefactor are engrossed by the vain and perishing things of this world; by sin his body is become mortal. Subject to pain disease and death; and his soul is exposed to the displeasure of God and to the curse annexed to the transgressions of his holy law. All this misery is implied in that awful threatening In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. [10]   And is not this threatening at least in part already put into execution? Whence is there so much ignorance and contempt of God? Why do mankind so eagerly so universally pursue the vain pleasures and follies of the world while they seldom think of God their Maker? From whence proceed the infidelity blasphemy lying theft sabbath-breaking slandering and the many horrid evils which every where abound? Whence is it that so many in this colony labour under such sore and complicated disorders pains and miseries? Why are so many both young and old taken away by death? And why is it that others who see all those things do not take warning by them to prepare for their own latter end? Brethren all these are so many undeniable proofs and evidences of what I have said; namely that we are fallen and guilty creatures. [11] These are the effects of Adam's sin and disobedience. The certain consequences of which would have been unavoidable and endless misery both of soul and body to himself and all his posterity had not some means been provided some way laid open for his and their recovery.   But blessed be God a door of hope is opened by the gospel for miserable sinners! A gracious promise was given early even to our first parents immediately after their fall. The seed of the woman shall break the serpent's head. This promised seed is the Lord Jesus Christ who in due time was to appear in the world to be born of a woman that by his life sufferings and obedience unto death he might recover fallen man from the misery and ruin in which he was involved. Brethren this gospel which as the ministers and ambassadors of God we are commissioned and commanded to preach to sinners proposes a free and gracious pardon to the guilty cleansing to the polluted healing to the sick happiness to the miserable light for those who sit in darkness strength for the weak food for the hungry and even life for the dead. [12]   All these inestimable blessings are the fruits and effects of the death and mediation of Jesus Christ. His great design in coming into the world was to seek and to save those who are lost; he came from heaven that he might raise us to those holy and happy mansions; he endured the curse that we might inherit the blessing; he bore the cross that we might wear the crown; he died that we might live; he died the just for the unjust that he might bring us to God.   These blessings become ours only by believing or faith. Thus it is said God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son - For what purpose? Why That whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life- he that believeth in him is not condemned;- he that believeth in him who justifieth the ungodly his faith is counted to him for righteousness. My friends search the scriptures and you will find that this is the tenor of the whole Bible; I may add of our church also in the Articles and Homilies. This believing is sometimes called a coming to Christ a looking unto Christ a trusting in him a casting our burden upon him. And remember that until we do thus come to Christ trust in him cast our cares and bur- dens upon him we have no part or interest in what the gospel unfolds and offers; how- ever others who have believed and daily act faith upon him are rejoicing in the participation of those rich benefits and blessings which the gospel freely offers to guilty and perishing sinners. [13] [14]   The faith whereby a sinner receives Christ and becomes a partaker of all the blessings of the gospel is the sole gift of God wrought in the heart by his Holy Spirit. This Holy Spirit produces an inward change in the soul called in the scripture the new birth regeneration or conversion and thus enables a sinner convinced of his sin and misery to look to Jesus and to believe on him.   But though repentance and faith are the gifts of God which none can obtain by any endeavours of their own yet we are encouraged and commanded to pray for them.   All who have thus through grace believed and are daily living a life of faith in the Son of God shall be saved: but such as carelessly neglect or wilfully reject this gospel must be damned. Think I beseech you of this! Remember that it is the solemn declaration of the Lord Jesus Christ himself. [15]   Now is the time to obtain the blessings revealed in the gospel and which are set before you when it is preached. Many have had these gracious declarations made to them before we were born and they will be repeated to many after we are dead. But this is our day. Now is the accepted time now is the day of salvation. To-day - for you and I may not live to see to-morrow. To day; if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts. My brethren it is your duty your wisdom and will finally prove to be your greatest happiness to seek an interest in this salvation for yourselves. It is your personal and must be your heart concern to make your calling and election sure.   [16] For death will soon put a period to all the overtures of grace and mercy with which many and particularly you are now favoured. It is as I have said both my duty and my pleasure to preach and proclaim these glad tidings. But to whom? Not to the dead but to the living; even to you. To you is the word of the salvation sent. But alas! should you still put it from you and should death at last find you in an unprepared state it will then be too late for you to begin to cry for mercy.   A day is likewise coming when our mortal bodies which must shortly moulder into dust will be raised again from the dead. Whether believers or unbelievers whether saints or sinners we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ. For the Lord Jesus will shortly appear in the clouds of heaven the last trumpet shall sound the graves shall open the sea give up her dead and all who have lived upon earth from the creation to the final consummation of time will then be judged and rewarded or punished according to their works. Mark well St. John's re- presentation of this solemn transaction \"I saw the dead small and great stand before God and the books were opened and another book was opened which is the book of life and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their works. / " Such are the declarations of scripture respecting this awful season! Sinners whatever you may now think of these things or think or say of me for declaring them to you in this plain and solemn manner I must and will tell you that there is not a profane oath which you have uttered nor a lie which you have told nor a sabbath which you have broken nor a single act of adultery fornication theft or any wickedness of which you have been guilty; in a word there is not an evil you have committed nor a duty you have omitted to perform but what is noted down in the book of God's remembrance and will be produced against you in the day of judgment unless you repent and believe the gospel. You must then give an account how you improved the advantages now afforded you for attending to the things pertaining to your peace. If you do not improve them the Bible will condemn you every faithful sermon you have heard will condemn you nay every sermon which you might have heard but would not because you despised and neglected the ordinances of public worship will condemn you: And alas! this address by which I try to warn you because I love you and wish well to your souls; which you are now reading or perhaps about to throw aside with scorn will then condemn you. The admonitions intreaties prayers and tears of godly parents the advice and reproofs of pious friends the warning and expostulations of faithful ministers will all witness against you. My brethren what shall I say? The law of God the gospel saints sinners angels your own con- sciences the Holy Spirit the Lord Jesus the great Judge himself will all witness against you for your contempt and neglect of that mercy and salvation which are let before you in the gospel. [17] [18] [19]   Then all ungodly and impenitent sinners being tried cast and condemned must hear that final terrible sentence pronounced upon them Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels! And remember that those who have been your associates in wickedness here will then be your companions in misery. This will if possible aggravate your torment. You and they will rue the day when you first met; and mutually charge the ruin of your souls upon each other. Oh think of this and pray for grace to repent before it be too late. [20]   At that solemn season the righteous shall be publicly and fully acquitted before the assembled world. The judge will say to them Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. The holy angels will then conduct them to the mansions of eternal bliss. Happy souls! They will then have no more cause to weep and mourn to fight and wrestle. They will no more be exercised with darkness or temptation; for sin which is the cause of all their conflicts and sorrows shall be done away; and God their gracious Father and everlasting Friend shall wipe all tears from their eyes.   The righteous however obscured and reproached upon earth shall then shine forth like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. [21] They are represented to us as standing before the throne clothed in white robes with palm- branches (the emblems of victory) in their hands and singing to their harps their Redeemer's praise. There they will join in company with Abraham Isaac and Jacob with the apostles prophets and martyrs with their dear friends and relatives who died in the faith before them and with the glorious angels; and above all (without which heaven itself would be no heaven to them) they will enjoy the unclouded presence of their Lord and Saviour who once suffered pain and shame and death for them. They will see him seated upon a throne of glory and unite with all the heavenly host in ascribing salvation glory and honour and praise to him who loved them and washed them from their sins in his own blood; and has made them kings and priests to God and to the Lamb for ever and ever.   [22] For the joys of heaven and the pains of hell will be eternal. Otherwise indeed neither the happiness nor the misery of a future state could be complete. It would damp the joys of the blessed to apprehend that they must at length terminate. And the horrors of the damned would be in a degree alleviated if there was the most distant prospect that they would have a period. But the word of God assures us that believers after death enter into life eternal and that the punishment of the wicked will be everlasting.   I have now given you a summary of the great truths which as a minister of the gospel I am commissioned and commanded to preach. And I can call God and your consciences to witness that I have not shunned thus to declare to you the whole counsel of God. I have explained to you the meaning and I have urged the importance of these things over and over. I have pointed out to you the wretched and dangerous condition of sinners the necessity of conversion or the new birth the nature of this change and by what power it is wrought and the fruits and effects which such a change will produce in a man's tempers words and actions. I have also shewn you the way in which you may and must be saved if you are saved at all. I have told you again and again that Christ is the Way the truth and the life and that there is no coming to God with comfort either in this world or in that which is to come but by him. He has told you so himself. And the apostle assures you that there is no other name under heaven given unto men whereby they can be saved. Look unto him and you shall be saved; if not you must be damn- ed. This is the plain truth the express declaration of the Bible. Life and death are set before you. [23]   [24] Permit me then as your minister your friend and a well-wisher to your souls to press these serious and weighty considerations home upon your consciences once more. I hope and believe that I have affected nothing but what can be proved by the highest authority the word of the living God. They certainly deserve your closest and most careful attention since it is plain beyond a doubt that upon your knowledge or ignorance your acceptance or rejection of this gospel your everlasting happiness or misery must depend.   Brethren I do not ask you what religious persuasion or denomination you have espoused. I fear that if I may judge of your hearts by your actions too many are destitute of any sense of religion at all. But I do not address you as Churchmen or Dissenters Roman Catholics or Protestants as Jews or Gentiles; I suppose yea I know that there are persons of every denomination amongst you. But I speak to you as men and women as intelligent creatures possessed of understanding and reason. I speak to you as mortals and yet immortals; as sinners who have broken the laws of God and are therefore obnoxious to his displeasure. And my sole aim and desire is to be instrumental in turning you from darkness to light from sin to holiness from the power of Satan to the service and favour of God. [25]   Seek then I beseech you above all things an interest in the blessings of the gospel. Be assured it is a matter of much less moment whether you are rich or poor respected or despised in this world. The rich have their cares fears crosses and vexations no less than the poor; but admitting that they could pass through life with greater ease than others we all know that they cannot escape death. The great point is how we shall die? whether as believers or unbelievers as saints or sinners. One soul according to our Lord's declaration is of more value than the whole world. If you lose your soul you lose all at once. You lose heaven and happiness for ever. Whatever therefore you do or leave undone for God's sake and for your own sakes neglect not for one day or hour longer the vast concerns of another life. Delays are dangerous. The more we have to risk or lose the greater folly it would be accounted to defer securing our property and goods which we know to be in danger. What folly therefore what madness must it be to put off with careless indifference the concernments of eternity; and to prefer the trifles of this transitory life to heaven and the favour of God! Let the parable of the rich man who pleased himself with the thought of having much good laid up for many years be a warning to you! That very night his soul was required of him. Such persons may now deem themselves wise; [27] but ere long they will be sensible they were fools. [26]   It you consider what a valuable price was paid for our redemptions you must be convinced that the soul of man is very precious in the sight of God and that sin is not so light and small an evil as many of you have sup- posed. To disobey the commandments of the just and holy God is as far as in us lies to renounce our allegiance to him and our dependence upon him and to set up for our- selves and even to join with the devil in open rebellion against our Maker. It is in plain terms to fly in his face and to bid defiance to his almighty arm. Sin is such a horrid evil that unless it is forgiven and blotted out by the blood of Jesus it will sink your souls lower than the center of the earth even into the very depths of hell never never never more to rise.   [28] So heinous was sin in the sight of God that rather than permit it to pass unpunished he would punish it in the person of his own his only his well-beloved Son who was made sin that is treated as a sinner deserved to be treated for us. He was delivered up into the hands of wicked men and crucified that by his suffering and death he might make atonement for our sins and procure an honourable and happy reconciliation between a righteous God and offending sinners I beseech you therefore to prize and to study this gospel that you may obtain a growing experience of its benefits. Praise God for such a Saviour and such a salvation as he has provided. Adore him for that infinite wisdom and boundless mercy which he has displayed in the redemption of fallen man and never rest nor be satisfied till you have good and scriptural reason to hope that this Saviour is yours with all the blessings he is exalted to bestow without money and without price.   [29] Our food my brethren then only can nourish us when it is eaten and digested. Medicines can only profit us by being applied and taken. It is exactly thus with the gospel. We may hear and talk of these things but so long as they remain matters of speculation and do not enter into our hearts into the very vitals of our souls (if I may so speak) we cannot be the better for them. Christ is the bread of life. His flesh is meat indeed and his blood is drink indeed! But unless we ourselves do spiritually eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man (for our Lord speaks of food for the soul not for the body) we have no life in us.   Moses by the express command of God erected a brazen serpent upon a pole in the view of the camp of Israel. Such of the people as were stung by the fiery serpents were directed and commanded to look up to the brazen serpent. They who did so were healed. But if any resisted they were sure to die. For no other means or physicians could relieve them. In like manner Christ Jesus our Saviour once lifted up on the cross is exhibited in the preaching of the gospel. Sinners who are wounded and diseased by sin are directed exhorted encouraged and commanded to look up to him. And they who are persuaded so to do are infallibly cured of all those spiritual maladies under which they have long and sorely laboured. But all who despise and reject this sovereign remedy of God's gracious appointment either by a total indifference to religion or by expecting salvation in any other way will be left and that most deservedly to perish in their wilful obstinacy and unbelief. [30]   [31] (An Address &c.) Part II   In the former part of this address I have already laid before you in the plainest manner I was able my views of the gospel of Christ. And as an experimental knowledge of this gospel is so very important I have endeavoured to press that importance upon your consciences. Whether you have paid that attention to the subject which it deserves and requires yourselves best know. I can only say that if I did not know it to be of great weight I should not either speak or write of it with so much earnestness. But being persuaded and assured by the express testimony of the holy scriptures that these things are true; and truths the knowledge of which is essential to your present and future happiness I must be plain and faithful in declaring them. I ought to be very indifferent what men of depraved morals and corrupt principles may say or think of me if I have the witness of a good conscience and the approbation of the God whom I serve. My concern is for your welfare and salvation; for I am certain as I have told you before and now tell you again that unless the gospel is made the power of God to your souls you must be miserable in time and to eternity. [32]   I propose now to give you some advices to assist you in understanding the gospel for yourselves which if you observe I trust you will attain to the possession of those principles and walk by those rules which will both afford you present peace and secure your future happiness. For godliness has promises pertaining to the life that now is and to that which is to come.   The three former were brought up and being called upon for their Defence declared that the Accusation against them was false ill-founded and proceeded wholly from the malignity of mind of Thos. Biggars (the overseer) whose cruel Treatment of & general ill-Behaviour to the unfortunate men under him they stated to be universally known to all Descriptions of people in the Colony - that said Biggars is in the constant Habit of knocking the men down without Cause or provocation and otherwise abusing and ill-treating them - that their allowance of Food is so extremely scanty as to be insufficient to support them in Labor yet the said Biggars allots them more work than twice the number of men could perform in the time - that altho' they had 50 Rods to reap each man daily they contrived with great Labor & application from the dawn of Day until night to accomplish their Task work with a view to have friday to themselves and when Friday came & their week's Task Work was finished they thought themselves at liberty to leave the Farm for their own Earnings - wholly deny any Disobedience of orders.  Remanded to the Custody of the Gaoler until Capt. Johnstone could be written to on the Buss. that he may have an opportunity if he pleases of attending himself or directing Thos. Biggars so to do in order to establish the Charge.  On Monday morning Galvin Cummins & McCabe the three men complained of by Captn Johnstone's overseer were in Consequence of the Charges being substantiated against them Sentence to receive 50 Lashes each & to be discharged to their former Labor.  Sentence inflicted.  NARRATIVE of the MELANCHOLY LOSS of the American Ship DUKE of PORTLAND.  With an Account of the Providential Rescue of a Young Woman named Elizabeth Morey from the savages of Toongataboo one of the Friendly Islands by the American Ship Union Captain Pendleton which left this Port for China the 29th of August but came last from Toongataboo which she left on 5th. Inst. and arrived here on Tuesday last.  DEPOSITION Respecting The Loss of the American Ship Duke of Portland.  Sydney Saturday October 27 1804  Elizabeth Morey being sworn says that she left the Cape of Good Hope with Mr. Lovat Mellon Captain of the American ship Duke of Portland bound to Lima; that on or about the 1st. of June 1802 the ship touched at an island in the Pacific Ocean called TOONGATABOO;  That Captain Mellon received a message from a white man named Doyle then residing on the island (and who this deponent afterwards learnt had got there from some vessel that had been cast away on another island and the captain and crew killed); that the Chief wished him Captain Mellon to send one of his boats mann'd to assist him repelling some invaders that had landed from another island. A boat was sent armed with eight men and the second Mate (Mr. Anderson); who after he had performed the duty allotted to him returned on board in the evening.  That previous to Mr. Anderson's return on board Mr. Gibson the chief Mate with a boat mann'd with four men went on shore for the purpose of bringing the former boat's crew on board; which he did and both boats came together.  That soon after the return of the boats on board the Chief of that part of the island named Ducava came on board to return the Captain thanks for the assistance he had received stopped on board the ship all night and on the morning following went on shore. The night after the Chief sent word on board for the two boats to be sent on shore for refreshments the next morning. The Captain ordered the Mate not to do so; but the following morning before the Captain was up the Mate had sent them both mann'd and armed with the second Mate.  About two hours afterwards the small boat returned with two boys in her accompanied by several canoes and natives with yams and the white man Doyle before mentioned. That after unloading her she was again sent on shore with the two boys but the natives with the white man Doyle remained on board. Shortly afterwards they took an opportunity of surrounding the Captain chief Mate and sailors then on board seven in number and killed them all except two boys this deponent and a black woman her servant. They threw the bodies over board.  Elizabeth Morey seeing the massacre attempted to jump over board but was prevented by the white man Doyle who told her not to be frightened for she should not be hurt. She was sent soon after on shore in one of the native canoes and given to the Chiefs wife. She learnt after she had got ashore from the boys four in number that were left alive with a white man of diminutive stature that the whole of the ship's company that were on shore had been killed except themselves.  For three successive days the Chief went on board the ship to get her unloaded; but not being able to accomplish the unloading of the ship he ordered the five remaining white persons to go on board to render assistance in landing her cargo which consisted chiefly of bales of calico and different piece goods; and this was accomplished in the six days following. [34]   All the sails were unbent and landed except two and after the cargo was so landed the four white boys and man took an opportunity of driving the natives over board killing Doyle cutting the cables and standing out to sea with the ship; and what further became of the ship the deponent Elizabeth Morey cannot say. HERE ENDS ELIZABETH MOREY'S DEPOSITION.  THE FOLLOWING INTERESTING PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO CAPTAIN MELLON HAVE BEEN COMMUNICATED BY A GENTLEMAN  Captain Mellon sailed from Manila about the latter end of April 1800 in a brig belonging to Mr. John Stewart Kerr American Consul at Manila. His instructions were to dispose of the cargo and purchase in return such commodities as were adapted to the Manila market having a letter of credit to an amount of twenty thousand dollars the better to enable him to load the vessel.  On his arrival at Batavia he sold the cargo and contrary to his instructions the brig also. He purchased there a Ship about 400 tons burthen called the Duke of Portland and the letter of credit he likewise made use of. The Duke of Portland was taken up by the Dutch Company at Batavia to proceed to Serra Bay for a cargo of rice. Captain Mellon proceeded thither accordingly and took in the freight; but instead of returning to Batavia went on to the Isle of France and there disposed of the cargo.  He went then to the Cape of Good Hope and had left the place clandestinely with intention as was supposed of proceeding to the north-west Coast of America. It would appear however from the deposition of Elizabeth Morey that his real intention was to go to Lima; in the way thither he touched for refreshments at the Island of Toongataboo and there fell a victim with most of his crew to the barbarity of the natives stimulated by the hope of plunder - and perhaps by the counsel of the villain Doyle. Those of the Duke of Portland's unfortunate crew whom the barbarous and greedy natives treacherously inveigled and murdered on their shore served to assuage their inordinate and cursed appetites.  The villain Doyle is supposed to have been one of a brig's crew that was unfortunately wrecked on some of the islands between three and four years since whose people were distributed and the major part inhumanely murdered by the natives. The brig had sailed from Canton for this Colony and belonged to Mr. Berry of Canton. One of her surviving hands whose name is Slater had the good fortune to be brought away by Captain Reid in the ship Plomer after a residence among the savages of two-and-twenty months.  DEPOSITION Respecting the Ship Union and the Rescue of Elizabeth Morey.  Daniel Wright Chief Mate of the ship Union of New York being sworn says that on or about the 29th. of August 1804 he sailed in the said ship from the harbour of Port Jackson under the command of Captain Pendleton having taken on board Mr. John Boston whom this deponent understood to be Supercargo; that they touched at Norfolk Island and from thence proceeded to the Island of Toongataboo one of the Friendly Islands where they arrived on or about the 30th of September.  Soon after they came to anchor a number of canoes visited them but left them at sunset. On the following morning they came off in great numbers among whom was a Malay that spoke broken English who informed them that they could get plenty of wood water and refreshments there and was very urgent for the ship's boats to be sent on shore. One of the ship's boats was accordingly hoisted out mann'd with six men 4 muskets and 2 cutlasses; in which boat the Captain and Mr. Boston went. Soon after the departure of the boat from the ship the natives became very troublesome from their numbers on board and round the vessel. The chief Mate stationed all his remaining hands about the ship to prevent their coming on board but still they succeeded in getting up contrary to his wish to the number of thirty who were observed had passed a number of clubs into the ship's channels ready to be handed in; and from his observations he had no doubt that they meant to take the ship.  The Chief frequently urged the chief Mate to let more men come on board which he positively refused telling him that he should be obliged to turn out those who were already on board which he did the greater part without any resistance or much trouble. The Chief did not seem in any wise dissatisfied with this proceeding but remained on board some time after to eat and drink with the deponent.  Shortly after the Chief took leave of the ship and was accompanied by the whole of the canoes alongside. Immediately the chief Mate hoisted the colours of the ship and fired a gun to put those on shore on their guard but soon after taking up the spy glass and looking toward the shore he perceived the ship's boat on the beach lying broadside on in the hands of the natives and a number of natives about her. [35] This might have been between one and two o'clock the boat having been gone about four hours. The chief Mate then put the ship in the best order he could expecting an attack from the natives - but no canoe came off that night. The next morning two canoes came within hail but would not come on board; and from several gestures which they made the people on board wanted to fire on them having construed those gestures to mean that the boat's crew were murdered. They also wished to get the ship under way and leave the place immediately but which the chief Mate would not allow of. No further intercourse passed that day.  The day following several canoes came within hail in one which was the Malay who asked the chief Mate to come on shore for that the Captain and Mr. Boston wished him. He endeavoured to get the Malay alongside but could not prevail upon him to do so though he promised to accompany him. The Malay then went on shore again.  The same afternoon the Malay came off again accompanied by several canoes in one of which was observed a European woman who spoke to them in English as did also the Malay inviting him on shore. But by particular signs from the white woman when unnoticed by the natives she forbid them to comply with the request. Finding they could not prevail in getting another boat from the ship they took their departure and nothing further occurred that day.  The next morning being the third after the boat in which the Captain and Mr. Boston had gone on shore several canoes again came off in one of which was the white woman and in the other the Malay repeating the former request. The white woman then stood up in the head of the canoe cried out that those on shore were murdered by the natives and then leaping into the water swam towards the ship; the men on board presenting their muskets and thereby deterring the natives from picking her up by which means she reached the vessel and was taken on board.  The said woman informed the chief Mate that the Captain and boat's crew had been murdered on shore; upon which information he ordered the natives to be fired on and saw two fall in one of the canoes; that he immediately directed the cable to be cut and putting out to sea shaped his course for Port Jackson where he arrived in 19 days without accident.  The deponent further states that when getting under way and sheeting home his top-gallant sails he heard two muskets fired on shore but cannot take upon himself to say what produced this circumstance further than that the white woman informed him that the Chief had told her it should be done to induce him (the deponent) to believe the people were alive and well on shore.  HERE ENDS DANIEL WRIGHT'S DEPOSITION.  CONCLUDING DEPOSITION  Elizabeth Morey again being sworn says that she lived with the Chief's wife on the Island of Toongataboo and that on or about the 30th of September she understood a ship had arrived at the Island - she then residing at the opposite side thereof.  One of the natives had come over for the purpose of bringing the Malay who was known by the name of Charley to go on board her. Three days after the vessel's arrival she was sent for by the Chief to converse with one of the white boys that had come on shore from whom she learnt the ship's name that she was from New York and that the Captain and several of her people were on shore.  The Chief desired her to go off to the vessel and endeavour to get some more of her boats on shore. She went off in the canoe as she was ordered accompanied by the Malay with five other canoes and did as she was directed being afraid to do otherwise; but from the conversation she had overheard among the natives previous to her going off she was satisfied that the greater part of those who had gone onshore were murdered. But being assiduously watched by the Malay (Charley) she could not communicate her information to the officers on board the ship except by signs.  The next morning following she was again sent for by the Malay who informed her that she was again to go off to the ship to repeat her former message and endeavour to get on shore some of her people. She went off accordingly accompanied by four canoes in one of which was that subtile wretch Charley the Malay who had been a servant to Captain Mellon and had found means to escape the massacre. On coming near the ship she stood up in the head of the canoe in which she was she called to the people on board informing them that their comrades were murdered by the natives on shore then jumped overboard and swam for the ship.  She heard the two muskets fired on shore which she knew was done by the Chief as he had told her he would do so before she left the shore to give an idea that Europeans were on shore firing for a boat.  FINIS  Whimsical Narrative of a Thoughtless Theft.  The practise of borrowing boats upon French leave is by far too prevalent and required to be checked the more especially as the consequences to the labourer and his family are in most such cases very severely injurious.  Want of consideration is the most lenient and polite epithet than can be bestowed upon such conduct and such worthless and thoughtless members of society merit complete condemnation and punishment.  To demonstrate how a whole family was reduced to the extreme of indigence by the caprice of an individual the following whimsical narrative explains the dilemma of a poor man whose whole livelihood depended upon his boat.  At 6 on Saturday morning found my boat lost and no tidings but went in search of some: paid 5£ to a man to help me but all to no purpose.  At 12 o'clock hired a boat for 3 / - and the man already engaged being absent as I supposed beating about the Creeks was forced to take another on his demand five shillings also; came back at night as I went quite dejected.  Next day was informed by a Native whom I rewarded with a loaf that my boat was high and dry at Lane Cove; had high hopes; engaged the man and boat again for 8 / - at noon reached Lane Cove but found nothing that had the resemblance of a boat except the stem of an old canoe:  curst the Native who had imposed on my credulity for a loaf and had my only jacket stole perhaps by some of his own kindred.  Went on for Kissing Point and called in to make enquiry and to bait being sorely fatigued; made fast to another boat while we went on shore the tide remarkably strong; meantime a brace of mischievous boys cast my boat loose and away she went clear out of sight before I knew she was adrift. Fresh grief and no help for it!  Agreed to give 5 / - for another boat to give chase to her a poor fellow with us gratis; and at 4 in the afternoon having lost much time in dodging about the Creeks had the good fortune to find her at Pinchgut the oars and rudder gone; overjoyed at first but soon after miserable as ever.  Got home with an aching heart was forced to pay 30 / - down for damages all gone and my Family without a loaf; hard luck! what was to become of me? but still I knew that God was gracious and "honesty the best policy".  I was now like a fish out of water; a new employment to seek since my boat was inhumanly taken from me; unable to relinquish hope entirely I sauntered about the Bays and Creeks five days successively; when Providence kindly directed a friendly Native towards me who anticipating the subject of my wanderings and led me to the spot on which my little fortune lay capsized and much the worse for wear: Courage and strength returned for half a loss was better than none at all: got every assistance from my friends because there was a prospect of my paying for it; and altho' my additional expense was seven and thirty shillings yet this was the best bestowed money I had expended as it restored comfort to my family; and may their short-liv'd miseries 'light heavily on the miscreants that impiously caused them.  PIRATICAL CAPTURE of the Venus COLONIAL BRIG  Sydney July 12 1806.  Yesterday arrived from Port Dalrymple the schooner Governor Hunter Mr. Rushworth master with the above melancholy information having on board Mr Chace late master of the brig Venus and several of his crew passengers. The following is the substance of a deposition of Mr. Chace taken before the magistrates at Yorkton on the 17th. of June ultimo.  SAMUEL RODMAN CHACE deposed that:  "The Venus sailed from Port Jackson the latter end of April into Two-fold Bay where she remained nearly five weeks; during which period he found that part of the property in his charge had been purloined by his crew and other persons on board. Whereupon he publicly challenged his mate Benjamin Barnet Kelly with having broached a cask of spirits which Kelly denied.  That having quitted Two-fold Bay he proceeded for Port Dalrymple: and that on Sunday the 8th. of June being then at sea he perceived a small deal box overboard which supposing to be a box of papers belonging to Captain Kemp of the New South Wales Corps he immediately put the ship about and ordered out a boat to pick up the box. That the boat followed it a considerable way but the box suddenly disappearing he made a signal for the boat to return.  That he afterwards found out that it was Captain Kemp's property thrown overboard by Catharine Hagarty a convict who co-habited during the passage with Kelly the first mate.  That about 10 in the morning of the 16th. ult. the vessel came to anchor in Port Dalrymple at Lagoon Beach and that two hours after Mr. House Naval Officer came on board and with the master quitted the vessel to proceed to Western Arm where Mr. Chace delivered his Government dispatches to His Honor the Lieutenant Governor.  That he afterwards went with Mr. House on board the Governor Hunter colonial schooner then lying in Western Arm and staid on board her that night. And this morning (the 17th.) proceeded down the River towards the Venus and saw her under way it being then about 7 o'clock.  That Captain Chace put into Outer Cove with Mr. House still imagining the vessel was coming up the River; but that about 10 o'clock five seamen belonging to the Venus came to the deponent and informed him that 'they had been forcibly turned out of the Venus by the first mate Kelly; the pilot David Evans and Richard Thompson a private of the New South Wales Corps;' and that they further informed the deponent that 'Kelly Evans and Thompson had knocked down and confined the second mate and had taken the brig out to sea; that Kelly was armed with a musket Evans with a pistol and that Thompson was at the helm' which information Captain Chace immediately communicated to Lieutenant Governor PATERSON."  A further investigation of the above piratical transaction being the same day ordered Mr. Chace in addition to the former testimony deposed that:  "While the Venus was weather-bound for the long period of five weeks at Two-fold Bay as before stated he had reason to believe from the conduct of Kelly that the vessel was in danger of being run away with; and that he (Chace) requested the master of the Marcia schooner then also lying in Two-fold Bay to inform Mr Palmer (Agent to the owner Mr Robert Campbell merchant of this territory) on the Marcia's return to Port Jackson that from the general behaviour of the people on board he did not think the vessel safe." [42]   Captain Chace then went on to say that:   "He also told the master of the Marcia that should a colonial vessel come into the Bay he would give up the brig to her as the crew were robbing and plundering the vessel and he did not think his life safe."  In view of these depositions by Captain Chace it is publicly considered most remarkable that he Captain Chace had in the most imprudent and unjustifiable Manner left the Venus to go 10 miles up the River to wait on the Lieutenant Governor when he ought to have remained on board in charge of his vessel and what was in her until the Venus reached the settlement at Yorkton. And further when Captain Chace reported the loss of stores to the Lieutenant-Governor while he was delivering the Government dispatches His Honor ordered both Captain Chace and Mr. House to return immediately on board the Venus which instructions as shown above they neglected to carry out.  We are sorry to conclude this unfortunate information by stating that the Venus had on board supplies of meal and flour (5674 lb.) and salt pork (11184 lb) with various public and private stores for the Settlements at Port Dalrymple and Hobart Town.  The pecuniary loss to the Government in the provisions and stores on board the vessel does not exceed £420. But the loss occasioned to these Settlements by this misfortune will be most severely felt until the arrival of the Sophia and Estramina which are fitting with the utmost expedition to take other supplies to those Settlements; which the present state (reduced rations in this Settlement) the Colony can but ill afford.  We append the following descriptions in order that whatsoever port or ports the Venus may be taken into or met with at sea it will ensure against any frauds or deceptions that may be put in practice by the pirates; and that they will be taken into custody and delivered to some British authority that they may be brought to condign punishment.  DESCRIPTION OF THE VENUS  Venus Colonial Brig of 45 tons burthen built and registered in Calcutta. Owners;- Campbell & Co. Calcutta. The vessel is unarmed and mounts no guns.  DESCRIPTION OF THE PIRATES  Benjamin Barnet Kelly first mate; about 5 feet 7 inches high pock-marked thin visage brown hair auburn whiskers and says he is an American; he came to this Colony as mate of the Albion south sea whaler Captain Bunker. Richard Edwards second mate; about 5 feet 5 inches high fair hair a very remarkable scar or cut in one cheek; landed here by the Bridgewater. Joseph Redmonds seaman; Mulatto about 5 feet 6 or 7 inches high stout made broad nose thick lips wears his hair tied in pigtails and with holes in his ears being accustomed to wear large earrings; came in the Venus whaler. A Malay cook. Thomas Ford and William Evans boys; the latter a native of this Colony. Richard Thompson soldier; 5 feet 8 inches high; about 27 years of age fair complexion and light brown hair. R. T. (David) Evans convict pilot; about 5 feet 7 or 8 inches high stout made brown hair broad visage; came out as a gunner's mate on board His Majesty's ship Calcutta and having deserted was afterwards transported here for fourteen years. John William Lancashire a convict; about 5 feet 4 inches high sallow complexion brown hair a little marked with the small-pox of an emaciated appearance and by trade a painter and draughtman. Catharine Hagarty a convict; middle size light hair fresh complexion much inclined to smile and hoarse voice. Charlotte Badger a convict; very corpulent with full face thick lips and light hair; has an infant child.  Yesterday the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction assembled at 10 in the forenoon; and proceeded to the trial of John Donne alias Dun a foreigner; Thos. Welch and Ann Wilson for the wilful murder of Mary Rowe at Parramatta on Sunday the 25th of August ultimo. The indictment charged Donne as the perpetrator of the crime and under three counts charged Welch and Wilson as accessories to before and after the fact.  Several witnesses proved the state in which the body of the deceased was found on Monday morning the 26th and stated generally that the deceased lived with one Charles Wright whose dwelling is situated between the back of Mr Ward's premises at Paramatta and the stone quarry a situation lonely retired and obscure; that on Monday morning a child of Mr Parrott's went into Charles Wright's to purchase milk as was her custom; and returning homewards related that Mrs Rowe was lying dead and mangled on her own floor: that the alarm immediately reached Mr Chief Constable Ward's who exerted himself in a manner becoming his office in the development that followed; that the body and limbs of the deceased were dreadfully mangled; a part of the flesh of her right thigh brutally cut and torn away; her cloaths rent piecemeal and that the murdered body was found on the floor in a doorway her legs in the front room and her head and body in the back room where she had always slept. That Mr Surgeon Luttrill was called in to examine the body; who deposed to the following effect viz; that at 9 on Monday morning he was called upon to view the body and immediately obeyed the summons; [365] that upon entering the house he found her lying as above described and that her face was much bruised and disfigured by blows; that a shawl was twisted about her neck as if designed to strangle her; beneath which when taken off there appeared a livid circle round the neck about two fingers in breadth; that the breast was a good deal scratched and lacerated; and that a most ghastly wound extended from the upper part of the thigh down to the knee which was not merely an incision but that evidently a part of the flesh had been cut or torn away and the bone left bare; that her death had proceeded from strangulation and not from this ghastly wound which though sufficient to have occasioned death independent of any other cause yet had undoubtedly been inflicted after death as little or no blood had issued whereas the infliction of such a wound upon a living subject would have produced a very large emulgence. This Gentleman also gave it as his opinion that the body had been lifeless 12 or 14 hours before he viewed it which was about 9 in the morning.  John Welch a boy about 14 years of age son of the prisoner at the bar Thomas Welch was then called as an Evidence for the Crown and seriously admonished by the Judge Advocate on the critical position in which he stood; as upon his truth and candour depended not only his present enlargement but his salvation in a future state. - This evidence being then sworn deposed that he lived at Parramatta with his father with whom the prisoner at the bar Ann Wilson co-habited and that the other prisoner at the bar John Donne lodged in the same house when in Parramatta he being employed on the roads by Mr Harrex the Road Contractor. - The deponent knew the deceased very well as she was his father's next door neighbour; and proceeded to state that about ten on Sunday morning Donne went home to his the deponent's father's with half-a-gallon of spirits having two women in his company whose names were Catherine Murphy and Bridget Bryan all parties sober; that the prisoners Welch and Wilson were absent from home having gone to Mr Martin's farm at Seven Hills a distance of about 7 miles from Parramatta; - That Donne the two women and the deponent drank the whole of the spirits and about two o'clock the women went Donne shortly after following but returning at half past three asked in a familiar way if the deponent thought their neighbour Mary Rowe who lived not more than 18 or 20 yards distant was possessed of money? To which the deponent answering that he could not judge Donne rejoined that he would see; and added that he had given her a pint of rum which had operated powerfully upon her; that she might be robbed without danger and that he would kill her if she did not immediately give her money up: - That the deponent attempted to advise him against the crime but finding him inflexibly bent upon the project bade him take his own course for that he would have no part in it; dissatisfied with which resolution he assured the deponent that unless he assisted in the robbery he would serve him in the same way; [366] that he again absented himself and returned at 4 o'clock by which time John Welch and Ann Wilson had also returned home; that deponent did not acquaint either of the two latter with Donne's project or with his menaces towards himself; that Donne told him privily that Charles Wright with whom the deceased lived was not at home that he Donne shortly afterwards called Thomas Welch deponent's father towards the threshold and wanted to borrow his axe which was behind the door of his own house saying to him also that he had been trying to open Mary Rowe's box but could not effect it for which purpose he wanted the axe and that his father Thomas Welch answered that he should not have it asking at the same time if he was tired of his life and wanted to be hanged? to which Donne made answer that there was no danger. Donne took up the axe accordingly but Welch the father took it from him; that they all sat down to supper between 7 and 8 during which Mrs Rowe knocked at the door which being opened by Donne she exclaimed My good man how dare you take the liberty to break my bedroom window open? if Wright had been at home you would have had a blunderbuss blown through you? to which Donne made no reply but followed the woman she going directly homewards and he desiring deponent Welch to accompany him which he did at a small distance. That Donne was nearly close to Mary Rowe when she entered the house near to the inner door of which deponent saw him grasp her round the neck with both his hands and after choaking her for about ten minutes she fell without a struggle lifeless! That Donne then proceeded to plunder the house; and with an axe he found therein broke open a box from whence he took in presence of deponent a tea-kettle full of copper coin a bag and a piece of cloth containing coppers likewise; deponent could neither account for the shawl being twined round the neck of the deceased nor how her cloaths became torn as he did not see Donne do either. That both returned to Welch's house Donne taking thither the plunder and found Welch up and Ann Wilson abed and asleep as he believed. That as soon as they entered the house Welch who either heard or saw the spoil brought in ordered John Donne to go and take the same away and secrete it as it would not be advisable to leave any part in the house. That Donne attended by deponent took away the kettle bag and cloth that held the money and buried the whole in the sand near the quarry (where by the deponent's information they were next day found): That they returned home and at Donne's wish went to procure a pint of spirits at the house of one Clowers who having none Donne paid to him two half-crown bills on a former account and they next went to Mr Beldon's where they drank two pints of which several other persons partook and a third they took home. [367] That they were admitted by Welch who had gone to bed from which he arose and afterwards drank of the spirits: Ann Wilson was awakened by Donne to partake of it likewise but she refusing Donne threw part of it over her. That Donne and deponent again went to the house of Charles Wright from whence D. conveyed the dead body to the bottom of the garden and there left it having first made the dreadful incision down the thigh with his knife from an apprehension that she might not yet be dead. That they then went back to Welch's: he was up: Donne told him what he had done with the body and Welch objecting to its being out of the house advised D. to take it back: to accomplish which they all three went to the spot from whence Donne reconveyed the lifeless body into the house she had scarce an hour before been mistress of. That deponent went in with Donne and Welch the elder remained outside. That they searched for further spoil and found two books containing bills which they took home; D. searched the books in presence of deponent and his father took out the bills and burnt the books: That Donne and deponent after this went back to pillage the place namely about 11 o'clock and finding a few more bills went home and went to bed! The deponent having thus ended his narrative of the horrible night's adventures added that Donne left his father's house before sun-rise: he the deponent went out at 8 to tend a herd of cattle which was his avocation; and at about half past 12 he was apprehended on suspicion half a mile from Parramatta very much intoxicated as had been declared by Mr Ward to whom he first disclosed his knowledge of the murder.  The testimony of the Crown Evidence was closely corroborated by witnesses to the minor facts which tended to connect the chain of circumstances and stamp his evidence with a degree of credit to which divest of such auxiliary support it might not have appeared entitled.  Thomas Clowers who in his evidence to the Coroner produced the two half-crown bills paid to him by Donne and one of which had been deposed to by Charles Wright as making part of the sum stolen from his house on the night of the murder could not now identify the bill but stated that Donne & Welch the younger were together and that it was about 8 at night.  Mr Beldon a publican of Parramatta in his evidence corresponded with the boy's; namely that they went together to his house drank two pints of spirits there in company with persons who were already there and took a third away for which Donne settled: - this deponent adding that in part payment he had tendered two bills one for 2s. 6d. the other for 5s. both which being somewhat scrupled by Mrs Beldon were instantly committed to the flames by Donne to whom the boy remarked that he had no need to pay in bills as he had plenty of coppers at home; to proceed whither he went out and returned in ten minutes with 10s. 3d. of copper coin. [368] At nine they left deponent's house.  Mr Owen Martin proved that the prisoners Thos. Welch and Ann Wilson were at his farm that day and staid there till he supposed to be about three o'clock.  The two women who had been with Donne at Welch's house in the forenoon of Sunday and partook of the half gallon of spirits both substantiated that part of the evidence; and Mr Harrex stated that he that morning gave half a gallon of spirits to Donne; together with 7s. 6d. in bills he being a labourer in his employ; and that his character was that of an industrious mild deserving man.  The whole of the evidence being gone through the prisoners were put upon their defence.  John Donne denied the accusation generally and stated that he had gone alone to his master's (Mr Harrex) between five and six in the evening and was absent half an hour or more; that upon his return to Welch's it being then about dark he found the house shut up the place in darkness and an entire silence prevailing; that he cast his eyes around and saw the boy John Welch hovering in silence about the house in which the deceased resided; and on enquiring what he was about received for answer that he was looking for him. At that juncture he was persuaded the murder had been effected; both as to any circumstance that took place after his conversation with the boy; how they passed the evening and night; or what became of the prisoners Welch and Wilson in whose hut which is represented as a single apartment less than 12 feet square he slept he gave no account; nor did he account for the money he had spent; but admitted that he had burnt the bills because he had been informed that they were bad.  Thomas Welch also declared himself innocent and accused his unhappy son of having advanced falsehoods to his prejudice and "sworn HIS life away!!!". . . . He solemnly protested that when the deceased came to his door and challenged Donne with the breaking open of her window he was totally unacquainted with the nature of the fact; that the boy followed Donne from a signal he must have given as he did not hear him speak at the time nor did the woman though the boy sat between the two; that after Donne and his son had been away a length of time he went to bed - the woman had done so likewise; that what Donne and his son were about he knew not as he had never arose from bed from the time of his going in to that of his rising in the morning or until he let them in - which of the two was the assertion we did not distinctly hear.  Ann Wilson rested her defence upon her original plea not guilty and threw herself upon the opinion of her impartial Judges. - [369]   The Court was directed to be cleared and after an hour and a quarter's exclusion the prisoners were recalled to the bar and the auditory re-admitted.  The crisis of expectancy being arrived the Judge Advocate communicated to the prisoners severally the Verdict of the Court which without a shadow of doubt had convicted the prisoner Donne of wilful murder and the prisoner Thos. Welch of being an accessory after the fact which extended to him the Benefit of Clergy. Ann Wilson was pronounced Not Guilty.  The Judge Advocate finally proceeded to the awful Sentence of the Law against John Donne otherwise Dunne which doomed him to suffer Death on Monday the 16th of August instant and his body to be afterwards dissected and anatomised.  And as Thomas Welch was already a prisoner for life and the nature of the offence of which he had been convicted differed in its shadowing but little from that of the condemned culprit the Court had thought proper to sentence him to 7 years confinement to hard labour wheresoever it should be the pleasure of His Excellency the Governor in Chief to direct.  The Trial lasted from ten to five at which hour the Court adjourned sine die.  Is there not in the colony great party differences existing between the free settlers from England and the free settlers after emancipation ? - No. I do not think there are great party differences existing; the native youths as they call themselves those born in the colony I have heard claim the rights of the aboriginal inhabitants. They say they are solely entitled to have grants of land given to them in preference to persons from Europe; when I say native youths I mean those who are born in the Colony the descendants of persons sent there; there is a feeling of that kind but it does not lead to any material differences.  Do they view the property acquired by the free settlers from Europe with considerable jealousy ? - I can hardly say whether they do or not: I should think they do; I think they are jealous of favours bestowed upon persons from Europe.  Is the opinion at all prevalent in the colony that the colony is for the convicts and their descendants and not for free settlers from the mother country? - I have heard such opinions expressed.  DREADFUL Mutiny on board the Chapmen Convict ship  Captain Drake bound for Botany Bay by which 34 Convicts lost their lives in their endeavours to seize the Vessel; an account of the capture of the Ringleaders; and the Evidence at length of Michael Collins one of the said Convicts.  It was stated some time since on the authority of a letter which had been sent from a Gentleman who had sailed in the CHAPMAN Convict Ship from Cove dated at sea in May last that a Mutiny had broken out among the Convicts in that ship which was put down by force and that some of them in consequence were shot and others dangerously wounded. The following particulars of the circumstances was given in the evidence of one of the Convicts in the presence of the Officers of the Ship: - Michael Collins Convict sworn.  Q. To the best of your recollection when did you know that the convicts intended to take the ship? - A. Second day after leaving St. Jago.  Q. What did the convicts intend to do with the ship if they got possession of her? - A. To take her to America.  Q. Who was the first person that mentioned taking the ship? - Francis Murphy.  Q. Did you take any oath? - A. Yes.  Q. Do you remember the words of the oath? - A. Yes; to be true and loyal and not to deceive each other as it was the Convicts' intention to take the ship and murder the crew and guard and every one on board except the Chief Mate.  Q. Do you know if they had succeeded in taking the ship which of them was to be Captain and Officers? - A. Yes; J. Flinn to be Captain's brother and sailing Captain; J. Morrison to be Captain and wear his clothes; Murphy to be Doctor and wear his clothes.  Q. Did you ever hear them talk of their wicked design? - A. Yes frequently; that they were to be officers and that they were only to keep one hundred convicts in irons to make it appear that all was right in the event of being boarded by any ship at sea.  Q. What was the punishment if any refused the oath? - A. To be stiffled with blankets quartered and hove out of the port-holes.  Q. Do you know if any of the ship's company assisted the convicts with articles to help them in their plot? - A. Yes; I know that Nelson and Crawley sailors of the ship handed down from deck two bars of iron two knives a carpenter's hammer and long nails.  Q. Did you ever hear what use they were to be made of? - A. Yes; to be put on pieces of wood to answer as spears.  Q. Do you know the plan by which the convicts intended to take the ship when Hugh Molloy was the pass-word? - A. Yes; one part of the convicts to force the fore-scuttle with a view of drawing the attention of every one on deck to that part; while the main body was to rush aft and force their way into the guard-room for the purpose of getting possession of the arms and go to the powder magazine which they intended to set on fire if they could not make their way back to the deck as it would be as well to be blown up as shot by the guard.  Q. Was it not their intention to have taken the ship last Friday? - A. Yes; because there were 17 men allowed to wash on deck who were selected out of the convicts for that purpose all the stoutest men besides three cooks and four swabbers altogether 24; they were to watch the opportunity when the ship's company went down to dinner when the sentinels were to be knocked down and their arms taken and then come aft and take possession of the quarter-deck and cut every body down that attempted to come from below. [80]   Q. Did they think of succeeding that day? -   A. Yes; they made sure for they said that day they should be employed in regulating and making out a ship's company and guard and on Saturday to have a grand dinner; the dinner was to be roasted turkey roast pigs geese with a glass of brandy; after the goose Port and Madeira wine.  The evidence closes here but the annexed narration is equally authentic and it will be seen such was the desperation of these wretches that they made another but equally unsuccessful attempt to carry the vessel.  We did give them all a dinner that they could not swallow. Four and six dozen lashes to every man on Saturday; our sailors had no mercy in flogging them. - We have all the ringleader on deck chained down several have since confessed the affair.  On Thursday evening they made their attempt forward first by forcing up the fore scuttle; finding they could not succeed they all made a rush to force the afthold bulk head we then began to fire at all the hatchways they still persisted and sung out that they wanted no quarter; we kept firing until we found them all quiet singing out for mercy. I went down with a party of the Guard and demanded the dead and wounded. We found nine dead and twenty-four wounded who have since died of their wounds.  Second Attempt - Sunday 27th P.M. evening we heard them consulting in a body below the sentry fired we then commenced for a little time until we found them all quiet. Killed one wounded six. We have not got half of them to the chain-cable so there in no fear of their doing any more harm; if they do we do not intend to leave a man of them alive. It was planned in Dublin prison that whatever ship they embarked in they would take and murder all hands. They say they have got most of their party on board the PILOT they think she will be taken. I am very much afraid of it. We have had several turn King's evidence which corroborates Collin's evidence. I hope to see them all hung at Botany Bay. May 2 found on Francis Murphy (the head of the ringleaders who was confined on deck with double-irons and handcuff) a pick-lock being proved by his fellow prisoners of his intention to get himself free of the handcuff. Peter Allen a fellow prisoner who was wounded was not handcuffed; he was the man to have freed him. Tied Murphy up and gave him two dozen; Allen being ill did not punish him.  "John Jackson's evidence (one of the ringleaders) on oath says it was their intention to have taken the ship two days after leaving Cove and to heave us all overboard and to run the ship on shore; they altered their mind saying it was too near home. He says they were all sworn coming round in the brig to take the ship they embarked in to murder all hands and to take the ship to America and if they failed in taking the ship they were sworn on their arrival at Botany with the PILOT'S people and as many as they could get there to join them to take Botany Bay. He says the Captain Officers ship's company and guard were all selected out amongst them and they made sure of succeeding in taking the ship."  W. Bethel Printer.  HOBART TOWN County of Buckinghamshire Island of Van Diemen.  Depositions taken on an Inquisition held this twentieth day of May 1815 upon the view of the body of James O'Burne then and there lying Dead before Adolarious William Henry Humphrey Esquire Coroner of the aforesaid County.  MR Dennis McCARTY on Oath deposed:- - I knew James O'Burne; he was in my employ three weeks ago as a Sailor. A Banditti of Bushrangers who are in the Woods disturbing the Settlements came to the district of New Norfolk where I reside. I knew McGwyre to be one of the party of Bushrangers. I was informed by those persons who knew them that James Whitehead Michael Howe Hugh Burn Richard Collyer I also heard the name of Jones who had a bump on his Eye together with Peter Septon and Peter Geary were of the party; that about Nine o'Clock in the morning of the day this happened Word was brought to me that the Bushrangers were plundering robbing and had fired at some of the Inhabitants of the Settlement at New Norfolk. I waited sometime judging that they would attack my house and did therefore prepare for the Attack; finding they did not come and having been informed that the Robbers had gone to the back River I sent to see if they were there. I was told that they were and had a Centry on one of the Houses. I lhcn mustered what force I could and proceeded to Robert Hayes' House. My party consisted of James O'Burne deceased who had Volunteered his Services with a great many other persons. The Bushrangers were gone from Hay's [sic] House before I could get to it with my Party. [237] I then went on to James Triffitt's; they had also left there and gone in the direction of Macquarie district. I and my Party continued the pursuit and came up with the Bushrangers about a Mile from Triffitt's when an Action took place and James O'Burne here lying dead received a Musket Shot from one of the Banditti. After the Engagement I returned home and sent out my Cart to bring in the Wounded and that this Morning the said James O'Bume died.  Dennis McCARTY  Verdict. That James O'Burne was Murdered wilfully by James Whitehead Peter Septon Michael Howe Richard Collyer Richard McGwyre Hugh Burn Peter Geary George Jones and a Woman Native of this Island who is called Mary.  A. W. H. HUMPHREY Coroner.  Robbery of Farm of Lieut-Governor Davey by Bushrangers  HOBART TOWN County of Buckinghamshire Van Diemen's Land.  Information on Oath of JOHN Peachey Overseer of His Honor Lieutenant Governor Davey's farm at Carrington Park Coal River who saith: About ten o'clock last night the Eighth of September 1816 William Wood a Crown servant was reading in the front Room of His Honor Lieutenant Governor Davey's house. I was in Bed; there came a knock at the Door. Wood opened the door and a man of the name of George Jones Bushranger said 'How do you do Wood?' I immediately got up and went into the front Room where I found five men Bushrangers viz. George Jones Michael Howe Peter Septon John Chapman and James Parker; to the best of my belief each of them had a brace of Pistols and a Musket. I said well my lads what do you want; they said 'They just called to see me'. I replied well I suppose you want something to eat; they said 'Yes' I told them that I had some fresh pork that was dressed; they said 'No'. Chapman one of the party said 'I must have some of the Ham which hangs up'; they asked where Manchester (another Crown Servant) was and said let him get the pan and begin to fry. Michael Howe went in search of Eggs through the Premises and then asked me for some Spirits which I gave him; they took some Cream and beam up the Eggs Cream and Spirits; they ordered me to make Tea which I did; they then asked me for my Wife's Thread. I brought out my wife's work basket; they asked for some Ammunition. I told them there was a little Powder in the Closet. I went and brought it to them also two small bags with some leaden Slugs in them; they desired me to tell my wife to get up; their reason for this as I afterwards found was to search the Room after my wife got up. [238] Michael Howe Peter Septon and George Jones went in and searched the Room; they turned everything out of the Boxes and took away with them nearly three lbs. weight of the best Green Tea a small parcel of Sugar together with thread Needles etc.; they also took six bottles of Wine which my wife had put by in case of illness; they asked me if the Wine was of one sort.  When they came out of the Bed room they told me what they had taken which was a few things they stood in need of but that they had not touched my wearing apparel; they packed up the wine with the other things as also the remainder of the Ham and two or three loaves of bread in their napsacks; they then asked me for a candle to go to the Servants' house. I gave them one and they returned back to the house and said there were two or three men absent and added they must be off. Peter Septon asked me for some Grog which I gave him who mixed it with milk and he then took it over to a sick man named Lucas (another Crown servant) at the men's place; they then took up their napsacks and went away bidding us all a good night; they left the house but returned immediately saying they had left three leaden weights on the table; they turned on their way to Stynes and Troy's farm; during the conversation at Tea they expressed a wish to see the Lieutenant Governor there as they wanted to have a little private conversation with him. Mich'l Howe desired his compliments to Lieutenant Governor Davey. I had a musket in the House which John Chapman changed. Michael Howe asked me for my dictionary. I gave it to him observing to him that it was mine and as soon as he had done with it to return it to me; he promised he would.  JOHN PEACHEY  Revd. Philip Connolly catholic Priest being duly sworn states I took my passage on board the Ship 'Janus'... about three weeks after I had been on board I had reason to suspect some improper intercourse was going on between the female Convicts and the Sailors; my reasons for so doing were in consequence of some Conversation between the Surgeon and Captn.; the intercourse appeared to me to be general; I have reason to believe there were two or three Women often indeed Constantly in the Captain's Cabin; Lydia Elsden was one Mary Long also was one; she endeavoured to get in of a night; they were in the sleeping Births and did not appear in the day; they were in the principal part of the day and principal part of the night. [9] I felt it my Duty to have some conversation with the Captain in the course of a Month after we sailed. I did so frequently nearly the whole Voyage; there was a time I ceased to do it Convinced it was useless; these things were frequently talked over publicly in the Cabin. Captain Mowat seemed by his words to wish to prevent it but not by his Actions. I have reason to believe as to the Sailors each took their partner from the Prison-room. . . I believe Prostitution was carried on during the Voyage to a most Shameful extent.  The Captain knew of the Prostitution being carried on; he took means to prevent it but not sufficient means: the Captain often went down to prevent it but I am sure they would have carried it on in spite of him; the Sailors seemed determined to have the Women. The Hatches were removed as regularly as they were fastened; his the Captain's remonstrances had no effect nor could it be expected they would in consequence of his own example and Conduct I mean bad example.  Mary Long being duly Sworn states I was one of the female Convicts that came out in the Ship 'Janus'. . . When I have not been Confined in the Prison during the night I have passed my time in the Captain's Cabin. I believe I am at this time in a pregnant Condition . . -When I was in the Captain's Cabin it was Commonly known. When I went I went publicly down night or day. I washed and mended for Captain Mowat. I constantly had occasion to go down for those purposes. Mary Hoare Isabella Irvin used to wash for the Priests: Ellen Molloy cooked for them; they had frequent occasion to go into the Priests' Cabin...  Lydia Elsden being duly Sworn states I was one of the Prisoners that Came out in the Ship 'Janus'. I wrote a Letter to Mr Bailey whose Government Servant I am. I was particularly urgent with him to come down to Sydney to see one of the Officers of the Ship. I complained to him that I was pregnant by the Chief Mate of the Ship John Hedges. I passed much of my time in his Cabin during the Voyage.. . The Surgeon knew of my going up and down and the other Women too and did not peremptorily order us to our Prison but only to be more Circumspect and not to do it openly lest the Priests should know it for that his living depended on his Character; this I have often heard and every Person on board heard the same and he said that he would have a Woman in his Cabin if it was not for the Priests.  AWFUL DISCLOSURES ON BOARD THE JANUS FEMALE CONVICT SHIP.  It is notorious that the female convicts on board the transports often lead dissolute lives with the seamen on the passage hither from England but no case before has shown such flagrant deriliction of Duty on the part of the Captain as well as his Officers as that of the female convict ship Janus.  The ship Janus commanded by Captain Thomas J. Mowatt arrived at Sydney on the 3d. of May 1820 with 104 Female Convicts from England and Ireland; Mr. Creagh Royal Navy having been the Surgeon Superintendent but who died at Sea when off Van Diemen's Land. Some weeks after these females were landed and either distributed amongst the respectable Married Settlers or placed in the Government Factory at Parramatta it appeared that most of them were in a state of Pregnancy through having lived in Prostitution with the Captain Officers and Crew.  It has transpired that two convict women Lydia Esden and Mary Long were sent to Nicholas Bayly Esquire of Bayly Park but they pretended they were unable to work and tried to return to Sydney in order as they said to get some recompense from the Captain and First Mate for their Prostitution while on board the Janus. Mary Long who cannot write said she lived with the Captain during the passage while Lydia Esden lived with the First Mate John Hedges. Both are pregnant. Lydia Esden sent the following letter to her Master who had refused them a pass being contrary to the Government Orders. [...] [84]   His Excellency the Governor deemed it necessary that such circumstances should be duly investigated by a full Bench of Magistrates which was accordingly undertaken on the 24th of June 1820 before Jno. Wylde Esqr. the Honbie the Judge Advocate; Will'm Minchin Esqr. J.P.; John Thomas Campbell Esqr. J.P.; Simeon Lord Esq. J.P.; John Piper Esqr. J.P.  The Reverend Philip Connolly and the Revd. Joseph Therry Roman Catholic Chaplains with the permission of the Government had come Out as passengers in the Janus and gave evidence as follows: - REVD. PHILIP CONNOLLY being duly sworn stated  "I took my passage on board the Ship Janus. About three weeks after I had been on board I had reason to suspect some improper intercourse was going on between the female Convicts and the Sailors; my reasons for so doing were in consequence of some Conversation between the Surgeon and Captain. The intercourse appeared to me to be general; I have reason to believe there were two or three Women often indeed Constantly in the Captain's Cabin - Lydia Esden was one Mary Long was also one - She endeavoured to get in of a night. They were in the sleeping Births both day and night.  I felt it my Duty to have some conversation with the Captain in the course of a Month after we sailed. I did so frequently nearly the whole Voyage but there was a time I ceased to do it Convinced it was useless. These things were frequently talked over publicly in the Cabin. Captain Mowatt seemed by his words to wish to prevent it but not by his Actions I have reason to believe as to the Sailors each took their partner from the Prison-room.  The Ship went into Rio and a letter was sent to the Commodore Bowles respecting the Mal-practices on board. The Captain and Surgeon in Consequence of this went on Shore and some bolts and bars were sent on board to keep the Prison secure and to prevent Prostitution. They were shortly removed by the Sailors; it was generally talked of in the Ship and I knew of two or three women who visited the Captain after the bolts were removed. Prostitution seemed to prevail more than before and I have seen women come from the Sailor's Birth.  The Captain knew of the Prostitution being carried on and he took means to prevent it but not sufficient means. The Sailors seemed determined to have the women. The Hatches were removed as regularly as they were fastened and the Captain's remonstrances had no effect nor could it be expected they would in consequence of his own example and Conduct - I mean bad example. I am sure it was the Sailors who removed the bars not with the Captain's permission but there was no means taken to punish those that removed them. The locks were bad but if they had been good the grating could be moved away from under the bars which were loose They had means on board to fasten them and had I been Master I should have had them fastened."  REVD. JOHN JOSEPH THERRY duly sworn gave similar evidence to that of the Revd. Connolly; he stated: "I did form an opinion as to what was going on in the Ship - the utmost prevalence of Vice in respect to illicit intercourse prevailed. I mean with all the men it was general and I do believe there was general criminal intercourse between the Sailors and the female Convicts. I expostulated with the Officers and Captain frequently but finding my expostulations of no use I discontinued them."  MARY LONG being duly sworn stated: "When I have not been confined in the Prison during the night I have passed my time in the Captain's Cabin. I believe I am at this time in a pregnant Condition. I charge Captain Mowatt with the cause of my being in this Condition. I washed and mended for Captain Mowatt. I constantly had occasion to go down for those purposes. Mary Hoare Isabella Irvin used to wash for the Priests; Ellen Molloy cooked for them and they had frequent occasions to go to the Priests' Cabin."  LYDIA ESDEN duly sworn stated: "I wrote a Letter to Mr. Bayly whose Government Servant I am. I was particularly urgent with him to come down to Sydney to see one of the Officers of the Ship. I complained to him that I was pregnant by the Chief Mate of the Ship John Hedges. I passed much of my time in his Cabin during the Voyage. The Surgeon knew of my going up and down and of the other women too and did not peremptorily order us to our Prison but only to be more Circumspect and not to do it openly lest the Priests should know of it; for that his living depended on his Character. He said he would have a woman in his Cabin if it was not for the Priests."  The Bench of Magistrates after due consideration found that Prostitution did prevail to a great degree on board the Janus throughout the Voyage from England to this Territory and that due exertions were not made on the part of the Captain and Officers to repress and prevent the same; and that the charges against Captain Mowatt and his Officers individually were true and well founded in fact.  In the year 1794 I purchased from an officer Sixty Bengal Ewes and Lambs which had been imported from Calcutta and very soon after I procured from the Captain of a Transport from Ireland two Irish Ewes and a young Ram. The Indian Sheep produced coarse hair and the wool of the Irish Sheep was then valued at no more than 9d. per lb. By crossing the two Breeds I had the satisfaction to see the lambs of the Indian Ewes bear the mingled fleece of hair and wool - this circumstance originated the idea of producing fine wool in New South Wales. In the year 1796 (I believe) the two sloops of war on this station were sent to the Cape of Good Hope and as their Commanders were friends of mine I requested them to enquire if there were any wool-bearing sheep at the Cape. At the period of their arrival at the Settlement there was a flock of Merino Sheep for sale from which about twenty were purchased. Of these I was favoured with Four Ewes and Two Rams the remainder were distributed amongst different individuals who did not take the necessary precautions to preserve the breed pure and they soon disappeared - Mine were carefully guarded against an impure mixture and increased in number and improved in the quality of their wool. In a year or two after I had an opportunity of augmenting my flock by the purchase from Colonel Foveaux of 1200 Sheep of the common Cape Breed. In 1801 I took to England specimens of the pure Merino Wool and of the best of the crossbred and having submitted them to the inspection of a Committee of Manufacturers they reported the Merino Wool was equal to any Spanish wool and the Crossbred of considerable value. Thus encouraged I purchased Nine Rams and a Ewe from the Royal Flock at Kew and returned to this country determined to devote my attention to the improvement of the Wool of my flocks. I only landed here Five Rams and one Ewe of the Sheep purchased from the Royal Flock. It is from these sources alone that my present stock has been raised.  On Friday last Robert Wardell and W.C. Wentworth Esquires Barristers at Law presented themselves to the Supreme Court and having been sworn in as such were also admitted in pursuance of the terms of the Charter "to act in the character of Proctors Attornies and Solicitors in the said Court."  Immediately upon admission Dr. Wardell moved that the Gentlemen at present practising as Solicitors and acting as Barristers be compelled to retire from the Bar confining themselves to their own province in the Profession as Attornies &c; and yielding to the Barristers the two fold privilege of exercising their functions as Barristers and practising as Attornies Solicitors &c. The Learned Gentleman founded this motion upon the tenth section of the New Charter of Justice (to which our Readers can refer) pointing out and explaining the defectiveness of that clause; urging that it was only consistent now that four Barristers were in the Colony that the Attornies should retire from acting as characters to which they had no legitimate claim; and that it rested with the Court from the construction of the Charter to make that division and distinction which the Learned Gentleman contended the time was now ripe for.  The Doctor's Learned Friend (Mr. Wentworth) briefly followed the exposition of the intention of the framers of the Charter; and moved that a Rule be granted to shew cause why the Attornies should not forthwith retire from the Bar. - Rule granted. His Honor appointed Tuesday last for the purpose of hearing the Gentlemen on the other side.  At 11 o'clock on Tuesday His Honor took his seat on the Bench. The business relative to the late motion was then brought forward. The Attorney General the Solicitor General Dr. Wardell and Mr. Wentworth with the whole of the Attornies were present. Mr. Garling as the senior Solicitor first addressed the Court by way of replication. He observed that he once thought of quietly retiring from the Bar as there were Gentlemen every way qualified for the higher duties of Barrister now in the Colony but that when compulsion was talked of he felt it his duty to resist every such attempt unless it was the opinion of the Court that the Attornies should concede the point and give up that privilege which he must till then hold as a right.  Mr. W.H. Moore followed Mr. Garling by observing that he had left England under the sanction of His Majesty's Ministers with a salary of £300 at a time when the Colony was most deplorably off for legal skill; and that for ten years past he (with Mr. Garling) had practised as Solicitor and exercised the duties of Barrister not only with satisfaction to the Courts of Justice but also with the entire approbation of the Public; that he had been approved admitted and enrolled in the present Court with all the powers specified in the Charter; and that he felt not the least disposition to retire from the Bar; but upon the contrary that he most strenuously insisted upon his right still to enjoy those privileges which had never before been questioned.  Mr. Rowe succeeded. This Gentleman kept the Court (at least the auditory which was crowded and respectable) in almost unceasing laughter. He appeared much animated and two or three times bordered on waxing wroth but opportunely remarked he entertained no hostile feeling. Mr. Rowe gave his reasons appealing to the Charter why he could not brook to so much indignity as to retreat from the post of honor which he had enjoyed with the approbation of all parties for several years.  Mr. Norton dispassionately but firmly resisted the attempt thus made to dispossess himself and Brethren from those immunities which they had as a Body held for ten years.  Mr. Chambers deliberately and much to the point contended that the motion was unjust. He founded his arguments upon the Charter at least the tenth section and made it appear that the Court could not without "reasonable cause" compel the Attornies to retire from the Bar.  Mr. Allen was very brief in his rejoinder. He merely stated that he was one of those who had expressed a willingness to retire; but now as the other side insisted upon their rights he also contended for the same privilege in common with the other Gentlemen.  Mr. Wentworth as was settled on Friday then rose to support the motion and answer the Solicitors. The Learned Gentleman elaborately and with undoubted ability attempted to rebut all the arguments that had been adduced on the other side. He insisted that it was only just that the Gentlemen who contended for their right should be dispossessed of that which was not their right; as it never could have been intended by the framers of the Charter in the event of Barristers coming out that the Attornies should be allowed to exercise a function which did not belong to their body; that the tenth section of the Charter was evidently bad grammar as had been shewn by his Learned Friend (Dr. Wardell) and therefore it was expedient to go back to the previous section to supply the hiatus that obviously existed in the tenth section; and that it remained with the Court to fill up that breach in effecting which there would be no difficulty in at once meeting the views of the motion. The Learned Gentleman was occupied nearly two hours in wading through Acts of Parliament Commissioner Bigge's Report and the Charter; in the course of which considerable ardour and abundant talent were pressed into service.  It is to be regretted that our limits will not allow of affording our Readers even the outline of the able impartial and perspicuous elucidation of that part of the Charter affecting this case which was given by the Chief Justice. We can only just notice that His Honor observed that he hoped the period was not far distant when the separation now sought for would be obtained; but that the present Charter of Justice did not admit of that construction which the Learned Movers gave to it. His Honor spoke particularly as to the omission in the tenth section of our Charter at the same time comparing it with various Indian Charters where the defect evidently was supplied. If we understood His Honor correctly it was suggested as extremely probable that by the expiration of the existing New South Wales Act the present subject of contention would meet with that consideration which it deservedly merited. The Rule was discharged.  Upon the above case silence we thought would become us best; but upon secondary consideration it was esteemed in the order of things as well to drop a few remarks upon a subject to discuss which all the legal talent and mental energies of the Colonial Bar were concentrated. Our annals could never before boast of such a day as Tuesday last! The keen ingenuity the laborious exposition of the Law the flights of fancy the satirical rubs the bursts of oratory the convincing and thundering arguments the profundity of science all all conspired to overwhelm the reflecting auditor with sublime conceptions of the future! The Genius of Australia was conjectured to form one of the auditory; but for certain reasons continued invisible. There was only one circumstance that had a tendency to disturb the pleasure of listening to such a display of forensic eloquence viz. unaffected regret that the Legal Heroes (for they certainly fought) should have differed among themselves just as if all the clients had become transformed into honorable men and there was nought more profitable left than to enter the lists with each other!! It was a high day to the clients as neither plaintiff nor defendant had to settle costs. But to be again serious: the olive branch has ever been significant of peace; how much is to be deplored then that so valuable an exotic has not yet been brought by some kind hand to our shores and carefully cultured that its friendly fruit might abound?  As far as the question affected the Public perhaps we may be allowed to venture our opinion one that is tolerably universal that in the event of a Bar being established here upon the same footing as in the Mother Country such an arrangement would have been inevitably depressive to the rising interests of the Colony. We are not old enough neither are we in the possession of sufficient wealth to sustain an independent Bar. Had the Rule been made absolute so far as preventing one party from trespassing on the rights of the other it is our conviction that the Attornies would not have lost a mite by the retrograde movement; but we the Colonists would have had to maintain the Barrister a tax not well as yet to be tolerated. The experience of three years as wisely suggested by His Honor the Chief Justice will not however be lost in influence with the Home Government.  Wednesday. Mr. Wentworth moved that Wm. King who was brought up by a writ of habeas corpus from the jail where he was detained for being a runaway from the Tamar should be discharged; but as it appeared that a certiorari had been directed to the committing justice to bring before the Court the depositions taken in this case - King was remanded till the return of the certiorari.  Thursday. - In the case of William King confined in the gaol by virtue of a warrant signed by Mr. Macleod as a runaway from H.M. ship Tamar the Chief Justice observed that in consequence of an application made to the Court for the discharge of the prisoner King he had given the subject some consideration; but could not come to any decision until a copy of the proceedings before the Magistrates should be laid before the Court. - (Here the Attorney General intimated that he had just received a return of the certiorari). It had been pretty broadly asserted that magistrates had not authority enabling them to commit to prison mariners belonging to his Majesty's service. - Though he did not feel disposed at present to enter into the merits of the case yet he would slightly glance at what he apprehended to be the law of it; and in so doing he could find a variety of statutes which certainly have analogy to the case before the Court; and by which a remedy was provided. The 18 Henry 6 c. 19. constituted desertion a felony; as also did the 2d and 3d of Edward 6; these acts were consolidated into one great code 22 Geo. 2 which were the articles of war; and a breach of the 16th article was punishable with death or such other punishment as by a court martial should be awarded. If however upon a due investigation it should appear that the Magistrate had acted upon a mistaken principle of authority he would immediately order the prisoner to be liberated; and if on the contrary he would direct him to be detained. There was another reason which induced him to suspend proceeding relative to the issuing a certiorari; and it did appear to him that there had been an informality in this part of the proceeding. A notice was undoubtedly required; that notice which he conceived to be indispensably requisite had not been given.  Monday. - The Attorney General in the case of King observed that the committal stood on the ground of his being a felon; in point of form he apprehended it was not necessary for a Magistrate to shew more than that he actually was a runaway from His Majesty's ship Tamar; and his own confession recorded in the depositions before the Court stated that fact. The learned Gentleman contended that it was quite competent to the Governor or to the Magistrates to dispose of him as a felon; for such by a statute of 22. G. 2 chap. 33 article 16 - sec. 2 he was constituted: he therefore resisted the imputation of the learned Counsel for the prisoner; and claimed King to be dealt with as the law should direct.  Mr. Wentworth remarked that on a former occasion he had treated the document he then held in his hand as a conviction though in fact it was difficult to affix a precise designation to it; it was laid down in all authorities that judgment should be definite; it should have a beginning and termination by 3 Burrough 1903 it was held that penalty indefinite was void. Here perpetual imprisonment was to all appearance assigned. He did not attempt to contravene the assertion of his learned friend that desertion was a felony; but he would maintain though the Magistrate might be legally authorised to commit yet he could not convict without the intervention of a jury.  Secondly he would observe that the document itself wanted all the essentials of a mittimus or final commitment; namely the hand and seal of the Magistrate; it was also invalid on another ground. The depositions did not shew that the charge was made on oath; he would admit that all offences did not require it; but this could only apply when the Magistrate had the positive evidence of his own senses as if he should have seen a man committing a robbery; but the Magistrate could not positively know that this man was a deserter. In the third place he would object to the detention of the prisoner on the ground that the commitment was not sufficiently explicit and particular as to the nature of the felony with which the prisoner was charged; here was no allegation of the Magistrate as to the distinct nature of the felony which by various cases had been held to be absolutely necessary; for if technicalities were done away with the safeguard and of [sic] protection prisoners would be curtailed. On the above grounds therefore he claimed the liberation of the prisoner.  The Chief Justice said the case in his opinion had been very liberally argued on the part of the prisoner. In a calm review of authorities he certainly was inclined to side with the modern authority of Lord Ellenborough and others; and by this interpretation Magistrates were bound to see that offenders did not escape the law; he would look to the whole range of matter before him and see if the party had actually committed a felony; if he had not certainly the Court would order his discharge; but the principal difficulty did not hinge here. The depositions clearly shewed that he was a deserter; this he would assume as there was no refutation attempted but rather the prisoner's own confession. His construction of the various statutes bearing on the present case was that Magistrates were bound to put prisoners into the regular channel prescribed by law for proper punishment; and he therefore should not think himself justified in discharging the prisoner; but order him to be detained either till he should be returned to his ship or dealt with as the executive authority should direct.  The plaintiff in this case sought to recover the value of a dog killed by the defendant a servant to a butcher named Kelly in Pitt-street. This butcher it appeared rented certain premises of the plaintiff and had the liberty of driving his cattle through the plaintiff's yard to his slaughter-house. In this yard the plaintiff's dog was kept. Witnesses stated that the dog was a very faithful and serviceable animal and worth at least ten pounds. The defendant had on the 30th of October gone into the plaintiff's yard without leave of plaintiff; the dog attacked him and he thereupon plunged a butcher's knife into the dog's chest which occasioned his immediate death. The Chief Justice observed that the plea of having killed the dog in his own defence was not a sufficient one in as much as the defendant was a trespasser and the plaintiff placed the dog in the yard as a protection against such persons. - Verdict for the plaintiff £5 and costs.  The plaintiff in this case sought to recover the value of a horse which had been purchased by the defendant and subsequently returned as unsound.  The principal witness on the part of the plaintiff was a clerk to Messrs. Icely and Hindson. Mr. J. Rodd who had been requested by Captain Lamb (then in immediate want of a horse) to purchase one of Mr. Macqueen. - To this gentleman he accordingly went and bargained for a chestnut horse for £45 without any enquiry at the time as to the soundness of the animal who in two hours after shewed symptoms of lameness. He returned by desire of Captain Lamb to enquire of Mr. M. whether he would warrant the horse sound wind and limb - who said he had broken him in himself and eventually gave him a general warranty. The horse in the course of the day became worse and he was taken back to Mr. Macqueen's house; he not being at home the horse to use the expression of witness "was hung up at the door;" the servant refusing to take any charge of him.  John Stone groom to the plaintiff was called to prove the soundness of the horse; he stated that when the shoe was removed from the lame foot the horse recovered and had never been lame for a moment since. Bad shoeing was the sole cause of it.  Mr. G. Cutter veterinary surgeon very minutely examined the animal in every point considered him perfectly sound; the lameness proceeded entirely from defective shoeing. The horse had never been doctored externally - considered him in every respect perfectly free from blemish - gave a certificate to that effect.  Daniel Morris a farrier had always shod Mr. Macqueen's horse did so two days previous to the sale - when brought to him after found he was shoe bound; on the shoe being removed the horse recovered instantly. - Verdict for the plaintiff £45; the value of the horse; no allowance being made for the horse's keep.  Saturday. - Mary Ann Bradney was indicted for feloniously maliciously and traitorously poisoning her husband John Bradney between the 21st of March and the 18th of April at the Settlement of Port Macquarie.  The peculiar heinousness of this crime was pathetically depicted by the Attorney General upon the opening of the trial. But as it is our intention only briefly to give the outlines of a case which occupied the attention of the Court from 11 in the forenoon to 9 at night we forbear remarking upon the opening of the case by the Attorney General.  The deceased John Bradney was well known in the town of Sydney about two years since as a brazier and tinman. Having unfortunately been implicated in the forgery of dollar-notes he was sentenced to serve the remainder of his original term of transportation at our penal settlement of Port Macquarie. At this settlement by good conduct he became introduced to the kind consideration of the Commandant (Captain Allman) and was put into the post of gaoler in which office he was also enabled to employ his leisure hours in his trade. From the testimony of Dr. Moran M.D. Assistant Surgeon on the Colonial Establishment doing duty at Port Macquarie there was not a more healthy and ruddy-faced man on the settlement up to March last in which month he first became ill. On the 20th March the deceased attended Dr. Moran who observed a great alteration in his countenance; he said that he had been indisposed from pains in his bowels and loss of appetite. Medicine was then administered and on the night of the 30th he was hastily called for Bradney being then pronounced in a dying state. When the Doctor saw him the deceased appeared terribly agitated and observed that he should die before morning. His teeth had been locked but as pulsation was then regular the Doctor told him not to be alarmed. By next morning the pains had yielded to the medicines that were administered the previous night; he seemed considerably restored and the anxiety consequently was abated. He went on tolerably well till the 5th of April when the Doctor found him bent double in bed and writhing in agony. He described the pains to be somewhat similar to those which might be produced by a hot poker introduced into the bowels; that he was excessively thirsty his lips parched and that in attempting to allay it his thirst became increased. Dr. Moran now became apprehensive that poison had been administered which he confidently related to a Gentleman on the Settlement. A large blister was applied to the affected part; the patient was fomented and other remedies given. In two days after he was able to walk about again and gave every hope of a speedy recovery. On the 8th of April however Dr. Moran was surprised to find that the disease had returned accompanied with strong delirium; - as the day previous he was in a convalescent state. The Doctor then expressed his apprehensions to the prisoner (Bradney's wife) that something improper must have taken place; in consequence of which he the Surgeon should direct his immediate removal to the hospital; which was accordingly promptly attended to. For two or three days the poor man appeared to be returning to health rapidly; but to the astonishment of Dr. Moran he died on the morning of the 18th of April having only been four days at the hospital. The body was opened and dissected and so far from incertitude being dispelled it became increased.  Upon the removal of the unfortunate man to the hospital Dr. Moran had deemed it prudent to issue an order that no provisions or article of comfort coming from Mrs. Bradney (the prisoner) should be given to her husband; and that admittance was not to be allowed her. It came out however in the course of evidence that the overseer of the hospital sent to the prisoner for a fowl to make some soup for the patient. One of the hospital attendants (who admitted he had been convicted and punished for perjury in the Colony) was commissioned to go on this errand. Instead of bringing a fowl as directed he waited for a few minutes and conveyed a canteen of soup to the hospital. This witness said that the overseer threw the same away and ordered that the canteen which contained a very small portion of the soup should be deposited in the dispensary in the event of being applied for. When Bradney died this transaction was made known to Dr. Moran. The canteen with the remains of the soup was brought forward and the latter underwent a chemical process with the view of leading to a discovery of the poison with which it was supposed the soup might be impregnated. After a very laborious investigation Dr. Moran had reason to believe his former conviction of the man's death by poison to be tolerably correct - so far as opinion could go. Hence the prisoner at the bar underwent examination before the Commandant and was committed to take her trial for the offence.  A good deal was said upon the trial and attempted to be proved in reference to arsenic having been seen in the possession of the prisoner. It was stated by some of the witnesses that arsenic was requisite for the business of a brazier and that this dangerous ingredient had been in the possession of the deceased who occasionally made use of it in endeavouring to exterminate rats from the gaol which was greatly infested by those vermin. It was also proved that upon one occasion the prisoner at the bar mixed up some poison with a small quantity of flour for the purpose of killing rats; and that she then threw the residue of a powder into the fire in the presence of two men.  Two witnesses stated to the Court that Bradney during his illness was subject to occasional fits of insanity in two of which he attempted to destroy himself; viz. once by threatening to stab himself with a knife; and secondly by trying to thrust a table spoon into his side but had been prevented by men who happened to be at hand.  In confirmation of the evidence for the prosecution the witness who went for the soup stated that Mrs. Bradney never so much as tasted it to ascertain whether it was palatable although he allowed only part of the soup was sent to the hospital; whereas another witness on the defence declared that he and another man actually assisted Mrs. Bradney to make the soup and that the residue was eaten that night for supper by the prisoner and her children; and that next morning two men the prisoner at the bar and her children breakfasted on the remains of the fowl.  It was attempted to be proved that there was an illicit intercourse maintained between the prisoner and one James Duff; but only one interview that had the blush of criminality was manifested throughout the whole trial. Upon the contrary it did appear that the prisoner conducted herself generally as a wife and a mother ever should. It was stated by some one or two of the witnesses for the prosecution that the prisoner did not evince all that regard which might be expected towards a sick husband; whereas upon the defence it was urged that she expressed the utmost joy at the thoughts of his speedy recovery and dismission from the hospital. In reference to the soup that was sent to the hospital and stated by one of the witnesses to have been thrown away; it was proved upon the evidence of a man whose veracity was not to be questioned when contrasted with that of an avowed perjurer that so far from the fowl-soup having been thrown away as related that the overseer and the witness Light actually drank the soup and eat the fowl! That when the canteen was thus emptied of its contents some hospital soup occupied its place and that it was then deposited in the dispensary; and this was the soup that had engaged the scientific scrutiny of Dr. Moran. The sides of the canteen this witness added were much disfigured by rosin.  His Honor the Chief Justice in summing up the case remarked that the crime with which the prisoner stood charged was of the most atrocious description; and so horrible had it been considered by the Law that it was denominated TREASON. His Honor went through all the evidence; and in charging the Jury observed that in order to find the prisoner guilty of the offence with which she stood charged that it would be essential for the ends of Justice in the first place to ascertain that the deceased came by his death by poison; to which Dr. Moran and several other Gentlemen of the Faculty could come to no conclusion; and in the second instance it must be proved that the poison was administered by the prisoner which had in no stage of the evidence been developed.  The Jury retired for about three quarters of an hour and returned with a verdict of Not Guilty.  James Charland was indicted under the Act commonly called Lord Ellenborough's Act for wilfully maliciously and unlawfully assaulting one John Proctor with intent to kill and murder at Penrith on the 11th of July last. Upon a second count in the information the prisoner was charged with a common assault.  In the opening of the case the Learned Attorney General gave the Court to understand that it seemed no longer a question whether the Act under which the present information was found extended to this Colony or otherwise; but that the late New South Wales Act decided that it did extend to the Colonies in all its provisions. This circumstance is mentioned in reference to the superseded highest Legal Authority in the Colony whose Judicial opinion was at variance with the principle now laid down; which we take the opportunity of promulging [sic] for general information.  John Proctor was the first witness called. He is the gaoler at Penrith. Upon Sunday evening the 11th of July last he was despatched by John M'Henry Esq. one of the Magistrates in that district to the ferry at Emu Ford upon a particular service. On his return about mid-way between the ferry and his own house he was suddenly and violently attacked by a man who struck him on the back part of the head with a stick; upon turning to face the assailant he met with another blow upon the left side of the mouth; and this was followed by one more violent on the left temple which felled him to the ground. In the act of rising he was again struck. The ruffian and the witness having closed a struggle ensued in which the latter was wounded on the right shoulder hand and thumb with a knife. The deadly instrument having dropped from the hand of the assailant the witness threw it some yards distant beyond his reach. He then was fortunate enough to grasp the bludgeon with which he had been so maltreated and  acting defensively turned upon his antagonist till he cried - "murder!" Immediately on rising the prisoner at the bar whom the prosecutor knew by this time enquired for his knife (a large butcher's knife) saying he had it to grind or had been grinding it. With assistance the prisoner was secured and lodged in custody.  Upon being cross-examined by Mr. Rowe for the prisoner the prosecutor adds that the prisoner came in the ship with him; that he is a married man; and that he has been subject to considerable distress of mind of late owing to an illicit intercourse that was said to exist betwixt his wife and one of the prosecutor's crown servants. He thinks that the prisoner is far from being right in his mind else he would not have acted in such a way towards him (the prosecutor) as they had been upon the most friendly terms. About six months ago in a fit of insanity he attempted the life of his wife.  Thomas Lewis deposed that he was called upon by John Proctor the last deponent between the hours of 9 and 10 o'clock at night on the 11th of July to aid in apprehending the prisoner at the bar; by whom the prosecutor had been wounded in several places.  John Wilcox deposed that on the morning after the attack upon Proctor he accompanied him to the spot in search of the knife with which Proctor said he had been wounded. He described the instrument; it was found upright a few yards from the place where Proctor said he had contended with the prisoner; and it was covered with blood.  George Godfrey deposed that he is acquainted with the prisoner and that the knife now before the Court he had seen in his possession prior to this transaction. Here the prosecution closed.  Upon the part of the prisoner John M'Henry Esq. Justice of the Peace deposed that he knows the prisoner. From the improper conduct of his wife at times the prisoner was in a distracted state of mind. Some months since he endeavoured to destroy her. In other respects he is a quiet inoffensive man.  John Loftus deposed that he heard the prosecutor say he would endeavour to have the prisoner removed to Port Macquarie as no one's life would be safe while he was at large.  His Honor the Chief Justice in summing up this case and giving his charge to the Jury with accustomed perspicuity remarked that the hour of the night and the circumstances of the attack must too clearly shew premeditated malice. His Honor briefly and forcibly animadverted upon the attempt that had been made to set up the plea of mental imbecility observing the danger that would be likely to arise if such excuses as aberration of intellect were once to be admitted in justification of such atrocious acts. The Jury retired for about half-an-hour and returned a Verdict of Guilty - Remanded.  The prisoner was tried under the statute 43 Geo. III. called Lord Ellenborough's Act. The offence was stated to have taken place at Penrith on the 11th of July last.  The information contained a second count against the prisoner for an assault with intent to murder but the statute being omitted the second charge resolved itself into a mere misdemeanor at common law. The Jury found a general verdict of "guilty." Afterwards the Attorney General entered a nolle prosequi on the first count and prayed judgment on the second; but it was contended by the counsel for the prisoner in arrest of judgment that the information was irregular because it did not lay the offence in any county although the facts were proved to have been done in the county of Cumberland; that the offence charged amounted in fact to felony and could not receive judgment as for a misdemeanor. The Court took time to consider the points and on this day gave judgment of which the following will be found to be a correct summary:-  The Chief Justice.- "The objections which have been raised in the present case are partly matter of fact and partly matter of law. I shall make a few observations upon them in the order in which they have been raised. The first objection goes to the omission of the county in which the offence charged against the prisoner was proved to have been committed. But it appears to me there is a preliminary question to determine - has this Colony ever been in fact divided into counties? and supposing it to have been so divided are all the legal considerations incident to counties in England necessarily applicable to the present condition of this Colony? The King in virtue of his executive authority may I conceive cause any of the Colonies dependant upon his Crown to be divided into counties and parishes; there is an opinion of Sir Dudley Rider and Lord Mansfield at the time he was Solicitor General to that effect. But I apprehend that in order to give the full force of law to such a measure it must be done in pursuance of an express authority from the Crown. I feel rather confirmed in this opinion by referring to the patent commission of the Governors of the Colony in which although a great number of specific powers are given and amongst others the power to appoint fairs and markets as well as ports and harbours; there is no power expressly given to divide the settlement into counties nor does the commission contain any general words from which such a power can be inferred. It was doubtless in the recollection of the advisers of the commission that this Colony had not yet received the right of choosing representatives or of trial by a jury of the county and therefore the power of erecting counties with all those incidents which are essential and inseparable from counties in England appears to have been wisely reserved for a more advanced age of the Colony. The King may indeed communicate to his representative as many of his royal powers as he may deem necessary for the government of his Colonial subjects; but all such powers unless they be clearly incidental can only be communicated by express words; for the grant of the prerogatives of the Crown like all other royal grants are to be taken strictly against the grantee and cannot be extended by construction. It does not appear to me that there has been any power within the Colony to divide it into counties with the legal incidents of counties; nor do I collect from the orders issued by the Governors of New South Wales which I have been enabled to find that any thing more was intended by them in giving the names of counties to particular divisions of the territory than to afford convenience and certainty in the description of particular places. The first order upon the subject I have met with is one of Governor King in the year 1802.  "The order of Governor Bligh dated the 22d of September 1806 professes merely to define the limits of the several military commands within the Settlement. That of Governor Macquarie in 1819 in which his Excellency was pleased to call the newly discovered county beyond the mountains by the name of the county of Westmoreland was I apprehend dictated in the same spirit.  "Entertaining the opinion which I do upon the matter of fact it is the less necessary to observe upon the law of the case. I shall therefore briefly state that the rule of law which requires the specific county to be named in the indictment or information does not in my opinion apply here. In England the institution of counties is coeval at least with the trial by jury. It is part of the law of trial by jury that the jury should be returned from the county where the offence is alleged to have been committed. Hence for the convenience of trial circuits were instituted throughout the different counties in England. It was always however in the power of the Court of King's Bench to try at bar if the necessity of the case should require such a manner of trial. This Court is a Court of Ki[n] g's Bench; and in virtue of its Supreme Jurisdiction may hear and determine every case which can regularly be brought before it. Although trials at bar are rarely resorted to at home it is merely because it is more convenient to proceed at the assizes. In the application of this principle of convenience the Court is governed by circumstances; and applying the same principle of convenience I should feel inclined to hold independently of any express law that it would be more convenient in this Colony to bring offenders to the bar of this Court than to remove the Court composed as it is of officers whose presence at the garrison is essential to the security of the Colony. Again by the express words of the Act this Court is constituted a Court of Oyer and Terminer and General Gaol Delivery in and for New South Wales;- not for the counties or divisions of New South Wales but for the whole colony at large. Had the Legislature intended it to be itinerant it would have added the Commission of Assize and Nisi Prius; but in adding to its authority as the Supreme Court of the Colony the commission of Oyer and Terminer and Gaol Delivery it appears merely to have intended to simplify its proceedings and render them more active.  "Upon the whole case I am of opinion that it is not necessary in any criminal proceeding in this Colony to state the offence to have been committed in any particular county provided there be words sufficiently descriptive of the place to bring it within the jurisdiction of the Court and to give the party accused every benefit of defence.  "Upon the second ground I am of opinion that as the offence charged as a misdemeanor does in fact amount to a felony that judgment must be arrested upon it. There is another ground which leads to the same conclusion; it is this:- The party has been prosecuted for a felony and consequently deprived of those benefits which he would have been entitled to if he had been tried for a misdemeanor - a copy of the information a special jury and the advantage of a full defence by counsel; therefore judgment must be arrested."  In the case of Dargan and Wildred two persons convicted before the General Quarter Sessions holden at Windsor the conviction it was contended was undue and illegal on two distinct grounds. First because the gentlemen who sat on the bench were not legally magistrates with he [sic] exception of one only and the law positively required that there should be two at the least; that at the present time there were no more than two magistrates in the colony namely John Stephen Esq. and William Carter Esq. For by a commission dated the 1st of November 1824 the names of those gentlemen only were specifically mentioned and by that commission only could magistrates be constituted; also by 2 Hen. 5 st. 1. c. 4 it is directed that one or more of the justices empowered to hold Quarter Sessions shall be of the quorum as also by 3. Hawkins p. 57. pleas of the crown which added that unless one or more were of the quorum the proceedings would be coram non judice. The only magistrate therefore present was Mr. Stephen and he was not of the quorum. The second ground was the validity of the commissions dated the 27th of April and the 26th of May. In Comyn's digest v. 4. p. 656 and 1st. Blackstone p. 353. it was stated that the new commission superceded the old one. It was held by the best authorities that two commissions could not be in existence at the same time and the last could be the only legal one; the conviction ought therefore to be quashed. In reply the argument on these commissions was confined by the Attorney General to the questions of law no other topic seeming proper in such a case. The reasons which led to the alteration of the old forms he said were stated at the Quarter Sessions where the subject was fully discussed in November. It was then shewn that the ancient practice which introduced the word "quorum" into the commission had for many years ceased in England and that the substance of the present English practice was studiously adhered to here; but that a repetition of names approaching to an absurdity was avoided. This supposed improvement was at variance with no law and was thought to be admissible because a prudent simplifying of public documents seemed to be an object of great importance[.] The reasons which in England might require strict adherence to venerable forms were thought to be sufficiently yielded to in new establishments if so much of them should be preserved as would give to the colony the full benefit of ancient and approved institutions. The second commission the Attorney General referred to the former which he would contend was still in force as would appear by 15 Viner and was to be judged of by sufficiency of expression. The authority of Blackstone might be very good but it is too general in its application. The King might make two or three commissions all valid unless specifically repealed. The doctrine of cancelling appeared to him rather extraordinary; he should not consider it as well grounded without a direct revocation he therefore considered the arguments on the opposite side sufficiently answered.  The Chief Justice gave judgment on Friday. He would explain the meaning of the term quorum; it was a word now disused. Formerly the magistrates were greatly inferior in point of authority and knowledge to the gentlemen who composed that body at a subsequent and more enlightened period; in the former case their jurisdictions only extended to apprehension of felons and sending them to trial; but that power was afterwards augmented enabling them to try and determine offences; it was then deemed necessary to give additional weight and security to their proceedings by appointing certain of those learned in the law to act on these occasions and these were named of the "quorum." The crown is required to appoint conservators of the peace; but under present circumstances it did not appear to him to be indispensable that there should be a special nomination and therefore the omission would not invalidate the proceedings. He would next consider the effect of the preceding commission. It was laid down in authorities that a new commission destroyed the old one by implication; but this he did not conceive applicable to magistrates. The last commission dated Nov. 1 was clearly an affirmation of the former. He would ask how was he to arrive at any other conclusion when the instrument was before him directly referring to the old one; he should therefore overrule that objection also.  The Solicitor General hoped that his Honor would give costs in dismissing the rule particularly as the application had been frivolous and vexatious and had been attended with much personal inconvenience to magistrates. The Chief Justice stated that he would make an order on the next court day.  Murder by Burning.- John Donovan was indicted for the wilful murder of Thomas Brown on the 8th of July last. The circumstances of this case will appear by the evidence.  Dr. West Resident Surgeon at Windsor deposed that on the 8th of July last the deceased Thomas Brown was brought in from the Government Settlement at Emu Plains in a cart in a shockingly burnt condition. The poor man was wasted from the soles of the feet up to the shoulder blades and even round the sides. Wishing to afford the patient time to recover from the fatigue of the journey Dr. West thought it unwise to interrogate him immediately as to the cause of the distressing situation in which he was placed; but on the following morning for the ends of justice required a narration of the particulars[.] The deceased then told the Surgeon that the prisoner and himself were fellow-sawyers at a short distance from the settlement at Emu; that their work was allotted to them by the task to perform which the prisoner his associate was most unwilling; whereupon he told him the prisoner that it would be necessary to report the same as he the deceased would not be punished for his neglect. After this conversation the prisoner went into camp (the settlement at Emu). About midnight he returned to the hut which was occupied by the deceased and the prisoner. Another man was in company whom he reported as being a stock-keeper in quest of some lost cattle. The deceased then desired the prisoner to dress the man some provision as he might require refreshment. The prisoner and the stranger went to supper and the deceased fell asleep. About four in the morning as near as he could recollect he was awoke by the prisoner and the other man in the act of conveying him from the bed to the fire. He was laid between two large logs. He resisted the savages and succeeded in tearing himself from their horrid embraces. Not from any hope of obtaining assistance as the hut was too far from the settlement to be within the possibility of hearing he made the woods to re-echo with the dismal cry of "murder" and thus intimidated his assailants from pursuit whilst he made for and gained the camp; from whence he was immediately sent in to Windsor for the benefit of professional aid. Dr. West added that the deceased did not give his declaration under the impression that he was dying but that on the contrary the man entertained hopes of recovery; which however was at variance with the judgment of Dr. West who at once discovered from the height the fire had ascended the body that the vital parts were affected; and which he had no question caused the dissolution of the man upon the 12th of July - four days after the affair transpired.  Mr. John Purcell chief constable at Penrith deposed that he was proceeding towards the Rev. Mr. Fulton's on the morning of the 8th of July and perchance fell in with the prisoner at the bar who being of a suspicious appearance was immediately secured by him. At this time he knew nothing of the present transaction. But upon hearing of the circumstance he was led to scrutinize the prisoner and ascertained that his trowsers were singed or discoloured by fire and that his face was marked by several scratches. While in Penrith gaol the prisoner so far from denying the crime laid to his charge attempted a justification by remarking that the deceased had always been annoying him; that he was in the habit of calling him a "Munster stork" meaning thereby that he was an idler coming from a particular part of Ireland; and that he the deceased used to thrust the saw in his face. He added further that there was no third person present but that a quarrel ensued owing to unpleasant epithets from the deceased; and in the act of grappling they fell into the fire. The reason he assigned for running away was that the deceased had gone into camp and that he expected to be punished. The trowsers with the marks of burning were exhibited in Court.  Joseph Peters principal overseer at Emu Plains deposed that it is his duty to locate the prisoners to their various employments; that the deceased and the prisoner were placed in one station and one hut as a pair of sawyers. He saw the deceased after he was burnt; he was roasted all over. In less than half-an-hour after the transaction he the witness visited the hut; and the prisoner was absent and was also absent from work that morning. The interior of the hut bore every appearance of disorder and confusion. The bedding was scattered over the room. From a view of the fire-place it appeared that some one had been lying in it as the ashes were evidently pressed flat and retained the impress of feet; but there were no logs in the fire-place; only a small fire in the back of the chimney and the scattered ashes were quite hot. In answer to a question put by the prisoner the witness admitted that the deceased was an aggravating man.  John M'Henry Esq. Justice of the Peace was called to prove a deposition made by the deceased while lying in the hospital at Windsor; but as this declaration was not made in the presence of the prisoner the Court could not receive it as evidence.  The prisoner gave in a written paper which was read by the Prothonotary Mr. Moore. This paper merely went to confirm that part of the conversation sworn to by Purcell to have taken place between him and the prisoner; of which in fact it was a repetition. He persisted in declaring there was no third man. The prisoner called no witnesses.  His Honor the Chief Justice remarked that the defence of the prisoner which might be called a confession must either be taken altogether and not in part or rejected; and therefore it would be incumbent on the Jury under all the circumstances to lose sight of any admission from the prisoner. The whole of the case was suspended upon a very tender point; and that point was whether the deceased made his declaration to Dr. West under the impression that he was in a dying state? This was the extreme tenderness of the case and it remained with the jury to decide the question. The verdict was Guilty.  His Honor the Chief Justice then proceeded to the painful duty of passing the awful sentence of the law upon the prisoner. His Honor pathetically remarked that he would not aggravate the sufferings of the unhappy man but called upon him to prepare to properly meet that fate from which there was no escape. He was then consigned to death on the 23d inst. (Monday).  The Chief Justice in proceeding to give judgment in this case stated that the rule nisi had been granted on the application of Mr. Jacob calling upon Captain Gillman to shew cause why a criminal information should not be filed against him for the matters set forth in the affidavits upon which that rule was based. His Honor said that he had not seen the rule until lately and that from the general terms in which it was framed he had found considerable difficulty in collecting the precise grounds of the charges against Captain Gillman which were scattered over the affidavits. The rule was in this particcular [sic] most faulty. It ought to have been framed with greater precision: for it was obvious that the intention of it was to put the defendant in possession of the charges. The grounds laid here were very wide - so wide that it mighi [sic] have been difficult for Captain Gillman to know exactly with what imputations he was taxed. His Honor had however collected from the arguments of counsel and the stress of the affidavits two grounds of charge. The one for having as a magisrrate [sic] maliciously issued a search warrant without due cause; the other for having sent a letter with intent to provoke a duel. The arguments adduced against the rule by the Attorney-General had commenced with the letter; those on the other hand which had been urged by the learned counsel in support of the rule had begun with the warrant. He should follow the order observed by the latter gentleman as being that in which the events out of which the application sprung occurred in their natural priority. On the subject of the search warrant there was considerable difficulty in collecting facts. The clearest light was derived from Mr. Reid's affidavit who had s[t] ated the circumstances thus:- "Sometime afterwards this deponent saw a prisoner of the crown cutting down some old straggling paling which had been abandoned to this deponent and deponent inquired of him why he did so when the man replied he did so by order of the Superintendent to which deponent observed that the Superintendent had no authority over deponent's paling and desired the man to lay them down which he did and deponent then caused his men to bring them into the said Vickers Jacob's verandah for safety which was accordingly done. That after the said paling had been so removed a constable brought a warrant to search the said Vickers Jacob's house for (as deponent believes) five pieces of paling as "concealed government property" which appeared to deponent so unwarranted that he sent to request the presence of Dr. Brooks as a respectable witness to the same on whose arrival deponent desired the constable to read the warrant which he did and after so doing he desired the constable he (the constable) had with him to take away the paling. That at the time of this transaction Captain Gillman who was walking in the verandah of the officers' quarters being the next building to the said Vickers Jacob's premises called out to the constable "Execute your warrant: do as I order you: call the military: see that there is nothing else concealed in the house;" upon which the constables went into and searched the house but did not find anything." It would seem then that this gentleman (Mr. Reid) was present and that Mr. Jacob was not. Dr. Brooks also was present having been called as a witness by Mr. Reid and his account of the proceeding was to this effect "That Mr. Reid sent for me and upon our meeting told me that he desired that I should witnes [sic] the reading and execution of a warrant that had been issued by Captain Gillman. The warrant as read directed the persons who was charged with its execution to search for "concealed property." Being asked by Mr. Reid whether I considered certain pieces of paling which were lying under the verandah as "concealed" I answered that I did not think they were concealed. The chief constable directed his constables to take these paling [sic] away and they were removed accordingly. Captain Gillman called from Lieutenant Owen's verandah and ordered the chief constable "to see if there was any more concealed property" or words to that effect upon which the chief constable entered Mr. Jacob's house. Having on a former occasion deposed before E.C. Close Esquire J.P. that I considered that Captain Gillman's conduct in Lieutenant Owen's barrack arose from irritated feelings candour requires that I avow on the present occasion that such was my impression then and that I still think his manner and his above-mentioned verbal order to the chief constable while executing the warrant betrayed much irritation of mind." The affidavits of these two gentlemen contained the only facts that were before the Court on the subject of the search warrant. There could be no doubt that Captain Gillman as a magistrate was authorised to issue a search warrant if he conscientiously thought that the case required it. A search warrant was a most valuable instrument in Society. It should however be used with extreme caution and tenderness and with every consideration for the feelings of individuals. In this case it certainly might and should have been dispensed with Captain Gillman had clearly no right to give the verbal directions mentioned in the preceding affidavits. His conduct so far was unlawful but he (the Chief Justice) considered this part of it extrajudicial and not referrible [sic] to him (Captain Gillman) in his magisterial capacity. For this there could be no doubt that he would be privately responsible. The law had provided for such irregularities as these another remedy more suited to their nature to which Mr. Jacob could resort. There had undoubtedly been great indecorum on the part of Captain Gillman but still he (the Chief Justice) did not upon the whole think that upon the first charge a case had been made out against him sufficient to justify the granting of the information which was prayed for. He should pass on therefore to the second charge - that of writing a letter to Mr. Jacob with a view to provoke him to send a challenge and thereby commit a breach of the peace. Mr. Jacob himself had stated the receipt of this letter and his impression that such was its object. The letter itself too was before the Court; and Mr. Jacob's opinion of its tendency was supported by the affidavits of two other gentlemen who had less feeling on the case and whose evidence therefore was entitled to more weight. One of these gentlemen of the name of Williamson who it seemed was a Captain in the East India Company's military service state [sic] "that he has seen the letter in question and that after giving the said letter due consideration he deponent verily believes that the said letter from its language and tendency was so sent to the said Vicars Jacob in order to incite him to commit a breach of the peace towards the said Henry Gillman; nor does he (Captain Williamson) think the matter contained in the letter can bear any other interpretation." Mr. Reid had also deposed to the same effect. On the other hand however Captain Gillman had sworn that he had no intention to provoke a challenge; and he is strongly corroborated in this point by the affidavits of Lieutenant Owen and Messrs. Brooks and Blaxland. - There is also the affidavit of Captain Gillman's clerk who had sworn that the letter was meant to be official. It was evident then that there was a direct opposition in the affidavits before the Court as to the real design of this letter.- The letter itself was in evidence and he could not but consider the Court as competent to judge of its object as the gentlemen whose opinions had been relied on. Coupling the letter with the facts detailed in the affidavits he had arrived at the conclusion that it was not intended to provoke a duel.- Had a duel been its object he could not help thinking that it would have been worded differently.- The words most relied on to prove its hostile tendency were these: "It appears evident you are aiming at leading me into a written discussion with some sinister view[.] I must therefore beg you will refrain from addressing me by letter. I am always to be seen at Newcastle; and cannot subject myself to the style of language of your written communications." With respect to the signature "Henry Gillman Buffs" upon which so much stress had been laid the clerk had sworn that Captain Gillman was frequently in the habit of signing that way through mere inadvertence. The most suspicious words were "I am always to be seen at Newcastle." These certainly carried with them prima facie a fighting appearance. The situation however of the parties must not be forgotten. It is stated that Captain Gillman was in the habit of seeing Mr. Jacob and other gentlemen personally. This was his ordinary course of business. The interpretation which he put upon this passage was that Captain Gillman did not wish to be led into a written discussion but to be seen personally as was his habit. In Captain Gillman's affidavit the origin of this business was pretty accurately detailed. He should not advert to the causes assigned for Mr. Reid's hostility to Captain Gillman because Mr. Reid was not before the Court and any allusion to him therefore would be irrelevant. Between Captain Gillman and Mr. Jacob however there evidently existed much ill will as would be seen by reference to the letters between them which are set forth in the affidavits. [sic] (Here the Chief Justice read Mr. Jacob's first letter to Captain Gillman; then Captain Gillman's reply and afterwards Mr. Jacob's rejoinder.) Now it was in answer to this last letter that the letter which is the subject of prosecution was written by Captain Gillman. (Here the Chief Justice also read this letter.) He then went on to say that taking all these letters together it would be obvious that   In the course of the last week several cases of misdemeanor have been brought before the Criminal Court. One of them a case of private libel was conducted at the expence of the private prosecutor and by his own legal adviser; the others were prosecuted at the charge of the Public. We understand that on more than one occasion the Attorney General has submitted observations to the following effect on this distinction to the Court. He has stated that the subject seemed to require much consideration with reference to public and private interests; and that the reasons which he at present felt to be proper for him to be guided by were open to the examination and correction of His Honor the Chief Justice of the Gentlemen who had practised in the Court and of the Public.  The late Act of Parliament introducing certain new forms of criminal procedure into the Colony is expressed in general terms:- "That all crimes misdemeanors and offences cognizable in the Supreme Court shall be prosecuted by information in the name of the Attorney General." - The question arises What is the force of this enactment? Where the law and customs of England are not changed they must be taken to be the rule by which as nearly as circumstances permit we must be guided. By these words nothing more seems to be done in regard to expence than the substitution of informations for indictments presented by a Grand Jury. The Attorney General therefore of the Colony in executing the act must look to the law and practice at home as to indictments and in some degree to the former practice here. - All informations being to pass in his name it seemed to him necessary to form an opinion on the merits of each case; and that after examinations he must allow them or not according to their several natures and with the incidents as near as possible to which they would severally be subject if instead of informations they had been indictments. In this extremely delicate task he would be much relieved by the Magistrates having first examined most of the cases. Where the proceedings should commence in a manner similar to the ex officio informations and to those in the name of the Master of the Crown-office the known rules which govern them in England would with the necessary alterations as to forms be applicable here.  In some cases as in that of libel before alluded to there seemed little doubt of the propriety of leaving the trial to the exertions of the private prosecutor; - such would be the course in England although the King's name would be used. The question is not merely one of expence; several further considerations deserve attention upon it. Here however more cases seem to have been prosecuted from time to time at the public expence than at home - and probably for good reasons; but looking to the establishing of a system of Criminal Law under the Act as in some measure new it is of the greatest possible importance to introduce the various arrangements with caution.  Friday. - The Attorney General informed the Court that he would present an information against John Johnston William Clarke John Nicholson Henry Castles and John Crear charged with an assault on an aboriginal black woman which terminated in death. The prisoners were accordingly indicted for manslaughter.  The Attorney General observed that this was not a case which affected the lives of the prisoners as there were certain transactions which prevented a capital charge being preferred. There were circumstances of danger which led to the present trial but nothing in his opinion that could justify the measures that had been adopted. Many accounts of the barbarities perpetrated by the black natives had been circulated and there had also been lives and property destroyed; which in extreme cases there could be no question should be defended at the risk of the lives of the assailants. The Attorney General further remarked that no difference existed between individuals whether black or white but that the same laws now in force equally extended to each; and although it was necessarily admitted that danger had no small influence upon the minds of the prisoners nevertheless it was to be proved that the steps resorted to were unjustifiably rigorous. Witnesses were then called in support of the prosecution.  Mr. William Lane overseer to Mrs. Hassall at O'Connel-plains in the Bathurst country deposed that a party of the natives visited that neighbourhood about the latter end of May last; shortly prior to which 7 white men had been killed by them in the vicinity of Mudjee. This occurrence had spread terror and alarm through the country. That a tribe of the natives also visited Brisbane Valley a station belonging to Mr. James Hassall distant 15 miles from O'Connel-plains. Here they plundered the stockmen of all their comforts and provisions. On the 31st of May one of the men under his controul named John Hollingshead came home wounded in two places; one spear having passed through the left arm just below the elbow and another fractured the thumb bone. This man reported to Mr. Lane that he had been pursued within one mile of the farm. The consternation among the men on the estate increased. Application was made by the prisoners at the bar in conjunction with one Alexander Grant to be allowed arms that they might go in pursuit of the natives else they would all be murdered. The witness considering his family and people were in imminent danger supplied the prisoners with horses and arms: four had muskets and the fifth (Castles) could only obtain a sword. The wounded man (Hollingshead) having been pursued in the S.E. direction which was close to the main road leading from O'Connel-plains the prisoners went off in that route. In the evening the party returned reporting the fruitlessness of the expedition as they had not fallen in with any of the natives. After this Clark and Castles admitted they had seen a party; in which they were borne out by the declaration of Alexander Grant in presence of the prisoners. The latter remarked to the witness that the blacks had their spears prepared to throw at him; that he called to the five prisoners who were rather behind to advance; that a volley was discharged in their midst; and that some of them dropped but whether males or females then they did not know. It was afterwards ascertained by the story of Grant that one was an old woman but of the age or sex of the others they pleaded ignorance. The party which had been so fired at contained about thirty in number and fle[d] into the mountains. The prisoner Castles admitted that as he passed he gave the old woman a prick with his sword. Mr. Lane said that he saw no dead natives but that he was acquainted with some few of them by name and that one was called Joe.  In reply to the cross-examination of Mr. Rowe the Solicitor for the prisoners Mr. Lane added that about 50 armed natives had been at his place sometime previous to the late unhappy occurrence; at which period two of these sable marauders were suffering imprisonment at Bathurst for outrages that had been perpetrated. Their appearance manifested symptoms of hostility though they conducted themselves quite peaceably as all their wants were then supplied. It was generally reported that seven white men had been killed which was a fact well known to one of the prisoners at the bar (Nicholson) as he had been at Bathurst and actually seen the bodies in a cart. The whole of the country Mr. Lane stated was in great agitation from the violence of the natives; some of whom he has been informed had fire-arms in their possession. He allowed the prisoners to go out in quest of the natives merely from motives of apprehension.  Henry Trickey a crown servant in the employ of Captain Raine deposed that he lives on his master's estate at the two mile creek distant five miles from O'Connel-plains and eighteen from Bathurst; that he is acquainted with Sidmouth Valley. He was going about five weeks since on a Tuesday with his mess to grind; when between Sidmouth Valley and the two-mile creek a trifling distance from the main road to Bathurst his attention was arrested by a large quantity of crows eagle hawks and other birds of prey; he proceeded to the spot and was surprised to find the bodies of three black women. The ground upon which those bodies were is called the Government reserve. He returned to his hut for a spade and interred the bodies which were in a state of putrefaction. He did not particularly examine them only one was an old woman and the others were apparently girls. He was at work the day before within half-a-mile of the spot but heard the discharge of no musketry. The day subsequent he saw the prisoners but had no conversation upon the subject. This witness also stated that the country was in considerable alarm from the atrocities committed by the natives.  Mr. Stephen Geary Wilks acting surgeon at Bathurst examined the bodies of three aboriginal women. Upon one of the bodies he discovered a wound which had penetrated the cavity of the abdomen; in examining the second there appeared a hole upon the bone of the skull; and the third exhibited nothing extraordinary. The wounds were sufficient to cause death[.] That inflicted upon the skull was of such force as to leave no doubt of its being occasioned by a gun-shot. He knows of 13 men that have been killed by the natives two of whom have undergone the operation of scalping which was supposed to have been done while the poor men were yet alive; but to this he could not speak positively.  Mr. William Webb Shannon resides at Raineville near Bathurst. At the direction of the Commandant on the 19th of June he was present at the medical enquiry upon the bodies of the black women. They had been interred within half-a-mile of his residence on the left side of the road from Sydney. He could not venture an opinion as to the cause of the wounds.  John Hollingshead is in the employ of Mrs. Hassall under the superintendence of Mr. Lane. He deposed that while searching for horses on the 31st of May last he fell in with a tribe of black natives about 30 in number upon the summit of a hill. There were in ambush; and as he was aware of disturbances that had only recently occurred he took to flight. The spears came flying after him in showers; he was twice wounded as already described but kept running as the natives were in close pursuit with the tomahawk till he came within a mile of home; when the chace was relinquished. He further added that it came within his knowledge that many atrocities had been committed upon the white men prior to this occurrence some of whom had been burnt to death in their huts.  Alexander Grant is in the same employ with the last witness. He deposed that he went out in the morning after some cattle and that proceeding about a mile on his way he beheld one of the sable hordes; he called to them but no reply was made; he named one of them; but as he was riding and attended by several dogs he passed unmolested. When he returned about 12 o'clock he found the last witness in a bleeding state from the effect of the wounds caused by the spears. The prisoners at the bar were equipped for an expedition after the natives and as he had so lately seen a party he was requested by the overseer (Mr. Lane) to accompany them. In scouring the woods he became separated from the prisoners at the bar and went to ascertain the safety of the flocks and the stock-keepers. At a place called the 8-mile swamp 7 miles from the main road he espied the same tribe he had seen in the morning. He called to Joe one of the chiefs and he replied in an abusive and insolent way. He then named Simon and being answered with a shower of spears he was compelled to retreat in quest of his companions the prisoners at the bar who were 3 miles away. The little force then went in pursuit to the 8-mile swamp but the natives had flown into the mountains. The stations of the shepherds were found safe and the party returned home. He said he could not tell whether the prisoners had discharged their guns during the separation. Prior to this day he had seen the bodies of 5 white men taken into Bathurst in a cart.  Peter Murphy is also in the above employ at O'Connel-plains. He saw Hollingshead subsequent to being wounded; at the time it happened he was absent with the team. He heard the prisoner Castles say in the evening that they had been out after the natives but had seen none. On the following day the 1st of June by the orders of Mr. Lane the party renewed the pursuit but returned without encountering any of them.  James Carter a shepherd to Mr. Arkell deposed that his station is about 28 miles from Bathurst and 14 from O'Connel-lpains; [sic] and that about the latter end of May the natives took from him 490 sheep; but that the greater part had been recovered. Here the prosecution closed.  Mr. Rowe respectfully suggested to the Court on behalf of his clients that he did not see there was any necessity for the prisoners to enter into a defence as the charge laid in the information did not appear to be borne out by the evidence that had been adduced. The learned Gentleman also contended that the prisoners were entitled to the benefit of two points of law which suggested themselves in the case; viz. 1. - That the indictment charged the prisoners with having committed an offence within the County of Cumberland whereas the spot on which these poor native women met with death was in the County of Westmoreland; and 2. - That the prisoners were warranted in the adoption of the steps that had been taken having acted under the direction of a Proclamation bearing date the 4th of May 1816; one clause of which enacted "That from and after the 4th day of June next ensuing that being the Birth-day of His Most Gracious Majesty King George the Third no black native or body of black natives shall ever appear at or within one mile of any town village or farm occupied by or belonging to any British subject armed with any warlike or offensive weapon or weapons of any description such as spears clubs or waddies on pain of being deemed and considered in a state of aggression and hostility and treated accordingly." In reply to the learned Solicitor His Honor the Chief Justice observed that these were matters of evidence and it was necessary that the prisoners should go into their defence.  Mr. Robert Howe called. - His father the late Mr. George Howe was the Editor and Government Printer in 1816; and he (the witness) succeeded to the situation in 1821. That it was usual for all Proclamations and other Orders of the Government to be published through the medium of the Gazette; and that such had been invariably the practice. That it was a standing Order "that all Public Communications which may appear in the Sydney Gazette signed with any Official Signature are to be considered as Official Communications made to those Persons to whom they may relate." The Proclamation bearing upon the present question was published by the late Governor (General Macquarie). That it had been called forth in consequence of certain outrages and murders that had been committed by the natives on this side the mountains which was the habit of being repeated every maize season; that it was found expedient to send out military aid to the settlers owing to which numbers of the natives had been killed; and that since the date of the Proclamation the natives had been in a tranquil state with the exception of those in the new-discovered Country (Bathurst). In his cross-examination by the learned Attorney General Mr. Howe stated that he had not heard of disturbances in the vicinity of Bathurst till within the last 8 months; and the preamble of Governor Macquarie's Proclamation was read to the witness reciting that the black natives of the Colony had for three years before its promulgation manifested a strong and sanguinary spirit of animosity and hostility towards the British inhabitants &c.  (The Proclamation was now read to the Court by the Prothonotary by consent; its not being legal evidence being waved [sic] ).  The Rev. Thomas Hassall was next called. - This gentleman also stated that the Proclamation had been issued by the late Government owing to the destructive and cruel ravages of the natives; and it was true that several natives had been killed in the new country. The country over the mountains is designated "Westmoreland." For general humanity and kindness Mr. Hassall gave the prisoners a most excellent character and was quite lavish in his encomiums on John Johnston whom together with the prisoner Clark he had known from a state of childhood.  On being cross-examined Mr. Hassall stated that he knew nothing of the consequences of the Proclamation of 1816 of his own knowledge; and the concluding paragraph of the Proclamation of 1816 was read to Mr. Hassall by the Attorney General; viz. "And finally His Excellency the Governor hereby orders and directs that on occasions of any natives coming armed or in a hostile manner without arms or in unarmed parties exceeding six in number to any farm belonging to or occupied by British subjects in the interior such natives are first to be desired in a civil manner to depart from the said farm; and if they persist in remaining thereon or attempt to plunder rob or commit any kind of depredation they are then to be driven away by force of arms by the settlers themselves; and in case they are not able to do so they are to apply to a Magistrate for aid from the nearest military station; and the troops stationed there are hereby commanded to render their assistance when so required. The troops are also to afford aid at the towns of Sydney Parramatta and Windsor respectively when called on by the Magistrates or Police Officers at those stations."  Mr. Hassall on being asked stated as to the clause - "they are then to be driven away by force of arms" - that his impression was that the settlers might kill the natives although they themselves were not attacked.  William Cox Esq. J.P. deposed that he remembers the Proclamation referred to perfectly well; and that it emanated from the Government on account of the murders that had been committed upon the settlers and their families which happened about the maize season. In his situation as Magistrate a military guard had been placed at his disposal. Parties went out in 1816 with the Magistrate at their head; and they always came to a Magistrate except the soldiers under Captain Shaw who received their instructions from Government; and the settlers did never attack the black natives alone without a Magistrate. There have been no depredations by the natives on this side the mountains since the promulgation of that Regulation in 1816; but that outrages have been occurring since that period in the County of "Westmoreland;" and the late hapless scenes had taken place 70 miles from the County of Cumberland. Mr. Cox added that the natives have been more troublous within the last eight months than at any former period. He then enumerated the various acts of cruelty and depredation that had been committed within his recollection. Mr. Cox thinks the natives may now be called at war with the Europeans; and that in his opinion resistance is justifiable. Well acquainted with the prisoner Johnston who received an additional proof of humane and unblemished character. It never was usual to fire upon the natives unless in such emergencies as called for the interposition of the Executive and times like the present.  Mr. Richard Lewis a resident of Bathurst deposed that he left home about 14 days since. His estate is 20 miles from Raineville and is called the Mill-post[.] He had one man killed by the natives. One of his neighbours a Mr. Tyndall had 3 men slain two of whom were burnt to death in their hut. Within 8 years 19 Europeans had been killed by the natives and 7 of that number had met with a premature destiny from this cruel source within as many months.  The learned Attorney General addressed the Court upon the conclusion of the defence observing that the case stood simply as to the particular fact which occupied its attention; and that therefore no reference could be had to the Proclamation that was exhibited. The learned Gentleman pressed upon the recollection of His Honor and the Jury that violences had been mutual; and that reasonable men might have sufficient cause of alarm; but the fact for the Jury to consider was whether the woman mentioned in the information had met with her death at the hands of one or either of the prisoners without the occasion having justified her being killed. It could not but appear strange that 30 natives had so defended themselves as to expose three women and that the men should escape. If it could be credited that a conflict with men had taken place; and that this conflict had been produced by personal danger and that the women had met with their death by the prisoners in that conflict their happening to be women could undoubtedly constitute no difference as to the point of law; although women should be put to death in very extreme cases of danger indeed. But the argument was this:- women only being killed made it incredible that there was such a conflict and such danger as to justify these parties. It was to be remarked that they were not charged with murder and although there might be terror on the mind still there was no necessity for killing those three women. The learned Attorney General then ended his observation by saying "If you believe Lane who obviously is a most unwilling witness you must come to the conclusion that the prisoners killed the women mentioned in the information without being in danger sufficiently great to justify the act; and it is only to this point I would press the question."  His Honor the Chief Justice was pleased to observe that the case was quite a different one from that of murder as it required that malice aforethought which constitutes the crime of murder. His Honor then went through the whole of the evidence throwing out all superfluous statements giving the simple facts as pressed upon His Honor's mind separating the degrees of evidence and laying down the points of Law for the direction of the Jury.  In remarking upon the Proclamation that was produced to the Court His Honor observed with all the deference due to the Authority from whence such edicts issue that no Proclamation could furnish any protection to individuals committing outrages upon the natives of the Colony. The main defence seemed to be that what the prisoners had done was restored to in self-defence. His Honor did not consider that they were justified in taking arms against the natives it being known that cruel acts had been perpetrated by the natives; as one of the prisoners (Nicholson) had actually seen the bodies of several white men at Bathurst and one of their own people (Hollingshead) had been speared. The circumstances were sufficient to warrant the act as it would have been too late to seek for that protection and assistance which they might otherwise have obtained. But looking upon the subjects that had fallen victims it seemed strange that these poor women should only have been killed; and His Honor could not help feelingly to remark upon the wantonness of Castles in the instance related of pricking the old woman with the sword! It would however be for the Jury to determine whether the prisoners had acted with sufficient authority or otherwise. His Honor was not aware that the same particularities existed here as in the Mother Country regarding the specification of counties as it appeared by the evidence that the county mentioned in the information should have been Westmoreland instead of Cumberland. But in case the Jury were of opinion that the prisoners were Guilty the point of law would then be reserved.  After a short consultation the Jury resumed their seats and through the Foreman returned a Verdict of Not Guilty.  Saturday. - Murder. - This day Mary Minton was indicted for feloniously traitorously and wilfully aiding abetting assisting and maintaining the before-mentioned prisoners James Stack and John Hand in murdering the said Michael Minton her husband.  (For this trial a new Jury was impanelled under the Precept of His Excellency the Governor in Chief.)  We should not feel justified there being but trifling variation in the main points of evidence that occupied the attention of the previous trial in which the principals were adjudged Guilty were we to traverse the same ground by giving repetition of the testimony that was adduced on this trial which could not but be nearly similar with that already detailed. Two or three new witnesses were called who only went to corroborate certain facts proved on the former trial. No new fact of any importance appeared to arise in this woman's trial. One witness was called who swore to finding the murderous weapons in the drain. Thomas Jones still persisted in his non-identity of the prisoner as being the woman whom he had seen going towards the drain with Stack. Several others testified that the prisoner at the bar acknowledged to them upon the night of the murder that the deceased her husband had done what he never did before in giving over to her charge the money as it had been the practice of the deceased to keep all monies in his possession. Most of the witnesses gave the prisoner an excellent character in her relative situations of a wife and mother and went so far as to say that a bad word had not been known to escape her lips. Mr. Magistrate Cox deposed that the Bank-bills &c. which were sworn to by Christopher Flood as being the identical notes in the possession of poor Minton when he left Sydney were found under a stump or tree by the condemned man Stack who confessed to him that he had received the same from the prisoner.  Mr. Rowe who conducted the defence at the request of the prisoner was allowed by the Court to read a written defence. This paper stated that the house was rushed by five men; that two of them entered the room in which was the prisoner her children sister and two crown servants Stack and Hand who guarded them whilst the other three proceeded to perpetrate the murder; and that as soon as she the prisoner could effect an escape an alarm was the consequence. She denied all knowledge of or participation in the dreadful crime which bereft her of a husband and her children of a father. She enquired where did the inducement appear that could possibly have influenced her to assist in so terrible an act? and concluded by throwing herself upon the merciful consideration of the Court.  The following we believe to be a correct sketch of His Honor's charge to the Jury:-  "The prisoner at the bar Mary Minton stands charged with the murder of her husband Michael Minton - an offence of the deepest die; it is termed petty treason from the sacred relations of private life which it violates and is second in degree only to that higher crime which goes at once to destroy all the relations of society."  "The information consists of five several counts which variously set forth the manner and instruments by which the murder was accomplished and they all charge the prisoner at the bar as present aiding and abetting at the fact; or as the Law terms it a principal in the second degree. From the nature of the charge it is necessary that the accused should have been present; but such presence need not be actual such as would make her an eye or an ear witness; if she were constructively present such as by taking some part assigned her in the common act she is as guilty in the estimate of the Law as if she were immediately engaged."  The Learned Judge then proceeded to review the few leading particulars which are established by direct and positive evidence; "that the deceased Michael Minton had been at Windsor on Sunday the 8th August and returned home about seven o'clock in the evening that he desired his wife to prepare his supper which he ate and retired to bed about eight o'clock; that shortly after the prisoner gave Jones one of her servants some linen desiring him to carry it to a neighbour called Mary Peckham to make up; that about the same time she also sent Wright another servant to another neighbour called Thomas Sell with a dump to pay for some butter. That at the time these two servants were so sent away the prisoner and her sister a girl between ten and eleven years of age her two infant children and two other servants Thomas Stack and John Hand were the only persons left in the house with Minton. That soon after the departure of the servants Jones and Wright the voice of Minton was heard crying "murder" several times and immediately after a gun was fired at Minton's house but no dogs were heard to bark and for many minutes all was still and silent. Jones who was at Mary Peckham's and heard the report of the gun immediately set out on his return home and on his approaching within a short distance of the house he saw Thomas Stack and a woman going from Minton's house towards a drain situated below the house. They were conversing at the time - he stopped for a moment and then proceeded onwards when he saw Thomas Stack returning up the hill from the direction of the drain. On seeing Jones he called out "Who's that?" and Jones answering he said "my master is murdered." He further related that five men two of whom he described one with a scar on his face and the other with a yellow jacket had rushed into the house and made all the party there turn their faces to the wall while they murdered the deceased. He also affected to be afraid to go into the house and desired Jones to do so which after some hesitation he did and there found his master lying dead - in the manner described by the surgeon - the frontal bone of his head was indented as if by the stroke of a hammer; the back of his head was also cut and fractured in three places as if by an axe his throat was cut the jugular vein quite severed; and a shot from a gun or pistol had penetrated his arm and grazed his back. On the following day suspicions being excited a search was made for certain implements which were missing from Minton's house and in the drain towards which Thomas Stack had been seen going were found a gun a pair of pistols an axe with some hair in it a hammer also with grey hairs on it and a knife which was stained. These instruments are all identified as having belonged to Minton and being in his house shortly before his murder."  The Chief Justice then went on to remark upon the points established in evidence to the following purport:- "That the instruments found in the drain were those by which the horrid deed was done there can be no doubt and that Minton was murdered by persons belonging to his house is equally clear. In the first place no property was stolen and it is not easy to believe that five persons should confederate together for the mere purpose of committing a profitless murder. In the next place a gun was fired and was heard by all the neighbours an unlikely thing to have been done by a banditti as it would be sure to give the alarm to the neighbourhood - an act of all others that persons bent upon mischief would most likely endeavour to avoid. Again no dogs were heard to bark although Minton had dogs that were used to bark at strangers; and they must have been heard for the voice of Minton was heard distinctly by two persons who swear they heard no dogs bark but that after the gun all was silent and still for some time. Besides murderers going to attack a house which was armed and where five men were known to reside would have been furnished with arms of their own and some marks of those arms would in all probability have been impressed upon the body of the deceased. But Minton was slain and mangled by implements of his own; the hair upon the axe and upon the hammer the indentation of his forehead the blood upon the knife all point to the fact in a manner too strong to be mistaken. But if no other circumstance had appeared in evidence the false incredible and self-refuting tale of the five men would be sufficient to prove that he was murdered by the persons who invented and propagated the tale. Suppose - I will only put it hypothetically for the present - that these accused persons had murdered their master they must account for his death in some way or other - now what story more likely to be invented than the one which has been set up? a few circumstances easily invented and remembered would be agreed upon - and a close silence beyond those circumstances; - but on the other hand suppose that the story were true and that five persons had actually rushed into Minton's house and made the five persons who were in it turn their faces to the wall while they perpetrated the murder a thousand circumstances would have rushed upon the recollection of the accused. The story would have been so replete with particulars how they looked what they said what they did where they went the conduct of the parties in the house the cries of the deceased the struggles the fact unaccounted for of his being found by the kitchen fire and not in the bed-room where he slept these and a thousand other circumstances would have sprung so spontaneously from the mouths of the parties that every question which could be asked and every doubt which could be raised would elicit fresh evidences of truth and establish the innocence of the accused beyond the reach of suspicion - it would have been impossible to sustain even a colourable charge against them. To me it is clear that the deceased was murdered by his own servants and that Stack and Hand were engaged in that murder. Stack was seen going towards the fatal drain - he was not afraid to go there although he hesitated about going to the house - the cruel and unfeeling expressions of Hand towards his master while his body was not yet cold in death point to him as a principal in the act. But it is not necessary to go into many details upon this point their guilt has been established. The point for our consideration is the situation and conduct of the prisoner at the bar and what part she took in the cruel plot. The first circumstance is her having sent away Wright and Jones. With respect to Wright it appears that she had spoken to him to go to Sell's early in the afternoon; but afterwards stated that she was afraid he would not be back before her master returned and would therefore defer it till evening. It is singular that she had also proposed sending Jones away early in the afternoon but he did not then go as it would rather seem he was employed in the garden. Now either these are the indications of a deep and premeditated design or they are accidental. I should hardly venture to affirm they were premeditated. If they were accidental they explain away something of the unfavorable circumstances of two of the servants being sent away just before the destruction of Minton. The next circumstance to which I shall call your attention is the fact of a woman being seen with Stack descending the hill in the direction of the drain. Was this the prisoner? The witness Jones will not positively swear it was - but he says he thought it was. If it were the prisoner when and where did she pick up her sister and the children so as to be at Ablett's gate? This is difficult to explain and the discrepancy of the evidence as to the interval of time between the firing of the gun and the hearing of Mrs. Minton's voice at Ablett's gate rather goes to encrease than to solve the difficulty. Could she have sent them on and afterwards joined them? I should be afraid to hazard a conjecture upon this very tender point. The next and worst feature of the case against the unhappy woman at the bar is the story of the five men. What! a wife who affected to love her husband the mother of his two infant children quietly turn her face to the wall and let the business of murdering that husband go quietly on without once attempting to assist him one alarming shriek or one supplicating word for his life! But this story does not deserve a moment's consideration - it is utterly false - and it is the share which the prisoner had taken in this false tale which is the strongest circumstance against her. Could it be that Stack and Hand had alarmed her fears and practised upon her credulity? But why then should she tell it as a thing she saw and heard herself? Can she have been a party to this tale and be guiltless?  "Again it is proved that the deceased had just before his death received a sum of money for the sale of pigs in Sydney. On one of the witnesses telling the prisoner that this money had probably been the cause of the attack on her house she replied "No; the money is safe - I have planted it." - Indeed! how then came Stack to know where this money was planted and to conduct the Magistrate to the spot where it was hidden in the hollow of a tree? And here I must notice what is untruly said in the defence that the money for which the pigs were sold was not the money Mrs. Minton said she had planted. Now the witness Weyham proves that the conversation he had with the prisoner related to the money lately received in Sydney for the sale of pigs. This was the money the prisoner told Mrs. Ablett she had planted; - how came the murderer Stack in the secret of the hiding place? The inference from it is strong and has led me reluctantly to a conclusion not reconcilable with the innocence of the prisoner.  "On the other hand she has had the strongest testimonials of her general character of tenderness and humanity and even of living happily with her husband. There appears to have been no motive for this dreadful act of which she has been accused. Gentlemen if you have doubts upon the case from the evidence before you you should give the prisoner at the bar the benefit of those doubts; but if on the contrary you should be led to the conclusion that she is guilty however painful that conclusion may be to your feelings or distressing the duty you will have consequently to perform I feel a perfect assurance that you will discharge that duty with integrity and justice."  The Jury retired for about 25 minutes and returned a Verdict of Not Guilty. The prisoner was directed to be discharged.  Murder.- The first case that became exhibited to the Court was one of a sanguinary description in which two fellow creatures were to stand their trial for their lives on the charge of depriving a fellow mortal of that existence which man can take away but which none except the Creator can bestow.  Michael Murphy and John Sullivan were indicted for the wilful murder of William Byrne on the evening of the 7th of March last.  (The prisoners were informed that they had a right to challenge on the ground of interest or affection any of the Jury.)  The Attorney General opened the case in which the learned Gentleman briefly stated such facts as became developed in the course of the evidence. The first witness called on the part of the prosecution was Dr. Anderson Assistant Surgeon on the Colonial Establishment who deposed that he examined the body of William Byrne the deceased on the 8th of March last in the General Hospital. He found the head considerably injured and swelled by two contused wounds; one of which was much larger than the other - the largest at the back part of the head. That in cutting down upon the scalp there appeared a considerable extravasation of blood between the skull and scalp with an extensive fracture of the occipital bone. So satisfied was Dr. Anderson of the cause of death by these wounds that he proceeded no further in his examination of the body. The wounds were evidently inflicted by a heavy blunt instrument.  G.M. Slade Esq. Coroner deposed that he convened an Inquest on the melancholy occasion on the 8th of March the day after the murder and that the papers now handed into Court were correct copies of the depositions and verdict.  John Thomas Campbell Esq. proved some additional depositions that were taken before him and other Justices of the Peace.  Catherine Bruce deposed that she was acquainted with Byrne the deceased as well as the two prisoners at the bar. She lived at the Waterloo Mills about 3 miles from Sydney on the Botany-road with her husband. She came into town about 3 in the afternoon of the 7th of March the day on which the murder was perpetrated; that upon coming to the toll-gate she saw the prisoners at the bar who were then apparently proceeding on the Botany-road on their way to the Mills of which the prisoner Murphy had then the charge as overseer and clerk. - At or about 8 o'clock in the same evening she returned through the toll-bar in her progress homewards in company with three men viz. the deceased John Baxter and Patrick Haydon. Shortly after their entering upon the Botany-road the witness beheld four men advance from the bush who leaped over the fence. Having hold of the arm of the deceased she exclaimed "Billy my lad see who is coming!" And before the words were scarcely articulated poor Byrne received a violent blow on the head from one of the four men which caused the blood to fly over the bonnet and face of the wituess [sic]. The prisoner Murphy gave this blow. The other prisoner Sullivan then struck him was the last that struck him and was the man that killed him! The other men were engaged in beating Baxter. In behalf of the deceased she vainly implored mercy at the hands of the dire ruffians when one of them gave her a blow. As soon as the murder was complete the party seemed to return towards Sydney. The witness dispatched Baxter to Sydney to give the alarm; and the other man Haydon went for her husband to the Waterloo Mills whilst the witness remained with the body. She laid the head of the deceased in her lap and rubbed the temples but there was no sign of life remaining.  Upon the part of the prisoners the witness was cross-examined by Mr. Solicitor Rowe. She still deposed to meeting the prisoners on the way out through the toll-gate while she was coming into Town. At the time she added that one James Purcell accompanied her. She called at the Woolpack public-house just at the entrance of Sydney and obtained one pint of beer which was drank by Purcell and herself. From thence she went to the house of one Wheeler in George-street but there had nothing to drink. After this she called at the house of Daniel Kelly where three others and the witness drank a quart of beer. From Kelly's she returned to the Woolpack where she met with the deceased Baxter and Haydon. Here she had nothing to drink. The witness stated that she was perfectly sober and did not require any assistance home; and that Baxter only went to protect her out of friendship to her husband. She again most particularly swore to the prisoners; but the other two she had no recollection of neither would she be able to identify them. The four men were dressed in black and wore long great coats. The night was sufficiently light to behold the faces of the prisoners at the bar.  John Baxter deposed that he was out at the Waterloo Mills to see the husband of the last deponent on the afternoon of the day on which the murder was committed. That Mrs. Bruce left home for Sydney about 3 in the afternoon; and waiting rather late her husband requested him to come into town for the purpose of seeing her safe home. When within 200 yards of the Woolpack public-house he could distinguish the voice of Mrs. Bruce. He found her in company with the deceased and the other man Haydon. This was between 6 and 7 o'clock. A few minutes after 8 Mrs. Bruce the deceased Haydon and himself set out for the Waterloo Mills. They had just left the toll-bar and entered upon the Botany-road when Mrs. Bruce desired him to go forward; upon complying with which his eye caught 4 or 5 men coming up whom he supposed to be constables. One of them gave him a blow on the head and in recovering from the effects of its violence a second was inflicted which felled him to the ground and produced insensibility for some considerable time. He was quite sober but knew none of the party. He was on the right hand side of the road when assaulted and the deceased on the left only a very short distance. The men seemed to have large coats on that came below the knees which were all of a dark colour. He recovered in time to perceive the assailants make for Sydney.  In his cross-examination by Mr. Rowe the witness admitted that Mrs. Bruce had been drinking and that the two men Haydon and the deceased were intoxicated. Mrs. Bruce gave the deponent some beer at the Woolpack. The men were 100 yards off when he first saw them on the Botany-road and were then in the rear; they walked together on the right hand side of the road. That finding they were all intoxicated he thought it his duty to conduct Mrs. Bruce home. It was a cloudy night and so dark that it was not possible to discern the countenance of any of the parties; but still had he been intimately acquainted with any of them he admitted it would have been easy to identify their persons. He would not swear to either of the prisoners.  In answer to a question put by the Attorney General the witness said that a very few minutes only could have elapsed from the time he first saw the four men till the moment he was struck; and that the face of Mrs. Bruce was not turned towards the party till he the witness told her they were coming.  Richard Palmer deposed that he met Mrs. Bruce and her party going towards the Waterloo Mills on the evening of the murder between 8 and 9. He was then coming in to town from Botany; and having a knowledge of the deceased Byrne spoke to him in passing. None of the party appeared to him in liquor nor did he think they were. So far from its being a dark and cloudy night as deposed by Baxter this witness stated it as a windy and moon-light light [sic] the moon being within an hour of setting. Upon coming to the bottom or the commencement of the Botany-road he met Sullivan one of the prisoners at the bar with whom he was acquainted. He Sullivan came across the road from 3 or 4 other men. He enquired of the witness where he was going; he replied to Sydney. The witness then asked Sullivan who were those men in great coats on the other side of the road; and the latter immediately asked if he the witness met Mrs. Bruce on the road and who was with her? He told him that "Little Bill the Carpenter" meaning the deceased was among the number. The witness then bade Sullivan good night which salutation was not returned. He stated that Sullivan was dressed in blue and that the others wore great coats. Business requiring his return to Botany early the next morning the witness saw the body of the murdered man; he then gave information of the previous evening's interview with the prisoner Sullivan but was not aware at the time that he was then in custody on suspicion.  Joseph Smith who lived at the Waterloo Mills in the same house with the prisoner Murphy deposed that the latter came home on the afternoon that the murder was committed exchanged a white jacket that he had worn all day for one of a blue colour and went out saying that he would endeavour to secure the deceased Byrne and lodge him in the watch-house for absence and neglect of duty. Sullivan the other prisoner also dressed in blue accompanied Murphy from home: the latter had a stick but which he was unable to describe to the Court. Murphy returned in the evening saying he could not find "Bill" the deceased and that he would not further perplex himself about him. The witness did not see Sullivan till the constables came to apprehend him at 11 at night.  Patrick Coglan deposed that he slept in the same room with the prisoner Sullivan. He saw both the prisoners on the 7th March. They were dressed in blue. Sullivan came home some time in the night and told him he had seen Mrs. Bruce and the deceased on their way home and that they knew him.  John Bruce a resident at the Waterloo Mills deposed that he saw the prisoner Murphy on the evening of the 7th of March before sun-set. He was enquiring for the deceased Byrne and one M'Coy; both of whom were under the orders of the prisoner Murphy as the overseer of the Mills.  The case for the prosecution here closed.  Daniel Kelly was the first witness called by Mr. Rowe in behalf of the prisoners. He deposed that he saw Mrs. Bruce about an hour before sun-set on the evening of the 7th of March last. She was "rolling drunk" past his gate. He then lived in Pitt-street and Mrs. Bruce being acquainted with his wife came in. She sent for half-a-pint of rum giving the witness's wife a silver shilling to procure the same; of which Mrs. Bruce partook one-sixth or half-a-glass. After remaining here half-an-hour Mrs. Bruce went into an adjoining public-house where she continued till sun-set. Upon leaving the public-house she was so drunk that the witness stated she wished to return to his house to become sober but which his wife would not allow. A man who came out with her conducted her away.  John Cullen innkeeper in George-street Sydney on the Brickfield-hill deposed that he recollects the evening of the murder well; that he saw Mrs. Bruce and two men going by his house on that evening towards the toll-gate; and that all three appeared to be drunk as they talked loud and conducted themselves as intoxicated persons. He had often seen Mrs. Bruce in an inebriated condition.  Florence M'Carthy deposed that he lived at the toll-gate; that he saw Mrs. Bruce on the evening of the murder returning homewards with three men; and that she appeared so drunk that they were holding her up; but cannot positively say she was intoxicated only coming to such a conclusion from appearances.  John Baxter was here re-called. - He stated that he saw the man who gave him the second blow; but not him that struck the first. To either of the prisoners he could not swear.  James Dunlevy a constable at the first round-house on the Parramatta-road deposed that he was in quest of bush-rangers in the vicinity of the Waterloo Mills on the evening and night of the 7th of March; that about 6 o'clock upon the other side of the Mills he fell in with the prisoner Murphy who was driving some bullocks out to pasturage for the night and he complained at the time of the absence of some men from the Mills. They remained in company till 25 minutes before nine o'clock when they separated at the Waterloo-gate Murphy going towards the Mills aud [sic] the witness making a short cut across the country to the round-house which saved half-a-mile and avoided the scene of murder. He concluded his testimony by remarking that Murphy wore a blue dress.  Many respectable witnesses were called on the part of the prisoner Murphy as to character; and one and all agreed as to his sobriety diligence and honesty.  The prisoners having closed their defence the Attorney General rose and addressed the Court by observing that he could not do better for the ends of justice than leave the case with the Jury.  His Honor the Chief Justice then proceeded to sum up the evidence; and in his charge to the Jury His Honor could not avoid remarking on the discrepancy in the evidence as far as regarded the sobriety of Catherine Bruce - the only witness that ventured on swearing to the prisoners at the bar and upon whose testimony their destiny seemed to hinge. Her testimony remained unsupported; and several witnesses deposed to her inebriety upon the evening of the murder. His Honor stated the law upon the subject to the Jury; going over the whole of the evidence and making such comments as the importance of the case and the intricacy of the circumstances required.  The Jury retired about half after five and resumed their seats about six; when the Foreman returned a verdict of Not Guilty against the prisoners who were directed by His Honor to be immediately discharged.  Petty Treason and Murder. - James Stack and John Hand were indicted for feloniously wilfully and traitorously assaulting their master Michael Minton in the district of Evan on the night of the 8th of August last from the wounds of which he died. The information comprised four counts severally charging the prisoners with having perpetrated the deed by means of a knife an axe a hammer or a musket.  In opening this terrific case the Attorney General observed that the relation in which the prisoners stood with the deceased would have to be proved; but should the testimony of two witnesses to that fact as regarded the crime of petty treason be wanting then it would be competent for the Jury to judge of the evidence as affecting the prisoners for the crime of murder. The confession of one of the prisoners the Attorney General informed the Court would be offered in evidence. By this admission it must appear that the prisoners were present aiding and assisting in the crime; and that were it urged to have been perpetrated by others it would be manifest that the premises were too well guarded by dogs at that season of the night to allow of a silent or uninterrupted intrusion. That the prisoners were in a condition to execute this fatal mischief was also to be proved; and that it was totally improbable as well as impossible that any one else but them could have effected the deed. It would be shewn that the prisoner Stack had a part of the property in his possession; and moreover that the death was occasioned by arms and other deadly weapons in the house.  Dr. West Resident Surgeon at Windsor deposed that he was called on to examine the body of Michael Minton the deceased at his house in the district of Evan on the morning of the 10th instant. It was lying on a bed. He ascertained that a pistol ball had penetrated the back but had not entered far owing to the circumstance of an interception by the bedding. A musket shot had perforated the fleshy part of the left arm. The throat was cut almost from ear to ear - the jugular vein and all the larger vessels were divided. Several fractures were observable upon the head. One was just above the left eye which had the appearance of infliction by a hammer. Three or four other fractures evidently were perpetrated by blows from an axe or some similar implement. From the nature and complication of these wounds Dr. West was most decidedly of opinion that the poor old man could not have survived over five minutes. - Mr. Rowe who appeared for the prisoner Hand made some enquiry of Dr. West as to the circumstance of his client having been under his medical care in the Windsor Hospital; but as this case appeared totally irrelevant to the case in point it is not entitled to further consideration.  Thomas Jones was next called. - He lived in the service of the deceased 11 months and was a fellow-servant with the prisoners at the bar. His master's farm was in the district of Evan and there are several houses near to and in a line with that of the deceased his late master. The Nepean river is half-a-mile distant from the house. Leary's house lies between Minton's and the river. His deceased master came home from Richmond upon the evening of the murder about sun-set. When he supped the deceased retired to the inner room to bed: there were only two rooms in the house with the exception of a passage about 3 feet wide. At the time his master went to bed there were the following persons in the house viz. Mrs. Minton (the wife); two children; Catherine Spalding (the wife's sister); the two prisoners at the bar; one John Wright and the witness. In the whole there were four crown servants on the farm who had been variously occupied during the day. Between 8 and 9 o'clock when his master was in bed his mistress despatched him the witness to the house of one Mary Peckham at the distance of half-a-mile with a sheet and shift to be made. These articles were delivered to him by the prisoner Stack through a skilling-window; who told him that in the event of his master waking he would report him as being in the barn; and accompanied him a short distance on the road. When he arrived at Mary Peckham's some conversation took place between her the witness and one James Danks. He had not been in the house more than three minutes when the report of a gun was heard. The woman remarked that that was "Old Minton" firing; which the witness denied as he had left his master in bed; but the sound coming in that direction he thought it best to return not having remained on his errand in the house above five minutes. When he left home his fellow-servant John Wright was not in the house. When within 6 or 7 rods of a large tree that stands contiguous to the deceased's house he saw the prisoner James Stack and a woman whom he supposed to be Mrs. Minton his mistress in company going towards a drain at the foot of the hill which lies between the dwelling and the river. He swore it was Stack but could not so clearly identify the person of his mistress though he was pretty conscious it could be no stranger as his master was particularly strict against allowing people to go across his farm. For the space of three minutes they were lost sight of; but on the witness continuing to make for the house he overheard some inaudible conversation - the parties spoke very low. Suddenly the prisoner Stack came up the side of the hill and observing the witness enquired "who was there?" "Jones" was the reply. He then ran up clasping his hands and loudly exclaiming "My God - my God! my master killed!" In answer to some questions put by the astonished witness the prisoner (Stack) replied that five men rushed into the house and killed their master. He said that the mistress and children were safe; and that Mrs. Minton was gone to a neighbour's house to make an alarm. All this time the witness had not seen the other prisoner (John Hand) of whom Stack seemed to know nothing. Accompanied with Stack the witness proceeded to the house; he wished the former to enter but excessive agitation apparently prevented him from a compliance in this instance. The witness glanced in at the front room and conjectured he saw a man stretched out by the right side of the fire-place who appeared to be on fire. Stack told the witness he should know two of the murderers. There were two good-sized dogs on the farm; he never knew them to bite any one; but they invariably barked at strangers. That evening he did not hear these animals give any alarm only when the gun fired and that was but momentary. His master kept a fowling piece or musket and two pistols in the house. About the premises there were also two axes and a hammer. The axe which was most commonly in use could not be found up to the night of the murder as it was sought after for the purpose of keeping up a fire. He the witness saw no strangers or bush-rangers about the premises either prior or subsequent to the dreadful transaction. Several of the neighbours flocked in upon the alarm becoming general. His master was habituated to visit the fields in the evening to ascertain whether the cattle and horses were safe. The prisoner Stack who was the overseer of the other men was not very much esteemed till of late by his mistress Mrs. Minton; but latterly her familiarity with this man (Stack) was obvious. At one time she was in the habit of continually expressing a dislike of him to his master her husband. The two prisoners at the bar were not the most friendly till recently. The witness stated that the prisoner Stack was a faithful overseer and that he had no personal animosity against him. He was not more than half-an-hour gone to Peckham's during which short interim the bloody deed had been accomplished. His master was accustomed to discharge a pistol every night. The axe and gun produced to the witness in Court he verily believed to be the property of the deceased.  John Wright in the same service with last deponent deposed that his master went to bed immediately after supper; he saw him undress and close the bed-room door. The men that were in the house consisted of the two prisoners at the bar Thomas Jones and the witness together with Mrs. Minton her sister (Catherine Spalding) aud [sic] two children: there were no strangers present. Between 8 and 9 o'clock his mistress gave him a dump and directed him to go to a neighbour's about 3-quarters of a mile off and pay him that piece of silver for some butter which she owed him. The name of the man was Sells. He left the two prisoners the only men present in the house - Jones the former witness being sent out previously. At the distance of half-a-mile the report of a gun arrested his attention as it came from his master's house. He went to the house of Sells and after some difficulty occasioned by the opposition of the dogs to his entrance into the premises at that hour of the night he delivered the coin into the hands of Sells and returned homewards. On the way he met John Hand one of the prisoners who exclaimed that he was "a happy man;" for since his absence from home the house had been filled with robbers who had murdered the master. He enquired if they were still there to which Hand replied that he thought they were gone. Hand then prevailed on the witness to accompany him to Weyham's a neighbouring settler to give the alarm and obtain assistance in so frightful an exigency. Mr. Weyham immediately despatched 4 government men with the witness and the prisoner Hand. They leaped over his master's fence; the dogs came barking at them; but the witness quieted the animals which he observed; to his knowledge had not barked before that evening; though it was usual upon the approach of strangers for them to make a great noise. The house was in a cloud of smoke. He the witness by means of a fire soon procured a light. It should have been stated that upon the witness gaining the scene of blood he found Jones on the spot before him afraid to enter. His master was lying within a foot and a half of the fire-place; the shirt which he wore was consuming; his night-cap was a short distance from the body; and the blood was running in a stream from under the head into the fire. The vital spark had been driven away but the body was not yet cold. Some of the bedding was also on fire. The prisoner Hand was one of those who sat up all night with the corpse. Fuel was wanted in the course of the night and the axe was missing. That which is in Court belonged to his deceased master; as also the gun pistols and the hammer. Mr. Minton used to keep the gun at the head of his bed.  William Sells settler at the Nepean corroborated the testimony of the last witness as far as regarded the nocturnal visit and payment of the dump. This witness added that the deceased's former wife was killed about 3 years since; and that that was not occasioned by bush-rangers as attempted to be urged but was committed by a government servant living on the farm.  John Tucksford who lived at Mary Peckham's deposed to the fact of the witness Jones (the servant of the deceased) coming to their house on the night already stated; that he came about a sheet and a shift. While the man was in the house the gun was fired upon which he bade the people "good night" and proceeded home only stopping about 5 minutes.  Samuel Leary settler at the Nepean deposed that he heard the deceased exclaim "O Lord!" and afterwards cry out "murder!" four times. This was between 8 and 9 o'clock; after which a gun was discharged and not till then did he hear any dogs bark. His house is situate between the river and that of the deceased. In half-an-hour after or thereabouts he heard Mrs. Minton with her children going to a neighbour's house. He despatched a servant off on horseback to ascertain the cause of these disturbances.  John Baker servant to the last witness deposed that he also heard the cry of "murder" four times in the direction of Minton's house. He heard the report of the gun. At the direction of his master he was going to find out the meaning of this report as well as the cry of "murder;" and having gained a knowledge of the distressing particulars he returned and acquainted his master.  Thomas Weyham another settler in the vicinity of the deceased's residence deposed that he heard the report of the gun about 9 o'clock. An alarm was presently made and he despatched four of his men to render assistance. He also followed and upon approaching the house met the wife of the deceased who told him that her husband had been murdered. He saw the prisoners at the bar. A conversation ensued between him and the witness and the prisoner Hand. He said Minton was killed and that "he was a dreadful man;" that he was always finding fault with him: and that it was not much matter about his being killed.  Thomas Keighan servant to the last witness confirmed his master's testimony; adding further that Hand should say that five men rushed into the house but none of whom he would be able to recognize; and that he Hand had been placed against a door by the ruffians who threatened to shoot him in the event of turning round.  John Ablett settler of the Nepean deposed that his farm is not above a quarter of a mile off that of the deceased; he heard the dogs barking exceedingly; and also heard Mrs. Minton cry "murder!" When he went to poor Minton's house he found the four servants present. The prisoners at the bar related the same tale to him about the five men as Hand had previously mentioned to Thomas Keighan. The witness was aware that the deceased had been in Sydney on the Thursday previous and bought a new plough.  John Fleming servant to the last witness corroborated the evidence given by his employer.  John Hickman servant to Thomas Weyham deposed that he was one of those that went forward to render assistance by his master's orders; and that upon asking the prisoner Hand whether he would be able to identify any of the ruffians he indifferently replied that he knew nothing about it and walked off.  Mr. John Purcell chief constable at Evan deposed that about half past 11 at night upon the evening of the murder he was directed by the Magistrate to proceed to the house of the deceased and gain every possible information that might lead to a disclosure of the parties. In a general conversation that ensued during the night the prisoners at the bar concurred in one tale viz[.] that five men rushed into the house; that two of them came into the room in which they were sitting and commanded them to stand with their faces towards the wall; another placed himself at the door with a pair of pistols while the others went into the bed-room and demanded Minton's money; he replied it was in the Bank then "we'll bank you" was the reply; to which no resistance was offered either by the servants the two prisoners at the bar or the wife! They further added that the murderers went off immediately the fire-arms were discharged. From certain information that he derived next morning he proceeded to search the premises; and from thence went towards the drain spoken to by the second witness Jones who said that he saw Stack and a woman like his mistress proceeding in that direction. With very little trouble one of the bye-standers handed over to Mr. Purcell the following sanguinary weapons viz. a gun a pair of pistols an axe a hammer with some human hair appending to the claw and a white-handled case knife covered with blood! These articles were produced to the witness and they were identified to be the same found in the drain. They were all sworn to be the property of the deceased. - While searching the house one of the knives were reported missing by Mrs. Minton and the one found in the drain corresponded with those in the house. From the dwelling to the drain the ground went in a declivity towards the river. There was not the least appearance of any property having been stolen by the five bush-rangers who were said to have committed the shocking deed.  Christopher Flood a publican in York-street Sydney deposed that the deceased was in town on the 5th instant. He sold a quantity of pigs for which he received in presence of the witness £98 in six 50-dollar notes one 5-dollar ditto and a Bank check drawn by Mr[.] De Mestre in favour of John Flood for 72 dollars dated Aug 5[.] One of the 50-dollar notes was cashed in town. The others Minton took home with him leaving with the witness the numbers dates and sums which Mr. Flood was so careful as to take in his own hand-writing.  Thomas Hobby Esq. Coroner for the district of Evan deposed that he held an Inquest on the body of Michael Minton the deceased on Tuesday the 10th instant.  William Cox Esq. Justice of the Peace deposed that he resorted to every expedient to lead to a discovery of this dreadful transaction. The prisoners at the bar related to him a similar tale to that which was afforded to Purcell the chief constable. They were sent to different gaols. On the 10th inssant [sic] they were brought before the Coroner's Inquest. Mr. Cox stated that he had some conversation upon this occasion with the prisoner Stack; in which at first he adhered to the old story. But after some short time he sent for Mr. Cox and told him he was most unhappy in his mind and entreated the Magistrate to direct him (Stack) how to act. Mr. Cox observed that he could not be admitted as an evidence either at the Inquest or before the Criminal Sessions but that "if he hoped for mercy" he would tell the truth and that upon his relating the truth he (Mr. Cox) might be induced to speak favourably of him to the Court. This Gentleman was then upon the eve of recounting the nature of this confession made by the prisoner Stack when he was stopped by the Solicitor for the prisoners (Mr. Rowe) who started two legal objections to such a confession being adopted as evidence. The first was that terror had been exercised by the Magistrate; and secondly that the hope of mercy was held out to the prisoner; either or both of which were contrary to Law and therefore fatal to any confession so received. The question one pregnant with the deepest interest as affecting the case and also of general import was ably argued by the Attorney General and the Learned Solicitor. It remained however for His Honor the Chief Justice to decide the point; and His Honor was pleased to observe upon mature deliberation that "he was of opinion that the confession could not be received; as the conversation that took place between the Magistrate and the prisoner Stack was certainly calculated to convey hope to the mind of the prisoner."  The prosecution here closed. The prisoners entered into no defence other than by denying all knowledge of or perpetration in the crime.  We should fail in doing justice to the lucid and elaborate charge given by His Honor the Chief Justice were we to attempt following up the observations that emanated from the Bench on this occasion; perhaps it will be sufficient to observe that after an absence of about five minutes the Jury returned with a Verdict - Guilty[.]   His Honor the Chief Justice immediately passed Sentence of Death upon the prisoners; which decreed them to die on Saturday.  On the motion of the Attorney General as we stated last week a rule nisi had been on the 2d inst. granted calling upon the Magistrates of Sydney to shew cause why a writ of mandamus should not issue directing them to summon juries as in England at the ensuing General Sessions to be holden in November. The case came on to be argued this day. The Solicitor General was retained by the Magistrates. The Attorney General first addressed the Court. He said he had made this motion merely from the delay which had occurred in the assembling of the Sessions; and not with any view to impute blame to the Magistracy. The delay probably had arisen from the novelty of the institution; but to whatever cause it was attributable it was injurious to the public interests and was therefore incumbent on him as the guardian of those interests to see that it was no longer persevered in. The day that had been fixed by proclamation for the holding of the Sessions had gone by; and another was now at hand and yet no conclusion had been arrived at among the Magistrates as to the course of conduct to be pursued by them. It appeared that a difference had arisen among them as to their competency to assemble juries under the late Act that this difference still existed and that the point was not likely to be settled among themselves. This then was of itself a sufficient ground for the course which he had adopted. The word mandamus carried with it a sounding name. Its object however as he had before stated was not imputation. It would be convenient that all the Magistrates should be bound by the decision which might be pronounced on this question to day although those of them to whom the rule was not specially directed might undoubtedly if they should think fit agitate it de novo. It would have been inconvenient to give them all notice in consequence of the urgency of the case and it was on that account that the motion was confined to the Magistrates of Sydney in exclusion of those who resided up the country. He was aware that there was an irregularity in his proceeding now to address the Court; but as the learned Solicitor General who was instructed on the part of the Magistrates to resist the rule was not present when it was obtained and would therefore probably be unapprized of the observations with which his motion had been prefaced he should now out of courtesy to him state the outline of the argument on which he should now rely for making the rule obtained by him on a former day absolute; reserving to himself however the right of reply to any arguments which might be employed by his learned Friend on the other side. The clause under which Courts of General or Quarter Sessions were constituted in this Colony was the 19th of the late Act the 4th Geo. 4. cap. 96. Here the learned Gentleman read the clause and then remarked that it consisted of two parts - one refering [sic] to free persons - the other to felons. The Sessions over the former class were invested with the same jurisdiction as is possessed by the Quarter Sessions in England; but over the latter class have an extended jurisdiction; viz. a power to try in "a summary way" by which words as every lawyer knew was meant that the regular form of proceeding by indictment and jury was as to this class of offenders to be dispensed with. It was quite clear that if the words of the clause by which this new Court is established be plain and intelligible the obvious meaning of those words must be adhered to; and that by themselves alone they must be construed without any reference to matter dehors. This was a universal rule of law to which the most rigid adherence should be given. The safety indeed of the whole community depended on the inviolability of this rule. It was the foundation of all private rights and all personal security; and it was one of the characteristics of British law that it pervaded alike the earliest and latest authorities. When any ambiguity however prevailed in the words there he admitted that the context must be resorted to in order to collect if possible the intention of the lawgiver. Here the learned Gentleman cited a dictum of Lord Holt in confirmation of his position and also a passage from Plowden where it was laid down to be law that "if any part of a statute be obscure it is proper to consider the parts;" whence the learned Gentleman inferred that if no such obscurity existed the other parts of the Act were of course to be put out of consideration. He also cited a dictum of Lord Chief Justice Trevor to the same effect. It would be easy the learned Gentleman continued to accumulate authorities and he would do so hereafter if it should be necessary.  There were also abundant authorities to be found in the books with reference to another very material branch of this argument. The Act it had been seen merely created a Court of General or Quarter Sessions. The King by virtue of his prerogative alone might have created such a Court but then it must have been clothed exclusively with the legal incidents possessed by such Courts in England and must have wanted one of the powers which the Act has conferred on it - that branch of summary jurisdiction to which he had already alluded. The learned Gentleman here referred to a passage from Dalton which is to be found in the 5th volume of the last edition of Burn's Justice page 207: also to a passage of similar import on the 19th vol. of Viner's Abridgment page 558 where it is laid down that "whenever an Act of Parliament makes an offence and is silent as to the manner of trying it it shall be intended to be a trial per pais according to Magna Charter." The learned Gentleman afterwards cited another passage from Salkeld in which an analogous doctrine was to be found and then said that it did appear to him from these authorities that when a Court was created as in the present case by Act of Parliament and no mode of trial pointed out the trial by jury must prevail. There was no other legal mode of trying facts. The only difficulty here would be whether the Session could proceed at all. That they could he felt persuaded on this well known maxim of law that the accessaries follow the principal and that whenever any right is given whatever is requisite to the enjoyment of that right forms an essential ingredient of its creation. This wonld [sic] result from an appointment by the King and surely an appointment by Act of Parliament cannot be less beneficial. It was clear that if trial by jury were to be dispensed with the distinction so broadly drawn in the Act between free persons and prisoners would be nugatory. In that case the mode of trying both classes would be alike "summary" and the landmark which the Act itself had placed between those who were subject to the penalties of the law and those who were not would be at once effaced. The Act itself however had in unequivocal terms confined the summary words of proceeding in the Sessions to prisoners. They therefore formed the exception which established the general rule. The learned Gentleman concluded by saying that it was on these grounds he claimed the Writ of Mandamus which he had applied for - and that in making this application he was actuated solely by public motives and with no view as he had before stated to cast imputation on the body to whom he prayed that the writ should be directed.  The Solicitor General then rose on behalf of the Magistrates who he said had come before the Court for direction how to proceed at the Sessions merely on account of an opinion which he had given on the jury question and which militated against the opinion given by the Attorney General. It was with diffidence that he had brought himself to differ on this point with his learned Friend. The grounds of that difference he was not now fully prepared to state but he would rather with every disadvantage which he had laboured under proceed with the discussion; of so much importance did he consider the immediate disposal of the question before the Court to the Colony at large than that it should remain any longer undecided. He should in the first place consider the Attorney General's statement and then go on to his own. The Act of Parliament itself formed the sole ground for their consideration. The authorities that had been cited did not he conceived apply. That Act had constituted Courts here varying considerably from the Courts in England from the peculiar circumstances of the Colony which it was not necessary particularly to state because they were well known. Those circumstances had proved sufficiently cogent to induce the Legislature to introduce a different mode of trial here not only with regard to criminals who were deprived of a jury but also in civil causes. This shewed that the Legislature thought the Colony unripe for trial by jury. He would refer to the 5th clause of the late Act which he read throughout and then proceeded to read the 6th clause which regulates the mode of trial in actions at law. After this he passed on the 19th clause by which the Courts of General or Quarter Sessions are created and which say not a word as to the trial of any questions by a jury as it would have done if the Legislature had intended that a jury should have prevailed there and not elsewhere. In that case a jury must have been held however great the absurdity of giving to an inferior jurisdiction what a superior did not possess. It was certainly true according to a maxim of law "expressio unius est exclusio alterius." An expression of this sort was to be found in the two first clauses of the Act to which he had referred where a different mode of trial was pointed out; and there being no exception in the 19th clause there could be no intendment against the former mode of trial. The learned Gentleman then denied the position of the Attorney General that the appointment of a Court of Sessions necessarily involved a jury and other common law incidents. This was a Court not known to the common law. Its powers were derived from Acts of Parliament. Nor could he perceive the applicability of the cases quoted from Viner's Abridgment and which went to shew that where no information was mentioned indictment must be understood. As little was the position warranted that when a Court was created by the King or Parliament a jury was essential. In many cases a Session of Magistrates was held even in England without a jury. With Magistrates alone for instance rested the decision of facts in cases of bastardy. It would he was confident have been much more satisfactory to the Magistrates to have put the same interpretation on the Act as the Attorney General. It would have saved him too the pain of differing with his learned Friend. It was of vital importance to the community at large of vital importance to the Magistrates themselves that the real meaning of the Act should be ascertained as a preliminary to their proceeding. No person could be more competent to decide on this question than his Honor who had heard all the arguments used on the passing of the Act. He apprehended that his Honor would find no difficulty in deciding on the case. He admitted the general principle of law that Acts of Parliament were to be construed not by the expediency of the measure but by the intention. He submitted that the Magistrates could not try differently from the Supreme Court. On the subject of expediency great inconvenience would arise from a jury; no jury could be assembled without great inconvenience in distant parts. It would be equally inconvenient for suitors to come to Sydney. The Parliament could not have overlooked the fact of the thinness of the population of the country on the one hand and the hardship of coming to Sydney on the other. He apologized for not having been prepared with authorities in support of his arguments; but the urgency of the case requiring immediate decision would he hoped hold him excused.  The Attorney General in reply admitted that it was highly necessary that an immediate decision should be had on this subject. As to any argument however to be derived from the mere question of expediency upon which the Solicitor General had dwelt so much - that was a contracted view of the subject which he certainly should resist. Parliament it was true had chosen one course in one court not definitively however but obviously with a view to change as the limited duration of the act and also many provisions in it sufficiently demonstrate. Government too might have intended this court as an experiment; and it was extremely probable indeed that they might have meant it as a preliminary essay; on which to base the introduction of trial by jury generally. That a jury was soon anticipated here was obvious from the Act itself; and if they were meant as an experiment the argument which had been derived from the inconvenience of the thing was at least balanced. The Attorney Geueral [sic] had argued that because a jury was taken away in Sydney where the population was comparatively so much denser than in any other part of the colony that it could not prevail elsewhere. It did not follow necessarily that Courts of Session should be held at the out-stations. It was left to the Governor to assemble the Sessions where he pleased. Country Sessions might be dispensed with; at least there was an option with the Governor - which he would doubtless exercise discreetly. If this clause implied that a jury was not necessary it would follow that free men could not be tried at all; for they could not be deprived of trial by jury by mere implication. And the known rule that all parts of an act of parliament must be carried into effect if possible would be prevented; if no meaning were attached to the first part of the clause. The argument on the other parts of the Act which provided for another mode of trial had been pushed much too far - in making them by implication stretch into application here. The Sessions though not strictly courts of common law were nevertheless held according to the course of the common law; and in those cases to which the Solicitor General had inferred where the decision of facts was left to the Magistrates - that power was given them by express provision which proved that they would not otherwise have possessed it. Courts of Quarter Sessions it was true had not been held time out of mind; but it did not thence follow that they were not to be [hel?] d with common law incidents; and although those courts did frequently decide in a summary way that is without a jury yet that summary authority was always specially vested in them by act of parliament; and it was because no such special authority was vested in them here that he had arrived at the conclusion that they would not act here without the intervention of a jury.  The Chief Justice then proceeded to pronounce his decision. The question for the consideration of the Court he said was raised upon the section of the present Judicature Act which directs "That Courts of General or Quarter Sessions shall be holden in New South Wales at such times and places as the Governor shall appoint; and such Courts shall have power and authority to take cognizance of all matters and things cognizable in Courts of General or Quarter Sessions in England so far as the circumstances and condition of the Colony shall require and admit." The statute then went on to clothe the Courts of Sessions so instituted with a summary jurisdiction over the persons and conduct of felons under a state of conviction and specified the punishment to which that class of the community should be liable. It appeared that His Excellency the Governor in pursuance of the power given to him by the Act issued his Proclamation some months since appointing certain times and places for holding Courts of Sessions within the several settled districts of the colony. The Magistrates of Sydney assembled at the time appointed but did not proceed to impanel Juries or try offenders in consequence it was stated of some doubts entertained how far they were empowered by the Act to summon and impanel Juries. They submitted their doubts to the Governor who caused the matter to be referred to the Law Officers of the Colony; and differences of opinion being entertained by them upon the policy of the law in respect of the mode of trial in the Sessions it was thought expedient to raise the question in some tangible form for the decision of the Supreme Court. With this view the Attorney General applied for a rule for a mandamus to which the Magistrates had appeared that day and instructed the Solicitor General as their counsel to state the grounds upon which their doubts had arisen. In prononncing [sic] my opinion continued his Honor I shall first review the law as it stood before the passing of the Act; and then examine the clauses of the Act and see how far they have altered the pre-existing law. Upon the first point I must assume that New South Wales must be considered as a colony strictly English and falling within the description of that class of colonies in which all the laws of England are in force so far as such laws may be applicable to its condition. The statute 27 Geo. III. ch. 2. sec. 1 the first New South Wales Judicature Act clearly warrants this assumption when it recites the necessity of "a colony and civil government" in New South Wales. Besides this statutable recognition of its English character the nature of the original settlement of the colony brings it within that class to which I have assigned it; namely a colony in which the English law prevails as the birthright of the subject and the bond of allegiance between the colonists and their sovereign. The Chief Justice then mentioned the authorities from the books (Show. P.C. 31. 32. 2 P. Wms. 75. Salk. 411. 1. Bl. Com. 107.) to shew that if an uninhabited country be discovered and planted by English subjects all the English laws then in being are immediately there in force; and observed that the authority in Peere Williams was of the most conclusive kind as it was a resolution of the highest tribunal to which such a question could be submitted viz. the King in Council which was to the Colonial Courts what the House of Lords was to other Courts in England - the Court of Appeal in the last resort. From these authorities he said it was clear that the prerogatives of the Crown extended to the colonies in common as part of the laws of the realm; and that in exercise of the prerogative His Majesty might institute Courts of Justice in the colonies with powers corresponding to similar Courts in the mother country; in corroboration of which his Honor read an opinion (from 2 Chalm. 154. 1 Cowp. 212.) of Sir Philip Yorke and Sir Clement Wearg (Attorney and Solicitor General) purporting that the Crown by commission might authorize the Governor of the Leeward Islands to institute a Court of Oyer and Terminer to proceed in a similar manner to Courts of Oyer and Terminer in England provided there were a sufficient number of inhabitants qualified to serve upon a Grand and Petit Jury; and also an opinion of two other crown officers Strange and Ryder (Id. 175) that the Governor of South Carolina might erect a Court of Exchequer in that colony with powers analogous to the Court of Exchequer in England. This power of the Crown was indeed too clear to be doubted; but as Courts of Sessions stood entirely upon a statutable foundation and were of more recent origin he proceeded to shew how far the statutes enabling His Majesty to create such Courts were applicable to the colonies. The Chief Justice recited Reeve's History of Newfoundland (page 101 & seq. and 2 Chalm. 234-5) to prove that the Governor of Newfoundland in virtue of his authority derived from the mere prerogative of the Crown had appointed Justices of the Peace in that colony and that it was the opinion of that first-rate lawyer Lord Hardwicke as well as of Mr. Fane the law adviser to the Board of Trade that Justice so appointed had power to hold Courts of Sessions and were also invested with authority to do all such acts as Justices of the Peace in England had so far as the circumstances and condition of the colony might require. It was held by the other lawyers that this prerogative of the Crown so delegated to the Governor could not be taken away except by the express negative terms of an Act of Parliament (Id. 239.) From these authorities the Chief Justice said "I deduce my opinion that His Majesty in virtue of his prerogative as the fountain of justice might at any time authorize the Governor of New South Wales to appoint Justices of the Peace and proper officers for the administration of justice and that the Governor in exercise of such power might nominate Justices and have required them to meet in Sessions convene juries and proceed according to the law and practice in England. So stood the law and so would it have been applied had the case before the Court arisen before the passing of the present Judicature Act." He then proceeded to enquire whether the law had been since altered - and how far such alterations might affect the question before the Court. "The Governor of New South Wales is authorised by his commission to appoint Justices of the Peace and other necessary Officers for the better administration of justice and putting the law in execution. Had His Excellency thought fit to require the Justices to meet in Sessions they must have proceeded strictly in conformity with the practice of English Courts of Sessions. The cases cited by the Attorney General establish his position. The 19th section of the Act under consideration enabled the Governor to convene Courts of Sessions at such times aud [sic] places as he might deem expedient; and it also enabled him with the assistance of the Chief Justice to regulate the forms of practice and proceeding of such Courts - thus placing the creation and operation of the Courts of Sessions within the discretion of His Excellency - a discretion to be exercised upon a sound view of what might best consist with the interests of the community committed to his government. The expediency or inexpediency of putting such Courts into action is one of pure policy to be regulated by the judgment and discretion of the Governor. But when called into action they must proceed conformably to the practice of the Sessions in England. After enabling the Governor to appoint the times and places of holding Courts the section of the Act alluded to went on to affirm that which was clearly the law before; namely the power of the Court of Sessions to take cognizance of all matters cognizable in similar Courts in the mother country so far as the circumstances of the Colony should require. That such was the law before the whole current of authorities which I have cited said the C.J. fully establishes and they receive confirmation from the manner in which this clause is framed. The first part of the clause is in the most general terms - it gives no new power it imposes no new restraint - while the latter part of the same clause which invests the Court with a new jurisdiction and requires it to proceed in a manner different from the course of proceeding in England observes the greatest exactness in describing the persons offences and complaints over which the Court is to exercise this new jurisdiction as well as in pointing out the precise measure of punishment to be inflicted. Had the Act of Parliament contained no other clause referring to the subject under consideration I think it may be confidently assumed that the question relative to the Trial by Jury in the Sessions could not have been raised - we must therefore look to other clauses of the Act and the supposed policy of Legislature as evidence by those clauses for true sources from which the doubts and differences of opinion have been drawn. The first sections of the Act authorized His Majesty to create a Supreme Court of Judicature uniting within itself the various jurisdictions and powers of the principal Courts of Common Law Equity and Ecclesiastical in England. The manner of trial however was essentially different from trials in England. In criminal cases the trial was by the Judge and seven Officers of the Army or Navy; and in civil cases by the Judge and two Assessors unless the parties plaintiff and defendant may have concurred in an application for Trial by Jury. From these clauses it had been argued that as the Supreme Court was restrained from proceeding by a jury it could not be the intention of the Legislature to entrust the exercise of that very delicate and questionable mode of trial to the Court of Sess  Rule made absolute.  Alexander Pearce a convict was arraigned for the murder of a fellow-prisoner named Thomas Cox at or near King's River in the month of November last and he pleaded - Not Guilty.  The circumstances which were understood to have accompanied the above crime had long been considered with extreme horror. Report had associated the prisoner with canibals; and recollecting as we did the vampire legends of modern Greece we confess that on this occasion our eyes glanced in fearfulness at the being who stood before a retributive Judge laden with the weight of human blood and believed to have banquetted on human flesh! It was therefore with much satisfaction we heard His Majesty's Attorney-General whilst candidly opening his case for the prosecution entreat the Jury to dismiss from their minds all previous impressions against the prisoner; as however justly their hearts must execrate the fell enormities imputed to him they should dutiously judge him not by rumours - but by indubitable evidence. The Learned Gentleman then proceeded to detail certain confessions made by the prisoner before the late much-lamented Lieutenant Cuthbertson. (Commandant at Macquarie Harbour) and at his examination by the Rev. Robert Knopwood - confessions which although in some respects inconsistent would yet when coupled with all the facts merit the most serious attention. From them it appeared that as other evidence would prove the prisoner and the deceased on the 13th November absconded from their duty into the woods each of them taking his axe and the prisoner being heavily ironed; -- that they for several days wandered on without provision and reduced by weakness until on the following Sunday evening the deceased and prisoner arrive at King's River; -- a quarrel then arose because the deceased could not swim and after prisoner had struck him on the head three times with his axe the deceased seeing him about to go away (his irons having been knocked off) said in a faint voice "for mercy's sake come back and put me out of my misery!" Prisoner struck him a fourth blow which immediately caused death; he then cut a piece off one thigh which he roasted and ate; and after putting another piece in his pocket he swam across the river with an intent to reach Port Dalrymple. Soon afterwards however he became so overwhelmmed with the agonies of remorse that he was constrained to re-cross the river and on seeing a schooner under weigh from the Settlement he made a signal-fire which on being seen induced the pilot boat to put off and take him on board. He was then conveyed to the harbour where he publicly owned the murder and said "He was willing to die for it." The Attorney-General concluded a thrilling tale of almost incredible barbarity by calling Thomas Smith who swore that in November last he was coxswain to the Commandant at Macquarie Harbour; he knew the prisoner and the deceased; they absconded from Logan's gang on the 13th; on the 22d Pearce made his signal-fire on the beach near King's River and was taken back to the Settlement; he said "Cox had died and he had cut off a bit of his flesh to shew what had become of him." Witness on the following day was ordered by the Commandant to go with prisoner and get Cox's body; he went and it was found. The head was away the hands cut off the bowels were torn out and the greater part of the breech and thighs gone as were the calf of the legs and the fleshy parts of the arms. Witness said to the prisoner "how could you do such a deed as this?" he answered "no person can tell what he will do when driven by hunger." Witness then said "where is the head?" the answer was "I left it with the body." Witness searched for and found it a few yards off under the shade of a fallen tree; witness then picked up what appeared to be the liver of the deceased and an axe stained with blood on which prisoner was asked "if that was the axe with which he had killed Cox" and he answered "it was." The fragments of the body were quite naked; near them were some pieces of a shirt and the cover of a hat. There had been a fire near the body and not far from it lay a knife which witness picked up. The body was then placed in two rugs and witness with the prisoner returned to the Settlement. Prisoner on being asked "where Cox's hands were" said "he had left them on a tree where the boat landed;" a search was then made for them but they could not be found. Prisoner said "he had cut off Cox's flesh to support him on his intended journey to Port Dalrymple but when he had crossed the river something came over him and forced him to return; he threw the flesh into the river made a sign and gave himself up."  William Evans of the Waterloo schooner had gone on shore to take the prisoner who said "Cox was drowned in the King's River." Prisoner's hands were fastened and his pockets searched in one of which was a piece of flesh; he was asked "what that was?" and said "it's a piece of Cox and I brought it to shew that he is lost." Witness heard the Commandant say to prisoner "tell me Pearce did you do the deed?" prisoner answered "yes and I am willing to die for it." Witness asked him "why he had killed Cox?" he said "I'll tell no man until I am going to suffer."  Many other witnesses were then called who corroborated the above depositions in every essential point; and proved that the clothes and hat worn by the deceased when he absconded were those which the prisoner wore when he was taken on board the pilot boat; but that the hat covering had been taken off.  The prisoner's written confessions were afterwards most fairly commented on by the Chief Justice who addressed the Jury at considerable length with much solemnity and submitted to their consideration whether or no it was fully proved that the deceased had died from blows inflicted by the prisoner? and then even if he had so died whether as a quarrel had been stated to have occurred before death the prisoner was guilty of the crime charged or of manslaughter? The Jury retired for a short time and found a verdict of - Guilty.  Alexander Pearce. - In our Paper the week before last we noticed the execution of this criminal for the Murder of Thomas Cox the leading facts of whose untimely death have already been reported in this Gazette. From a much respected Gentleman in whose knowledge and veracity the most unbounded confidence may be placed we derive the following particulars which it is to be hoped may excite a proper feeling among that class of society to which it is earnestly addressed:--  The Rev. Mr. Conolly who attended this unfortunate man administering to him the consolations of Religion addressed the crowd assembled around the scaffold a few minutes before the fatal drop was let to fall in words to the following effect:-- He commenced by stating that Pearce standing on the awful entrance into eternity on which he was placed was desirous to make the most public acknowledgment of his guilt in order to humble himself as much as possible in the sight of God and Man; -- that to prevent any embarrassment which might attend Pearce in personally expressing himself he had requested and directed him to say that he committed the murder of Cox under the following circumstances:--  Having been arrested here after his escape from Macquarie Habour Pearce was sent back to that Settlement where the deceased (Cox) and he were worked together in the same gang. Cox constantly entreated him to run away with him from that Settlement which he refused to do for a length of time. Cox having procured fishhooks a knife and some burnt rag for tinder he at last agreed to go with him to which he was powerfully induced by the apprehension of corporal punishment for the loss of a shirt that had been stolen from him. For the first and second day they strayed through the forest - on the third made the beach and travelled towards Port Dalrymple until the fifth when they arrived at King's River. They remained for three or four days in an adjoining wood to avoid soldiers who were in pursuit of them and were all the time from the period they started without a morsel to eat. Overcome by famine Pearce determined to take Cox's life which he effected by the stroke of an axe while Cox was sleeping. Soon after the soldiers had departed Pearce occupied the place they had been in where he remained part of a day and a night living on the mutilated remains of Cox; he returned to the Settlement made signal and was taken by the pilot who conveyed him to Macquarie Harbour where he disclosed to the Commandant the deed he had done being weary of life and willing to die for the misfortunes and atrocities into which he had fallen.  The Rev. Gentleman then proceeded to state that he believed it was in the recollection of every one present that eight men had made their escape last year from Macquarie Harbour. All these except Pearce who was of the party soon perished or were destroyed by the hands of their companions. To set the public right respecting their fate Pearce is desirous to state that this party which consisted of himself Matthew Travers Bob Greenhill Bill Cornelius Alexander Dalton John Mathers and two more named Bodnam and Brown escaped from Macquaire Harbour in two boats taking with them what provision the coal-miners had which afforded each man about two ounces of food per day for a week. - Afterwards they lived eight or nine days on the tops of tea-tree and peppermint which they boiled in tin-pots to extract the juice. Having ascended a hill in sight of Macquarie Harbour they struck a light and made two fires. Cornelius Brown and Dalton placed themselves at one fire the rest of the party at the other; those three separated privately from the party on account of Greenhill having already said that lots must be cast for some one to be put to death to save the whole from perishing. Pearce does not know personally what became of Cornelius Brown and Dalton; -- he heard that Cornelius and Brown reached Macquarie Harbour where they soon died and that Dalton perished on his return to that Settlement. - After their departure the party then consisting of five men lived two or three days on wild berries and their kangaroo jackets which they roasted; at length they arrived at Gordon's River where it was agreed that while Mathers and Pearce collected fire-wood Greenhill and Travers should kill Bodnam which they accordingly did. It was insisted upon that every one should partake of Bodnam's remains lest in the event of their ultimate success to obtain their liberty any of them might consider himself innocent of his death and give evidence against the rest. After a day or two they all swam across the river except Travers whom they dragged across by means of a pole to which he tied himself. Having spent some days in distress and famine it was proposed to Pearce by Greenhill and Travers that Mathers be killed to which he agreed Travers and Pearce held him while Greenhill killed him with an axe. Living on the remains of the deceased which they were hardly able to taste they spent three or four days through weakness without advancing beyond five or six miles Travers being scarcely able to move from lameness and swelling in his foot. - Greenhill and Pearce agreed to kill Travers which Greenhill did while Pearce collected fire-wood. Having lived some time on the remains of Travers they were for some days without anything to eat - their wants were dreadful - each strove to catch the other off his guard and kill him. - Pearce succeeded to find Greenhill asleep - took his life - and lived on him for four days. He was afterwards for three days without any sustenance - fell in at last with the Derwent River and found some small pieces of opossums &c. at a place where the Natives had lately made fires. More desirous to die than to live he called out as loudly as he could expecting the Natives would hear him and come to put an end to his existence! Having fallen in with some bush-rangers with whom he was taken Pearce was sent back to Macquarie Harbour from whence he escaped with Cox as has been already stated for whose death he is now about to suffer.  Alluding particularly to those who ought to be deterred from the commission of crime by examples like the present how often said the Rev. Mr. Conolly does the justice of Providence bring to light the dark deeds of death! and how frequently do we see it verified that "Whoever sheds the blood of Man by Man shall his blood be shed!" Having stated that the unfortunate Pearce was more willing to die than to live he concluded by entreating all persons present to offer up their prayers and beg of the Almighty to have mercy upon him.  A TRUE AND TERRIBLE CONFESSION of the CANNIBAL ALEXANDER PEARCE A CONVICT  HOBART TOWN July 20 1824  This man was executed yesterday for the horrible Murder of a fellow prisoner named Thomas Cox at or near King s River in the month of November 1823 The circumstances which accompanied the above crime have long been considered with extreme horror and the large and curious crowd assembled around the scaffold glanced in fearfulness at the being who stood on the gallows before them laden with the weight of human blood and known to have BANQUETTED ON HUMAN FLESH.  The Rev. Mr. Connolly who attended the unfortunate man by administering to him the consolations of Religion also addressed the assembly a few minutes before the fatal drop was let to fall with the following words: - "He would commence by stating that Pearce standing on the awful entrance into eternity on which he was placed was desirous to make the most public acknowledgment of his guilt in order to humble himself as much as possible in the sight of God and Man.  That to prevent any embarrassment which might attend Pearce in personally ex-pressing himself he had requested and directed him to say that he committed the murder of Cox under the following circumstances: - Having been arrested here after his escape from Macquarie Harbour Pearce was sent back to that Settlement where the deceased (Cox) and he worked together in the same gang. Cox constantly entreated him to run away with him from the Settlement which he refused to do for a length of time. Cox having procured fishhooks a knife and some burnt rag for tinder he at last agreed to go with him to which he was powerfully induced by the apprehension of corporal punishment for the loss of a shirt that had been stolen from him.  On the 13th November they absconded from their duty into the woods each of them taking his axe and the prisoner being heavily ironed. For several days they wandered on without provision and reduced by weakness until on the following Sunday evening the deceased and prisoner arrived at King's River. A quarrel then arose because Cox could not swim and Pearce struck him three times on the head with his axe. Pearce then freed himself of his irons and Cox seeing him about to go off said in a faint voice for mercy s sake come back and put me out of my misery!  Pearce then struck him a fourth blow which immediately caused death; he then cut a piece of flesh off one thigh which he roasted and ate and after putting another piece in his pocket he swam across the river with intent to reach Port Dalrymple. Soon after-wards however he became so overwhelmed with remorse that he was constrained to recross the river and on seeing a schooner under weigh from the Settlement he made a signal fire which on being seen induced the pilot boat to put off and take him onboard. He was then conveyed to the harbour where he publicly owned the murder and said 'he was willing to die for it'"  The Rev. Gentleman after this thrilling tale of almost incredible barbarity then proceeded to state that: [97] "He believed it was the recollection of every one present that eight men had made their escape last year from Macquarie Harbour. All these except Pearce who was one of the party soon perished or were destroyed by the hands of their companions. To set the public right respecting their fate Pearce is desirous to state that this party which consisted of himself Matthew Travers Bob Greenhill Bill Cornelius Alexander Dalton John Mathers and two more named Bodnam and Brown escaped from Macquarie Harbour in two boats taking with them what provisions the coal-miners had which afforded each man almost two ounces of food per day for a week.  Afterwards they lived eight or nine days on the tops of tea-tree and peppermint which they boiled in tin-pots to extract the juice. Having ascended a hill in sight of Macquarie Harbour they struck a light and made two fires. Cornelius Brown and Dalton placed themselves at one fire the rest of the party at the other. The first three departed privately from the party on account of Greenhill having already said that lots must be cast for some one to be put to death to save the whole from perishing.  Pearce does not know personally what became of Cornelius Dalton and Brown but he had heard the two former reached Macquarie Harbour where they soon died and that Brown perished on his return to that Settlement.  After their departure the party then consisting of five men lived two or three days on wild berries and their kangaroo jackets which they roasted. At length they arrived at Gordon's River where it was agreed that while Mathers and Pearce collected fire-wood Greenhill and Travers should kill Bodnam which they accordingly did. It was insisted upon that every one should partake of Bodnam's remains lest in the event of their ultimate success to obtain their liberty any of them might consider himself innocent of his death and give evidence against the rest.  After a day or two they swam across the river except Travers whom they dragged across by means of a pole to which he tied himself. Having spent some days in distress and famine it was proposed to Pearce by Greenhill and Travers that Mathers be killed to which he agreed. Travers and Pearce held him while Greenhill killed him with an axe. Living on the remains of Mathers which they were hardly able to taste they spent three or four days through weakness without advancing beyond five or six miles Travers being scarcely able to move from lameness and swelling in his foot.  Greenhill and Pearce agreed to kill Travers which Greenhill did while Pearce was gathering fire-wood. Having lived some time on the remains of Travers they were for some days without anything to eat - their wants were dreadful - each strove to catch the other off guard and kill him.  Pearce succeeded to find Greenhill asleep took his life and lived on him for four days. He was afterwards three days without sustenance but fell in at last with the Derwent River and found some small pieces of opossums etc. at a place where the natives had lately made fires. More desirous to die than live he called out loudly as loudly as be could expecting the natives would hear him and come and put an end to his existence!  Having fallen in with some bushrangers with whom he was taken Pearce was sent back to Macquarie Harbour from whence he escaped with Cox as has been already stated for whose death he is now about to suffer.  Having stated that the unfortunate Pearce was more willing to die than to live he concluded this heart-rending and awful narrative by entreating all persons present to offer up their prayers and beg of the Almighty to have mercy upon the prisoner.  We trust these awful and ignominous results of disobedience to law and humanity will act as a powerful caution; for blood must expiate blood! and the welfare of society imperatively requires that all whose crimes are so confirmed and systematic as not to be redeemed by leniety shall be pursued in vengeance and extirpated with death!  James Pharos having confessed to a robbery before a constable and afterwards denied it before the Court a sentence was pronounced to be flogged every morning until he confessed where the property was; and he gave up a watch in consequence of that sentence.  James Blackburn attached to the prisoners barrack; ordered to receive twenty-five lashes every morning and be kept on bread and water until he tells who were the four men that were in company with him gambling.  William Earles attached to the clearing gang on the estate of the Reverend Samuel Marsden; ordered to be confined in a cell on bread and water until he tells where an absolute pardon is given to him by John Durrah to take to Dr. Douglass.  A Rule was granted by the Court on the 15th ult. calling on Mr. Rowe to shew cause why he should not pay certain monies into Court and answer the matters contained in the following affidavit:-  Caleb Wilson of Sydney maketh oath and saith that one J. Price mariner being indebted to this deponent M. Landers and M. Leburn; and the said Price having put into the hands of T.D. Rowe gent. one of the attornies of this Hon. Court a certain claim which the said Price had for a share as a mariner on board a certain ship or vessel called the Emerald of which one N. Thornton of Hobart Town merchant was captain and owner to be recovered against the said N. Thornton; the said Price in order to liquidate the debts so due by him as aforesaid gave deponent and the said Landers certain orders on the said T.D. Rowe for the amount of their respective debts directing the same to be paid out of the amount of the said claim when the said T [sic] D. Rowe should recover the same from the said Thornton; that the said T.D. Rowe indorsed on the order to pay Landers a promise to pay the amount when he received it from Hobart Town; that the said Price also gave the said Leburn a power of attorney to receive the monies due to him; that the said power of attorney was drawn by one W. Freeman clerk to the said T.D. Bowe [sic] in his office; that it was afterwards transferred by an indorsement thereon in the hand writing of the said Freeman in the office of the said T.D. Rowe by the said Leburn to this deponent; that the said Freeman declared that the said power of attorney and the said indorsement were sufficient to enable this deponent to receive the amount of the claim of the said Price so soon as the same should be recovered from the said Thornton; that after the arrival of the amount of the said claim from Hobart Town the said T.D. Rowe made various appointments with this deponent and Flood (whose husband John Flood has a similar claim) to meet them at his office under a promise of a settlement; that this deponent and the said Flood attended there several times under a hope that a settlement would be effected but to no purpose; the said T.D. Rowe constantly putting this deponent and the said Flood off with one shuffling excuse or other; that after various tricks and devices of this kind; the said T.D. Rowe said on or about the first of October now last past that if this deponent and the said Flood would call at the close of the court on that day he would settle with them;   that they accordingly both waited on the outside of the court house till the court was over intending to follow the said T.D. Rowe to his office; but that the said T.D. Rowe instead of proceeding to his office went in another direction; and upon this deponent accosting him to ask when he would be at his office he replied in a sharp and petulant manner "I am not going there at all to-day I shall be there some time to-morrow; I cannot be bothered;" or words to that effect; that this deponent has heard and verily believes that the said T.D. Rowe in about a week or ten days after this made an application to this hon. court for leave to pay the proceeds of the said Price and Edridge's action against the said Thornton into court alleging that he did not feel himself secure in paying over this money to the persons (meaning this deponent and the said Flood) authorized to receive the same; that on this occasion Mr. Wentworth (deponent's and the said Flood's counsel) got up and consented that the money should be so paid into the hands of the officer of this hon. court; but that deponent has heard and verily believes that the said money has not yet been so paid; and that the said T.D. Rowe means if possible to cheat and defraud this deponent and the said Flood out of their money; that a bill of costs of which a copy is hereunto annexed was handed to this deponent by the said Freeman the said T.D. Rowe's clerk; but that this deponent considering the charges therein contained irregular and excessive refused to allow the said charges without the authority of this hon. court; that this deponent has heard that the said T.D. Rowe on making the above application to this hon. court alleged among other things in reply to an observation from Mr. Wentworth that the said Price countermanded by letter the payment which he had so directed as aforesaid to be made to this deponent and others; but although it is true that the said payments were countermanded in the first instance by the said Price yet that the said Price afterwards in the said T.D. Rowes [sic] office before the said Leburn and Freeman revoked the said letter acknowledging the impropriety thereof and that the said monies were justly due to this deponent; that this deponent moreover swears to the best of his recollection and belief that this letter was written to the said T.D. Rowe before the power of attorney so given by the said Price to the said Leburn and by her transferred to this deponent; this deponent further says that he believes the said T.D. Rowe will not pay the said monies unless he be thereto compelled by some summary process from this hon. court which he therefore prays may issue against him.  On Wednesday the 22d ult. cause was shewn and Mr. Rowe observed;- that he conceived there had been a total absence of decorum and gentlemanly feeling in the framing of the affidavit by the plaintiff's Counsel. Unjustifiable language had been made use of and unfounded imputations cast upon him. He believed as a legal practitioner his zeal and attention to the interests of his clients was unimpeached. He would read to the court the affidavits of himself and his clerk Mr. Freeman as to what actually was the case.  T.D. Rowe of Sydney Gent. one of the attornies of this Hon. Court maketh oath and saith that he was requested on or about the month of September 1822 to commence actions against N. Thornton of Hobart Town by J. Price T. Edridge and J. Morgan for the recovery of certain sums of money alledged to be due by the said N. Thornton to the said J. Price T. Edridge and J. Morgan for and on account of certain shares of oil said to be due to them by the said N. Thornton. And this deponent saith that in pursuance of such retainers he this deponent did commence such actions in the Honorable the then Supreme Court of this colony and did recover verdicts against the said N. Thornton for and on account of the said J. Price of £62 12s. 2d.; and for and on account of the said T. Edridge of £100; and for and on account of the said J. Morgan of £98 9s. 6d. as appears by the records in the said court. And this deponent saith that he was put to vast trouble and inconvenience in endeavouring to obtain the amounts of such judgments both by himself and through his agents at Hobart Town aforesaid that by a letter from G.C. Clarke Esq. his own agent at Hobart Town of date the 29th June 1824 it would appear that the amounts of the said different verdicts with the costs had been received by the said G.C. Clarke. That this deponent expecting Mrs. Rowe the wife of him this deponent would shortly thereafter arrive at Hobart Town wrote to his said agent and requested he would pay the amounts over to her which in the month of August or thereabouts was accordingly done and which sums were handed over to this deponent on or about the month of September last past; on Mrs. Rowe's arrival at Sydney and not till then were the amounts of the said verdicts or any part thereof ever previously thereto received by this deponent or carried into account with the said G.C. Clarke or with any other person authorized by him and this deponent. That the said Price by an authority of date the 26th May 1823 requested in writing that he this deponent would not pay over to any other person or persons whomsover any amount but the sum of £18 to Mrs. Leburn; that the said J. Price was put into gaol at Sydney on a criminal charge and did retain the said T.D. Rowe in writing to appear for him and defend him and one Smith as appears by his retainer; that the said Price is also indebted to this deponent in the sum of £16 2s. 6d. or thereabouts for extra costs as between attorney and client as by bill of costs adjoined hereto will appear. That the said Wilson who claims the amount of said judgment so obtained by said Price against said Thornton is likewise indebted to this deponent in the sum of £13 9s. 4d. as appears by also his said Wilson's costs hereto attached. That the said Landers never applied personally to this deponent since the recovery of the said money for the said Price but he has on various occasions previously and has offered to make a considerable reduction therefrom provided this deponent would pay him the money which he declined doing; and this deponent has heard and believes that the said Wilson has since received the same from the said Landers at a much less sum than it expresses[.] That had the said Landers presented the said order to this deponent at the proper place and time he this deponent would have settled the same immediately as it seems that the said order is dated subsequently to the directions of the said Price not to pay any person but the £18 to Mrs. Leburn and as this deponent verily believes that he was specially directed to pay the said Landers by the said Price or otherwise deponent would not have accepted the same.   That this deponent could not have promised payment to the said Wilson and Margaret otherwise Mary Flood as he has on very many occasions told W. Freeman his clerk and this deponent verily believes also the said Wilson and Mary or Margaret Flood that he would not as this deponent conceived be safe in paying the said Price's and Edridge's monies in the claimants thereof except as regards said Mary Leburn's order of £18 and Landers' of £10; but he this deponent verily believes that he hath frequently told the said Wilson and Leburn that he was ready and willing to settle with them according to said Price's directions the said two several amounts of £18 and £10 but which they refused except they procured the whole sum recovered. That this deponent hath frequently desired the said Freeman to enquire what sums were claimed by the said Wilson and ordered that the amount thereof might be paid into this hon. court after deducting the costs that were individually due to this deponent from said Price and Wilson; and this deponent hath heard and verily believes that the said Freeman did call on the attorney for the said parties as late as the day before the motion made by Mr. Wentworth; viz. the 14th ult. when the said Mr. Wentworth as the said Freeman informed this deponent in answer to the said Freeman's request to know what sum was alleged to be due to the said Wilson that the same might be paid into court said he believed the whole amounts received were claimed; and this deponent denies that he ever meant to cheat and defraud the said Wilson or Flood out of their money; and he verily believes that the said Wilson is actuated in this proceeding solely with a desire to harass this deponent; and this deponent saith that he does not feel himself authorized to pay over the amount of the verdict recovered by the said Edridge to said Flood as he hath frequently informed said Flood; but hath desired said Flood to procure a regular power of attorney from said Edridge which said Flood directed to be prepared and which was accordingly prepared; and that then and as soon as the same was presented to this deponent he would instantly hand over the amount to the said Flood; and this deponent lastly saith that in this matter as also in the matter of Price before referred to he has in view solely the security of his client's property; the honor of the profession and the honor of his character; and that the said Price has neither verbally nor in any other manner personally to this deponent countermanded the said authority of the 26th May 1823 herein before referred to.  Upon these grounds Mr. Rowe resisted payment of the several claims; and farther because it was not in his power to ascertain that the documents produced on the other side were not obtained by artifice or fraud; and he was therefore bound to be diligent in securing the safety of his client's property; and it did not appear to him that at the time of Edridge leaving the colony he was indebted to Margaret Flood in any such sum as she now claimed.  Mr. Wentworth proceeded to remark that with regard to the particular allusions Mr. Rowe had thought proper to apply to him they were only consistent with the usual tone and tenor of his observations. In the construction he had put on them they tended colourably to complain of a want of courtesy towards him as a practitioner of the law; whilst in point of fact they implied that Mr. Rowe by reason of his office was not to be called to account for any impropriety of conduct of which he might be guilty. The personal scurrility Mr. Rowe had indulged in he should not reply to; it was beneath his notice. In justice to himself however he would state a few facts which would shew that no want of courtesy was justly imputable to him. When this business was first put into his hands about four months since he had made a civil application to Mr. Rowe by letter requesting to be informed upon what grounds he resisted the claim of the plaintiff's; to which Mr. Rowe had not thought proper to return answer. When Mr. Rowe however heard that the case had been entrusted to him (Mr. Wentworth) Mr. Rowe apprehensive without doubt of the exposure that would be consequent on the motion which he anticipated would be made against him applied (in a manner which clearly indicated sheer trickery and device) to the court for leave to pay the monies in question into the hands of the proper officer; and to this application he (Mr. Wentworth) had assented. Now it might naturally be expected that when an order to this effect had been made by the consent of both parties it would have been complied with at once and that the matter would have here ended; but strange to say however up to the present time not a fraction had ever been forthcoming. He repeated then that this application could not have been for any other purpose than to delay proceedings for the moment and it certainly had been attended with that effect. If Mr. Rowe thought that because he was a practitioner of the court he was to be allowed to detain the money belonging to suitors of the court until it suited his pleasure or convenience to hand it over to the owners; and that no other member of the profession was in the meanwhile to wrest it from him on the score of courtesy; that would indeed be establishing a system of legal depredation; to which he for one would not be a party.  The learned Counsel then proceeded to observe that it behoved a court of justice narrowly to watch over its officers; and on no occasion to countenance their malpractices; otherwise a court of justice would soon degenerate into a kind of legal whirlpool in which all debts of the community would soon be engulphed and not one disgorged again. It would indeed be a lamentable case for the client if he had to go to the trouble and expense of a suit at law and then to have his trouble and expense iterated in order to compel his law agent to be honest.  On contrasting the affidavits on both sides it would be seen that many of the most material allegations had been unanswered; and the others replied to in a most shuffling and evasive manner. To establish this fact it would only be necessary to observe the way in which Mr. Rowe had answered a fact charged in all the affidavits - that he had from time to time evaded the payment of these monies notwithstanding repeated promises made to the applicants jointly and severally that he would settle with them. Mr. Rowe had said he could not have made any such promises. Why he had not sworn that he did not make them. He Mr. W. would tell him that if he had so sworn he should have been treated with an assignment of perjury. Mr. Rowe had thought fit to complain of the term "trickery and evasion" which had been applied to him in the affidavits; but if this was not trickery and evasion he did not know the English of these terms. Mr. R.'s affidavit might not perhaps amount to a direct denial that he was probably afraid to hazard; but it was an avowance as equivocal as ever came before a court of justice: an avowance which was of itself a serious malpractice. He would advert to the article of costs amounting to £40. If taxed by the master he was confident there would be a reduction of at least one half. This bill it would be recollected was independent of the costs awarded by the court. These had already been paid. These were the costs between attorney and client. Here was an attempt to swallow up the poor man's all with enormous costs.  He had no wish to deprive Mr. Rowe of a just recompence for his labour; but with regard to those allegations which formed so prominent a feature of his affidavit and which dwelt at such length on the immensity of trouble and inconvenience which he (Mr. Rowe) had had in recovering his money he (Mr. R.) thought that those allegations might have been omitted. Every person connected with the court was perfectly aware of the nature of the pains and inconveniences consequent on (Mr. R.'s) professional avocations. One thing was evident now that the money was recovered it would be as safe for the claimants whoever they might eventually prove to be in the hands of the officer of the court as in those of Mr. Rowe.  He (Mr. W.) would admit that the powers of attorney which the present claimants held were not altogether a very safe authority for the payment of the money; but it must be remembered that there was no precise form of words necessary to constitute an instrument of this sort. Such a document prepared with the utmost regularity and precision was revocable by an ordinary letter. He would however admit what he had admitted on a former occasion that if Mr. Rowe had any doubts as to the sufficiency of these instruments he acted right in not paying the money except under the court's direction. What he now complained of was that the court's directions had been obtained for the payment of this money into the hands of its officer more than two months since and that this direction was yet to be complied with. This was a serious malpractice of itself. It was in fact to treat the authority of that court with contempt: and to make it in the public estimation a mere solemn mockery. The learned Counsel contended that a case of gross malpractice had been satisfactorily made out and in conformity to the custom of the English courts on such occasions he considered it due to his own character and to that of the other practitioners of the court to move that the name of Mr. Thos. Deane Rowe be erased from the rolls of the court.  The Chief Justice said he was at a loss to conjecture why the order of the court had not been complied with relative to the payment of the money. He again directed the money to be paid into the hands of the registrar of the court; and he would then make such orders for its disposal as the nature of the case should require. He would take the earliest opportunity of perusing these affidavits and would then give his decision according to the facts contained in them.  On Wednesday the 29th ult. the defendant applied for leave to amend the affidavits filed by him relative to the article of costs into which some inaccuracy had inadvertently crept.  The Counsel for the plaintiff objected to such a mode of proceeding as altogether irregular at this stage of the business; he conceived that such an amendment would have come with better grace at the time the affidavits were filed and not after public comments had been made on the subject. The learned gentleman intimated his intention of making certain of Mr. Rowe's allegations the subject of ulterior proceedings. The Chief Justice did not object to a supplemental affidavit being filed to be considered as strictly explanatory of the alleged errors.  On this day the Chief Justice proceeded to decision. In giving his decision on this matter the Chief Justi[c] e remarked that in the view he had taken of it two points appeared to be embraced; there was an application to the court calling on Mr. T.D. Rowe to pay into the hands of the officer certain sums of money the balance of damages awarded in two actions brought by Price and Edridge against Thornton after deducting his bill of costs therefrom; and secondly to answer certain allegations made against him; he would proceed to review the affidavits and the manner in which they were made. Those on behalf of the plaintiff attributed to him shuffling and irregular conduct in first promising to pay the money to Mrs. Flood and afterwards refusing to comply with his promise. It did not appear that he promised to pay Flood himself though he might subsequently to his wife. He certainly thought that an Attorney had a discretional power even if he had made a promise as to the fulfilment of it if upon a cool deliberation of the subject it should appear to him to compromise the interest of his client. The affidavits of the defendant assigned as a reason for the non performance of his promise that he did not feel himself authorized to do so; he had told Mrs. Flood very many times he did not consider it safe. Mr. Wentworth had objected to a particular expression as equivocal; namely "that he (Mr. Rowe) could not have promised to pay" and expressed his opinion that for "could" should have been substituted "did" not. He (the Chief Justice) did not consider that as a strong objection inasmuch as he had mentioned the circumstance to his clerk Mr. Freeman and confidentially communicated his doubts on the subject. As regarded the validity of the promise that was not for his decision at the present time. The practice of making loose promises was highly improper and could not be too highly reprobated; they tended to instil a belief into the minds of persons that there is no recovering money lodged in that court.  In the case of Price he would look at Wilson's affidavit as it comprehended all the leading facts of the case. Price had given a power of attorney to Mary Leburn executed in Rowe's own office by his own clerk who said that was sufficient to enable him to secure the payment of the money. But this was not the act of Rowe as it did not appear that he was present at the time; he was left to conjecture the particular degree of relationship subsisting between them. There was a subsequent letter from Price desiring him not to pay any other person than Mary Leburn dated May 26 - the orders having been given in February and March; this rendered those writings invalid. The money to Mary Leburn Mr. Rowe had expressed his readiness to pay at any time that he might be called on. It did not appear that he was aware that this instrument was in the possession of Wilson. It was clear that he had promised to pay on the 1st of October. Whatever might be the real merits of the case there should not have been a promise made without some intention of meeting the parties and giving an explanation of his reasons for witholding [sic] the money. Accuracy should be invariably attended to - exact and scrupulous should be every thing connected with time and place and all other requisites. If the observance of a promise was necessary in common places how much more so was it when connected with the proceedings of a court of law contrary practice tended to weaken the force of justice. Powers of attorney and orders he admitted were disputable things. The court were in a dilemma as the parties were not present. Hawkins in his pleas of the crown observes that unnecessary extension of proceedings in order to cause additional expense and swell the bill of costs is a gross and palpable fraud. The graver charges had been met by the affidavits on the adverse side; on other and less material charges he had sufficiently animadverted; and he trusted that would have the effect of preventing a recurrence of a like practice and that this would be the last case of the kind he should ever hear of. The money he should order to be paid forthwith into the hands of the registrar; and the costs to be referred to the master not considering himself competent to pronounce so heavy a penalty as that which was sought; namely incapacitating him from practising in that court after having so long been permitted to do so; he should therefore with the rule he had given dismiss the matter.  On the motion of Mr. Wentworth costs were ordered to be paid by Mr. Rowe.  Martin Benson James Cogan John Sprole Anthony Rodney and Eliza Campbell stood indicted for the wilful murder of their late master John Brackfield of South Creek. There were two counts in the indictment; the first charging Martin Benson as principal and the others as accessaries. The second count charged all as principals. In the indictment the date of the murder was laid on the fifth day of November 1824. The first evidence called on the part of the prosecution was Mr. Pat Hill R.N. surgeon examined the body of the deceased on the 13th of November being the morning after the murder; found the body lying near the bed side on the floor. The face was black and swoln; and blood issued from the nose and mouth. The right leg and thigh were forcibly contracted and the left perfectly straight. The arms were in an inverted position. There was also a contused wound on the head above the ear considered that the deceased met his death by strangulation was present at the confession of Nich. Kaine --- - had in consequence of some information therein contained examined the person of Martin Benson and found a wound in his knee; the body when he examined it could not have been long dead.  John Attwood constable of the district of Cabramatta lives at South Creek about 130 rods from the house of the deceased --- - the land is clear could hear distinctly the dogs of Mr. Brackfield bark. Mr. B. kept 5 or 6 --- - one was remarkably ferocious. Though a near neighbour he could not approach the house without calling for some person to pacify the dogs --- on the night of the murder and all the day previous heard no noise; saw the deceased in a field with his wife in the afternoon; the next morning was called up by Benson and Kaine; the former said in reply to a question "he hardly knew what had been the matter; the house had been robbed the doors had been broken open and the trunks all tossed about; did not know where his master was but supposed he was murdered." He requested Kaine to stop at his house while he went to the house of the deceased. Benson told him that at eleven o'clock the night previous the hut was attacked by bushrangers; two of whom stood at the door and window presenting loaded muskets at them and threatening them with death if they moved. When within 20 yards of the house met Eliza Campbell; asked her what was the matter she answered she did not know. He then went into the house and found the deceased in the position described by the last witness; the body was quite cold. The female prisoner said she had been dragged from her bed into her mistress's room; upon whose bed she was thrown and forcibly held there by a man who burst the front door open and was followed by another --- - she heard a noise in her master's room.  This witness had a horse running in a paddock about 30 rods from the house of the deceased on the evening of the murder in good order and fit for work; on looking at him the morning following he found him much injured; his head knee and shoulder were wounded; and his back swoln and very tender --- - evidently from the effects of hard riding and an overload. Knows Jones and Chittenden; they live about 7 miles from the deceased's; Jones is married examined the door was of opinion the injury it received was effected after the door had been opened employed some black men to search the grounds contiguous but could at the time discover no traces of footsteps. Several days after at the bottom of the garden several tracks were visible; as of persons jumping over the railings; but went no further than that spot; went in company with Nicholas Kaine and a black to a water hole distant from the house 200 yards; and agreeable to the statement made by Kaine 2 guns and a hammer were found by the black; knows one of the guns belonged to the deceased; had frequently borrowed it himself. The men said that the bushrangers staid at the hut two hours; saw the deceased alive on the 12th on the 13th saw him dead.  John Hutchins is a carpenter and fencer; knows Brackfield's house; examined it the following Sunday; is of opinion that the violence used to the door was done while open; knows all the prisoners; went with a constable on the Thursday following to Eliza Campbell; she was in bed but got up and sent for some beer; she said she had no hand in the murder but knew who had; she asked him to take care of a small bundle for her; he desired her to throw it among the potatoes; but saw no more of it.  Nicholas Kaine one of the accomplices having been cautioned against any deviation from the truth on either side proceeded to give his testimony as follows ---   I was in Mr. Brackfield's employ at the time of his death; and all the prisoners in number seven. On leaving their work on the night of the 12th of November Anthony Rodney told the men in the hut he had seen Eliza Campbell at the back door and told her if she should hear a noise in the night not to make an alarm to which she assented: but would render no assistance; she came to the hut in half an hour and asked what they were going to do: Rodney told her they were going to rob the house and kill their master; she then went into the house and returned after dark in her chemise; he heard her say to Benson and Rodney who were standing outside the door that she was going to bed with her master and they might come in and do what they thought fit; they expressed surprise that she should sleep with her master; she replied that he had threatened to send her to the Factory for two pieces of tobacco he had found in her pocket; she then went into the house saying she would leave the back door open for them. Wright was also present. Martin Benson immediately fetched Attwood's mare; Sprole Rodney and witness went to catch their master's two horses but returned without them; witness went into the hut and sat down; the other two went again to the field and caught the horses and tied them to the railing; heard Benson ask them what was the best thing to put the master to death with; one of them replied "choke him;" Benson said his silk handkerchief would do the business well; he immediately went to his box and took it out; went towards the house followed by Cogan Sprole and Rodney; witness went and hid himself behind the pig-stye contiguous to the house; in two minutes after saw Eliza Campbell run out in her shift; she went into the hut came out quickly and ran towards the road; in about 12 or 13 minutes Rodney followed her; then Benson came out and went to the hut; Rodney and the woman returned from the road and also went into the hut; while he was standing behind the pig-stye he heard a groan as of a person being strangled; saw one of them come out of the hut with a lamp in his hand and was followed by Rodney and Eliza Campbell; shortly after they came out and went to the storehouse; cannot say who opened the door; brought some beer out and drank --- Eliza Campbell then discovering him there asked him what he was doing; and requested him to drink; he at first refused but afterwards complied; Benson and Rodney brought out three sacks which they afterwards filled with tea sugar and wearing apparel and a saddle and bridle; Benson loaded the constable's mare and rode away; the other two Sprole and Rodney followed with the other horses; after they were gone Cogan and Eliza Campbell brought a dish full of papers and burned them; he did not enter the house himself that night; the men with the horses returned an hour before day break; they put two of the horses in the stable; and the constable's mare was left in her own paddock; heard them returning very fast; they brought no bag with them back; they went into the house and brought out some victuals; Benson said they had left the property at "Long Tom's" (Chittenden's); and that Jones was not at home; he also said that Attwood's mare fell and that he had cut his knee across her head; Sprole and Benson asked him to throw two guns and a hammer into the creek which he did; he afterwards pointed out the spot to the constable; about ten in the morning Eliza Campbell asked him to draw her a bucket of water and gave him two other hammers to throw in; they were dry and clean; usually hung over the fire in the back kitchen; heard Benson say they had taken 34lbs. of tea and 31lbs. of sugar; went for a constable with Benson; should know the handkerchief used to strangle his master; had often seen it before.  Cross examined.  Has been confined in gaol with Wright by himself; never talked of making up a story to tell the Court; did not go into the house that night himself at all; was confined from Tuesday till Sunday and did not communicate what he knew all that time; denied to Mr. Throsby that he had any knowledge of the transaction; afterwards said if he could have his clergy he would tell; does not expect either pardon or reward; was promised both by Mr. Throsby; expects he may yet be tried himself; leaves all to the goodness of the Court; heard Eliza Campbell say in the morning it was time to put her in her mistress's room; and desired one of them to give her a blow to mark her; one of them replied he had not the heart to do that; washed nothing the next morning.  Lewis Solomon is a carpenter and undertaker was called on to inter the deceased; his suspicions were excited by Eliza Campbell refusing to put the shroud on the corpse; when he insisted on her doing it she turned pale and trembled very much; said to constable "that woman's guilty."  Matilda Jones is the wife of Stephen Jones lives on the Orphan School Farm about 3 miles from Liverpool; knows Long Tom; also Martin Benson; saw the latter on the night of the 12th about eleven o'clock; he came on horseback; she said to him "For God's sake what brings you here at this time of the night" and desired him to go away; is positive he is the man.  David O'Hara and John Knoblett belonging to clearing parties at Cabramatta saw three men on horseback riding very fast on the night of the 13th in the direction from the Orphan School Farm to South Creek; mentioned it the next morning when they heard of the murder; do not know either of the prisoners.  Mr. Ikin chief constable of Liverpool and George Greenhill a constable deposed to finding the property now produced; part on the premises of Chittenden alias Long Tom; and part concealed in the ground adjoining.  Mr. Henry Marr of Sydney proved having sold several of the articles now produced and found concealed at "Long Tom's" to Mr. Brackfield.  Mrs. Brackfield widow of the deceased identified the property so found as belonging to her husband.  This witness has been for many years in a state of mental derangement; but at this time was lucid and sensible.  Samuel Wright the other approver corroborated all the statement of Nicholas Kaine; he farther added that he heard Sprole say that he and Rodney had hit him on the head with a hammer; and Benson said he had tied the handkerchief and strangled him; heard them say that Long Tom's wife weighed the tea and sugar; while they were gone Cogan and Eliza Campbell burnt a shirt because it was bloody; Sprole also on his return burned another for the same reason; saw a hammer lying on the dresser in the kitchen next morning; Eliza Campbell said that was the hammer they killed the master with; it was very bloody; she took a cloth and wiped it off; he was in bed while the murder was perpetrated; shortly after they went out to kill the master. Eliza Campbell ran into the hut and said "Lord have mercy they are killing the master;" she then went out; he did not go into the house till next morning.  Joseph Leon a prisoner in the gaol was employed by Sprole to write a letter to Eliza Campbell; saying therein that the property had been left at Jones's; that he was the putter up of this business; and was clearing himself at their expense; that he had received £6 all but a dump for some of the property.  This was the case on the part of the prosecution. No evidence was called on behalf of the prisoners. The Chief Justice in summing up expressed a strong opinion of the guilt of the prisoners. The Jury retired for about ten minutes and then returned with a Verdict of guilty against all.  On behalf of the prisoners an arrest of judgment was moved on the ground of its having been laid in the indictment that the murder was committed on the 5th and proved in evidence that it was committed on the 12th of the month. The Court adjourned till Saturday when the Attorney and the Solicitor-General on the authority of Lord Hale's pleas of the Crown contended that the objection was groundless which was the opinion of the Court; and the Chief Justice therefore proceeded to pass sentence of death upon the prisoners.   The Chief Justice observed that it was not his intention to wound the feelings of the unfortunate persons or to aggravate their sufferings by entering into the details of the evidence; it was his duty to tell them that no recommendation for mercy could with justice be forwarded to His Excellency on their behalf.  They were ordered for execution on Monday the 24th inst. and their bodies to be delivered to the surgeons for dissection.   The male prisoners were very little affected when their awful doom was communicated to them; the female on the contrary appeared deeply sensible of her unfortunate situation.  During the whole of the trial the prisoners manifested perfect apathy; they heard the evidence of Kaine particularly describing the perpetration of the horrid deed with hardened indifference they made no defence when the verdict was pronounced. The woman for the first time betrayed a slight agitation; exclaiming "she was innocent." The men said their lives had been sworn away by two vagabonds; and Rodney observed "that he would haunt them as long as God Almighty would give him liberty."  They were all young men; the oldest Sprole not appearing more than 30. Mar[t] in Benson who is represented as being the most active looks about 22. The countenance of Rodney was dark and forbidding.  THE EXECUTION.  The unfortunate convicts were attended to the place of execution on Monday by the Rev. Mr. Cowper and the Rev. Mr. Therry Roman Catholic Clergyman. After the usual devotions in which they all joined were ended the culprits ascended the fatal scaffold where they were again joined by the Rev. Clergymen; they acknowledged the justice of their sentence; one of them sung two hymns and the whole of them evinced the utmost penitence for their crime --- - they were then launched into eternity.   These were two rules for a Mandamus. The first of them calling upon the above named justices or any other two of his Majesty's justices of the peace in this colony to issue a fresh warrant to the chief constable to return true lists of jurors to serve at the next Quarter Sessions; the other calling upon the chief constable himself to obey a former warrant which the above named justices had previously directed to him and which it appeared he had not complied with in due form of law. These two rules however were substantially the same and intended only to present the same question to the court under a double aspect.   The Attorney General against the rules said that he would confine himself to one formal objection viz. that the various Acts of Parliament which provided for the making of jury lists were to be considered as mere municipal acts contemplating only English arrangements and therefore not in force in this colony. He contended that it was a general proposition of law that Acts of Parliament did not extend to the colonies unless they contained specific words of reference and as the acts in question were confined by the letter of them to England and Wales they could not for that reason be construed as extending to this colony: and they furthermore did not extend to it as being altogether inapplicable to its state and condition. It was upon this ground that Sir William Grant when Master of the Rolls held that the statutes of mortmain did not extend to the colonies. It was clear therefore that the applicants for these rules had mistaken the summoning officer. The rules should have been against the sheriff to whom the returning of juries belonged at common law. The justices of the peace in this colony had no thing to do with this duty. They could not be considered in any another light than mere individuals. For this reason the learned gentleman prayed that the opinion of the court might be given on this point in the first instance and if that opinion should be against him that a future day might be named for entering upon the merits of the question whether those persons who now prayed for these writs were as they termed themselves in their affidavits really good and lawful men and as such qualified to act as jurors. Their qualification in any other respect would not be disputed.  The Solicitor General conceived the question to be this Is a mandamus to be granted in this particular case? He would lay it down as a general proposition in every sense of the word incontrovertible that a mandamus could not be granted by that court when another specific remedy could be obtained elsewhere; and such a remedy he concluded might be had at the Quarter Sessions either by subjecting the chief constable to the penalties created by the statute of Ann or by indicting him at common law. This writ it would be recollected was a high prerogative remedy not to be granted on every slight and trivial occasion. If the applicants for it felt themselves aggrieved by the omission of their names in the jury lists why had they not complained to the Sessions? why had they not punished the chief constable in the manner before mentioned? He would tell that court the reason. They or rather their counsel wished by this mode of proceeding to give an importance and cast a dignity around this question to which it was not intrinsically entitled. Their clients were considered by them as personages of too much consequence to crave redress at so humble a tribunal as that over which he had the honor to preside as chairman. The sheriff was obviously in this case the returning officer and not the magistrates who could only be regarded as individuals. In a legal point of view they were mere friends of the sheriff and had voluntarily intermeddled in a matter which did not in the slightest degree concern their office. It could not be disputed that the Acts of Parliament relating to juries did not apply in the early stages of the colony and if they did not apply then he would beg to enquire when did they begin to apply? Again if the legislature had meant the jury acts to be in force here would they have altered the qualifications as they have done in those cases where juries are permitted? This innovation in so material a point shewed that it was not contemplated by the legislature that the statutes of 7 and 8 William III. 3 and 4 Ann and 3 Geo II. extended beyond the precincts of England. He therefore submitted that this rule must be discharged.  Dr. Wardell in reply stated that the line of argument adopted by the Attorney and Solicitor-General was the same as he himself had adopted on a former occasion when a writ of mandamus was applied for against the Sheriff. He at that time contended that the Acts of Parliament relating to the returns of jurors did not apply and that therefore it was necessary to look to the Sheriff as the Common Law Officer. He was then told the Acts of Parliament prescribed a proper remedy and that the Sheriff was not liable for omissions of the constables. After the Court had so strongly intimated an opinion that the Acts of Parliament were in force here he should not presume to argue that they were not. Whatever might have been his opinion he certainly did think that when Courts of Quarter Sessions were introduced into the colony under the 4 Geo. 4 it might properly be concluded that all the requisites for rendering them effective all the incidents and all the regulations with which they were surrounded and as they existed in England were introduced along with them that the component parts should all be put together by the same law; and that therefore the method of reforming juries must be adopted here the same as in England. If the acts were not in force in this colony then the application of the former occasion was right if they were the present application was right. It had been said that if the constable had not performed his duty he might be punished by indictment; and therefore another remedy existed. He admitted that the constable might be indicted and indeed he had been indicted and a true bill had been found against him and he no doubt would be punished. But that was not a remedy for the future; it was only a punishment for the past; it would not get the names of the applicants inserted in the panel. The petty constables could not be punished at all because they had not been required to do any thing. It had been contended by the Solicitor-General that the parties applying had no legal right; but if it were considered what was the origin of juries it was evident that to exercise the office of juror was a legal right. Every one by the common law had a right to be tried by his peers that right was reciprocal; and the right to be tried by involved the right to try his peers.   The Solicitor-General had also said that the writ of mandamus was a high prerogative writ and ought not to be used except on extraordinary occasions but on the authority of cases almost innumerable it had been granted for very trivial purposes such as "to compel a justice of the peace to admit a constable;" "to appoint overseers of an extra parochial vill" &c. There was a case it was true in term reports wherein Lord Kenyon was stated to have said that they might as well issue a writ of mandamus to a constable to compel him to execute a warrant but there was an evident distinction between a common constable and a high constable; between a petty officer and one who even in this colony in all probability would soon become a man of great consequence with his two or three thousand a year. Besides it was a general principle regulating the granting of the writ of mandamus as appeared by the case of Rex v. Everett that it would be to oblige an officer to do his duty and even in cases where there was a penalty for his neglect. It was clear then that there was a legal right; it was clear also that there was no prospective remedy however true it might be that the chief constable might be and had been indicted in poenam for the past. In concluding the learned Gentleman begged to refer the Court and especially the Solicitor-General to the 11 Henry 4. c. 9 which was a statute declaratory of the common law; and it was equally operative here whether the statutes relative to impanelling juries were or were not in force. By that statute it would appear that unless juries were returned according to law and by the proper officers and not at the "denomination" of any other persons all the proceedings in session were coram non judice and every conviction void. It was evident that the juries had not been properly returned; as neither by the common nor statute law was the chief constable authorised to make out lists for the Sheriff as he had done either by himself or with the assistance of others. He therefore considered that all the convictions at every Quarter Sessions in the colony might be quashed and that the judgments were ipso facto void.  Mr. Wentworth said he should first notice the objection of the Attorney General. That learned gentleman had laid it down as a general proposition of law that Acts of Parliament were not in force in the Colonies without specific words of reference to the colonies; that upon this principle the jury acts which might be considered as municipal acts contemplating only English arrangements could have no efficacy here. Mr. Wentworth said that whatever might be the value of the inference which the Attorney General had drawn from the above premises the premises themselves were not sustainable; for if all the statutes which were in all British Colonies recognized to be valid were examined it would be found that nine tenths of them took no notice of the colonies whatever. The learned Solicitor General in support of the Attorney General's view of the Acts which relate to the mode of returning juries after sagely premising that it was clear juries did not exist at the first establishment of this Colony had pertinently inquired "why did not these Acts of Parliament apply in the early stages of the Colony; and if they do apply now when did they begin to apply?" He should have no difficulty in helping that learned gentleman out of this legal dilemma. The acts in question did not apply in the early stages of the Colony; because the legislature of the mother country wisely foreseeing that the description of persons who would necessarily form the population of the colony during "the early stages of the colony" would be legally incapacitated to act as jurors suspended the operation of the jury acts by an act passed in the 27th year of his late Majesty and instead of trial by jury which would otherwise have prevailed here gave the colony a court consisting of a judge advocate and six or seven officers of his Majesty's forces by sea or land. As for the Solicitor General's second query the jury acts he begged to inform him began to apply here from the moment the Court of Quarter Sessions sprung into existence. To contend as the Solicitor General had done that if the legislature had meant the jury acts to apply here they would not have altered the qualification as they have done was completely to beg the question. This was assertion not argument. It might be that the legislature had made the jury qualification here so high in order to ensure the respectability of juries. It might be that they were better acquainted with the local circumstances of the colony than the Solicitor General and meant this qualification to be a substitute for the qualification required in England. It was impossible however now to dive into the intention of the legislature; but at all events it was clear that this "altered qualification" did not extend to the juries at the Quarter Sessions; it only referred to juries in that court.   This was obvious from the place which the clause creating this high jury qualification occupied in the body of the act itself. As to the objection which had been taken to this application for a Mandamus; he would fully concede it to be a general proposition of law that this writ would not lie where there was any other specific remedy for the grievance complained of; and it was because his learned friend and himself had arrived at the conclusion that there was no other specific remedy that they had adopted the present course of proceeding. It was for this reason and upon the authority of the cases cited by his learned friend cases which he could not help thinking were strictly in point that they had applied for this rule. The case cited by the Solicitor General and so triumphantly relied on by him was altogether wide of the question. It merely decided that though the King's Bench will grant a Mandamus to compel justices of the peace to do their duty generally; yet that it will not dictate the decision at which they are to arrive; in other words that the judges of the court would not arrogate original jurisdiction in matters which should only come before them by certiorari or other proceedings in the nature of an appeal. He could not but lament that the principal law officers of the government should have evinced so much antipathy to meet this question fairly. Had he been in their place after the minute and accurate account which had been lately given to the colony of the proceedings that took place in the various stages of the act by which this court was constituted he must confess that he should have observed a very different course. The debates on that act must suffice to satisfy every unprejudiced mind that his Majesty's Ministers had no wish either to encourage or to perpetuate those unhappy distinctions which have grown up in this colony and which if not obliterated must go on increasing in inveteracy until they end in explosion. But unfortunately there was notoriously in this community a sinister and mysterious agency more powerful as it would seem than the government of the mother country itself. It was through this secret and baneful intervention that the emancipists had hitherto been deprived of that right which they now sought; and through it would they be deprived of it if possible for ever. He trusted however that justice would at length be done to so large and respectable a class of the colonists; and that the efforts which had this day been made to deprive them of their right by those who if he mistook not the line of their public duty ought to be arranged on the other side of the question would no longer prevail.  Chief Justice. "This is an application for a writ of mandamus on the affidavits of Daniel Cooper and Simeon Lord two inhabitants of the town of Sydney who complain as a grievance that their names have been omitted in the jury lists returned to the Quarter Sessions; that this omission has had an injurious effect tending to degrade them in the general estimation of society and that they are "remediless in the premises" unless this writ be granted to them. In every case of an application of this sort there must be to uphold it a right and the absence of a specific remedy to enforce that right. That right in this instance has not been disputed; and it would be inconvenient and useless therefore to moot it at present. A special case might have been framed with that view at the Sessions. Supposing the parties to have the right they claim the question is whether they are without remedy unless through the interposition of this court. That is the cardinal point of the argument on which every thing hinges. It appeared to me that the argument of the Attorney General goes much too far. I understood him to say that none of the statutes with regard to the impannelling of juries apply here and this view of the case he supported by a dictum of a very eminent lawyer certainly Sir William Grant in a case where the question was whether the statutes of mortmain were or were not in force in the colonies. He decided that they were not on the ground that the policy of those statutes was not applicable to the colonies. But the Attorney General in his argument to day has gone much further in his opinion than any of the principles deducible from that case would warrant. The general question of the applicability or non-applicability of Acts of Parliament is a very wide question. The common law is admitted to belong to colonies; but does it altogether apply to the state of all or any of our colonies? It is quite clear that there are some parts of that law which do apply to the colonies and other parts which do not. Now if there be some parts of the common law applicable to the condition of our colonies and some parts not and yet that law be in force there upon what principle can it be contended that the statute law of the realm is not be used in the same way? The legislative power of the country happens now to belong to King Lords and Commons conjointly; but there was a period in our history when it was vested solely in the King. Much of what is termed the common law proceeded from the edicts of the sovereign alone; but it at all events is to be presumed to have proceeded from the legislative authority of the day in whomsoever that authority may have been centered.   I consider the argument of the Attorney General not more objectionable in its principles than its application; every court has of necessity a power to compel its officers to execute its process. This is a power necessarily incident to the creation of courts. In this case the magistrates who are the judges of the court of sessions by their precept directed to the chief constable an officer of that court commanded something to be done which has not been done. The statute of 4 Geo. IV. 4 cap. in merely directing courts of Quarter Sessions to be held here I think necessarily implies that they are to be held as in England. This at least is the inclination of my mind; though I will not at present be considered as giving on this point a definite decision. If such be the case the provisions of the statutes of William and Ann without doubt apply here. Upon general principles then the court of sessions having power to act must also possess the means of acting; and one of those means would be by the intervention of those officers whom the law has made its ministerial agents. Now in the statutes before referred to the 7 and 8 William III. and also 3 Geo. II. there is a specific mode of punishing the high and petty constables for not making out proper jury lists. There it will be seen that these acts point out a specific mode of redress for the injury here complained of. Supposing the sessions authorized to enforce this mode; this brings me to the question whether the parties here are really remediless except through the writ of mandamus for which they now pray. It was clear from all the authorities and it had indeed been partly conceded by their learned counsel on both sides that this writ will only lie where there is a want of some other remedy. This principle is clearly deducible from the decision of Lord Mansfield and also from the case of the King v. the Churchwardens of [sic]. The principle of these cases goes to shew that the King's Bench will compel the inferior court to proceed generally but no further. The learned counsel in support of this rule have cited no cases to controvert this principle. One case cited rather confirmed my view than otherwise. If the chief constable had not been subject to the orders of the sessions the question would have been different. Cases have been cited in which this writ has lain for admitting constables sextons and other inferior ministerial officers to shew that it is not necessarily confined as was contended by the Solicitor General to dignified occasions. These cases are undoubtedly law at present; nor would the law have been consistent in this particular if it had permitted this writ to issue for the purpose of compelling the admission of the higher class of officers and withheld it from the lower class. I have been considerably arrested by the argument of one of the learned counsel in support of the rule which tended to shew that a fatal omission had been made by the chief constable by his neglecting to issue his precept to the petty constables in obedience to the statute; and that this omission had rendered the writ now sought the only remedy to which the applicants could resort. And if I had granted a mandamus here it must have been against that officer and not against the magistrates; who it was admitted by the affidavits of the applicants themselves had discharged their duty. If the sessions should be found without power to enforce the warrant of the justices which it was clear the chief constable had disobeyed that would alter the state of the question and afford sufficient reason for recurring to this court. At present however I think that there is a specific legal remedy elsewhere. That is my reason for discharging this rule."   This was an action for breach of Promise of Marriage. Mr. Wentworth stated the Case as follows. The action was brought in the name of Miss Cox's Father who is a tradesman residing near the old Government wharf in Macquarie-place; and the Defendant is Captain Payne lately engaged in maritime affairs but now carrying on business as brewer and vintner in George-street. In the early part of the year 1822 the defendant became intimate with the family of the plaintiff; his attentions were attracted by the plaintiff a young lady then about 16 years of age and possessing some attractions. The defendant became more frequent in his visits; and ultimately disclosed the [s] entiments of his mind to the parents of the young lady; he solicited their permission to pay his addresses to the plaintiff; declared his views as being the most honourable; and expressed an hope of being allied to the family. This request was acceded to by the plaintiff's family; and was afterwards admitted as the suitor of the young lady; however on one occasion it appears that some misunderstanding arose between the lovers in consequence of the defendant having come to the plaintiff's house (at a very late hour one evening when the whole of the family had retired to bed with the exception of the plaintiff and a female servant) in a state of intoxication; this method of behaviour was strongly reprobated by the plaintiff at the time who entreated of the defendant that if he could not select any hours but those to come there he had better stop away; but this it will be proved was a slight difference which existed but a very short space of time. Some letlers [sic] passed between them which had the result if possible of increasing their affection. However it appeared that some letters had been received by the young lady from a young man of respectable connexions containing proposals of marriage. The learned Counsel was prepared to hear of some letters which the plaintiff might have written to the defendant wherein some ambiguity of expression would be construed into a meaning contrary to what was intended. The learned Counsel then proceeded to read several letters which had passed between the plaintiff and defendant couched in terms of the strongest affection.  The learned Counsel concluded by calling upon the Jury to award liberal damages.  Mrs. Foster examined - I know the plaintiff and remember her living in her father's house in the early part of 1822; the defendant was in the habit of going backwards and forwards to the house; knows that an intimacy subsisted between them; remembers Captain Payne writing a letter to her but cannot say what the words were but believes it contained a promise of marriage.  Elizabeth Cox - I am sister of the plaintiff I never saw the defendant write but I have seen his letters frequently (a letter was here shewn to the witness); I remember that letter having been received by my sister about three years ago; it contained a promise of marriage; the defendant visited the house in the character of my sistes's [sic] lover; his addresses were approved of by my father and mother; I never heard Mr. Payne assign any reason for protracting the match; it is now abou [sic] 12 months ago or rather more since the defendant went to sea; I was present on one occasion when a promise of marriage was made; I am not in the habit of being in my sister's room where Mr. P. used to be; I remember in the month of March a quarrel having taken place between them but do not know what it was about; cannot say that plaintiff wrote any letters to defendant in consequence of that quarrel; witness believes there was a coolness but the matter was made up again; plaintiff and defendant were intimate until the moth [sic] of July; remembers another quarrel having taken place between them from the months of April and July defendant having come to the house one evening very late and in a state of intoxication; plaintiff reprobated him for such impropriety of conduct; plaintiff wrote a note upon the subject to defendant but witness did not see it; witness remembers another letter having been sent by her sister but cannot say what it contained; but knows it was in consequence of her being offended; remembers defendant writing a note to her sister in the month of July; I know that my sister lost some letters out of a box which was kept on a table by the window; my father has a man in his employ in the name of Armstrong; I know that the quarrel was entirely made up; I remember on one evening that plaintiff and defendant were not friends; when the latter told me he would marry my sister when he left off the sea; defendant hoped that his eyes might drop out of his head if he did not; witness cannot recollect the date nor remember defendant having made any other promise.  Cross-examined --- - Cannot say how many quarrels arose between the plaintiff and defendant; the first quarrel was a long time ago; recollects a quarrel between the months of April and July; it was in consequence of defendant having come to her father's house in a state of intoxication; cannot tell how long it is since the last quarrel; there have been three quarrels; one of which was concerning a Mrs. Leverton; remembers sister having begged pardon for what she had said in first letter; knows sister's hand-writing (some letters were here shewn to the witness); they are the hand-writing of the plaintiff; never heard sister say in what manner those letters were disposed of; she had said that they were lost and could not tell how. Mrs. Frazier has walked out with plaintiff; does not know that her sister at any time met with the present wife of the defendant in the street; it is now three years since the plaintiff and defendant first became acquainted; never heard sister say that she would be revenged on the defendant; it is now about six months ago since witness lost some letters; among them were some from a second lover; does not know they are shortly to be married; or that the damages sought for by this action are to be her marriage portion.  Re-examined --- The plaintiff never to witness's knowledge gave the second lover any encouragement; he is very intimate with the family; does not know that she prefers him to the defendant; was not in Sydney when plaintiff and defendant became acquainted.  Matthew Bacon examined --- - I am acquainted with defendant's hand-writing; I was his partner (a letter was here handed to the witness); if the signature was attached to the letter I should say it was the hand-writing of defendant; witness has seen but little of his writing; principally the signatures.  Mr. Redman --- - Knows the defendant he has been in the habit of visiting his house; never proposed to him to marry one of his daughters; knows the defendant since he came into the Country; does not know that the defendant is married never asked him.  Mr. Todhunter --- - I have been intimate with the plaintiff's family for a considerable time past; observed the progress of the courtship between plaintiff and defendant; always considered that the latter frequented the house as the lover of the young lady; it was generally understood that proposals of marriage had been made by the defendant to the friends of the plaintiff; knows of some letters having passed between them; plaintiff wished witness to write some letters for her which he did; one of them contained a remonstrance against his improper conduct on one occasion; it was worded in rather a harsh manner but were both friends after; defendant continued his visits at the house; remembers plaintiff having said that some letters had been lost but she could not tell which way; plaintiff lost a letter which had been written to defendant in consequence of his going to Mrs. Leverton in the month of April or May but did not write it herself; after those letters had been sent then both parties were again reconciled.  Cross-examined --- - The reconciliation which took place was after writing the first letter now more than 18 months since it might be two years; defendant paid his attentions to plaintiff until his return from sea about 14 months ago; plaintiff never told him that she intended to decline any further acquaintance with defendant.  Mrs. Beckett examined --- - I was present at a conversation which took place in Mr. Cooper's house between Mrs. C. and the defendant; the former enquired of the defendant as to his motives for deceiving the young lady when he answered that promises and pie crusts were made to be broke.  John Williams examined --- - I know the defendant; always considered him as a man in very good circumstances; have heard him say that he would leave off going to sea when he became independent; defendant has a capital farm at Port Dalrymple worth £1700; a mill at Curryjong Brush; also a fine house situate in George-street the rental of which is £100 per annum; witness should suppose defendant worth £5000.  Cross-examined --- - Does not know but that the property might be mortgaged only judges from appearances.  Re-examined --- - Defendant carries on a considerable trade; should not suppose that such an extensive business could be carried on without a large capital; witness does not know but that the money might have been borrowed.  The case for the plaintiff here closed.  The defence made by defendant's Counsel Dr. Wardell was three-fold. First he endeavoured to shew the plaintiff had in her letters released the defendant from his promise of marriage. Secondly that the plaintiff in having obtained a new suitor had evidently sustained no injury. And thirdly that the plaintiff had kept improper company; and so far justified the defection of the defendant. He contended also that promises of marriage were commonly proved very easily; while on the other hand when a release from such promises took place it could scarcely be known by any one save the parties themselves; he therefore trusted the Court would consider the slightest proof of a release of the defendant's promise of marriage in the present instance to be sufficient; the proofs he should offer to establish that point were contained in the plaintiff's letters; letters were then read in which the writer used expressions similar to these: "that she would never trouble him (the defendant) more that she never had said she would force him to keep his promise." The Counsel then read extracts from letters addressed to the plaintiff by a Mr. Sutor; one of which had been accompanied hy [sic] a present of two mountain parrots; the donor described one of the parrots as being able to sing "My heart with love is beating." He said also that he hoped when next they met he should receive from herself reciprocal declarations of affection. In the second letter he mentioned he had availed himself of another opportunity of broaching his love &c. &c.. The plaintiff was not entitled to damages continued the Counsel because she had encouraged the second lover; it appeared it was all the same to the plaintiff whom she married! Sutor was as good as the other.  After addressing the Jury at considerable length the learned Counsel proceeded to call  Francis Mitchell --- - I know that the plaintiff is acquainted with Mr. D. Sutor; some presents and letters were brought to me which I forwarded to the plaintiff which she kept for six weeks and then returned them: witness is not aware that plaintiff is shortly to be married; never knew that he received any encouragement from plaintiff.  Armstrong examined --- - I remember the defendant; I have taken a great number of notes from the plaintiff to defendant; my Mistress threatened to punish me if I carried any more; I cannot say when that was; Mrs. Cox and the servant girl threw some stones at me on one occasion for taking some letters; heard of his Mistress speak concerning a marriage which was to take place between plaintiff and Mr. Sutor.  Mr. Wentworth replied.  The Judge summed up --- and the Jury returned a Verdict of One Hundred Pounds.  CAPTAIN MITCHELL v. HOWE.  This was an action at the suit of Captain Mitchell of His Majesty's Sloop of War The Slaney against Robert Howe for a libel contained in the Sydney Gazette of the third of March last.   Dr. Wardell addressed the Court and the assessors for the plaintiff. Mr. Wentworth called witnesses to prove the publication &c.  These witnesses were cross-examined by the Attorney General who appeared for the defendant. A great deal of extraneous evidence was gone into in the course of the cross examination but it was not objected to by Counsel for Captain Mitchell as they were anxious for all possible elucidation.  The Attorney General addressed the Court for the defendant.  Chief Justice. This is an action for a libel against the plaintiff stated and proved to have been published by the defendant. The plaintiff's damages are laid at £1000. The declaration opens with the usual allegation of the plaintiff's good name fame and reputation. This averment was not necessary to be proved because the law would intend purity of character until the contrary were shewn; and the person who ventured thus to assail the character of another the law would hold responsible. The declaration contained five counts. The first set out the whole libel with a great many prefatory averments to explain its meaning and suitable inuendoes connecting the various offensive parts of the libel with those averments. The second contained three of the most material passages of the libel omitting the rest. The third recited those passages of the libel which charged the plaintiff with a want of common justice and humanity. The fourth referred to the office of the plaintiff and then went on to shew how the libel affected him in this particular; and the fifth count was to the same effect only that it set forth a different portion of the libel. The declaration then ended with an averment of damage sustained by the plaintiff both in his office and as an individual by reason of this publication. The plea put in was not guilty; and during the trial there had been much discussion and some difficulty as to the evidence which was properly received under this plea. The law on this point appeared to be that any rumours which might have been in circulation short of the facts charged were admissible; and to this extent he had allowed the evidence to go. But the truth of the charges in the libel was clearly not allowable unless under a plea of justification. Such a plea might have been put upon the record; and if sustained by the evidence adduced would have been a complete bar to this action. Without such a plea however he repeated that no specific acts either justificatory or tending to justification could be admitted. And the reason as it appeared to him of this distinction was that rumours from the vagueness of their nature could not be pleaded and facts might. Such rumours when proved went to shew that the party was not damnified to the extent of which he complained. His Honor made these observations to enable the assessors to understand and weigh the evidence which had been offered. The libel complained of was found in the Sydney Gazette of the third of March of which it appeared that the defendant was editor and proprietor. The only proof which was absolutely required on the part of the plaintiff was proof of the publication. It would then rest with the assessors to say whether it bore the meaning put upon it. The part which is charged as most libellous begins thus "The Almorah is off! the executive authority has been set at defiance and his Majesty's officers have been daringly and wantonly fired on! For the sake of Captain Mitchell and his first Lieutenant Matthews we had almost expressed a hope that the Almorah might turn out to be a lawful prize; for if such should not be the case there can be but one opinion as to the painful but necessary result originating in conduct so glaringly repugnant to every principle of justice or humanity." Was this passage calculated to cause a diminution of character to the plaintiff and to prejudice him in the opinion of his friends and the public? The Attorney General had contended that this passage involved a contingency and that the meaning of the publisher was that if the seizure of the Almorah had been illegal then the charge of felony attached but not otherwise. He could not he confessed concur in this interpretation looking at the whole libel for in another part of the same paragraph there were these words which were fully explanatory of the intention of the writer. "In the afternoon the Attorney General and Mr. Clements made another attempt to board and were welcomed by a similar warm reception. This they might have expected as Capt. Mitchell was met on his return from the Almorah and he very considerately advised them not to think of going on board; so he was well aware of the instructions he had given to his Lieutenant to shoot the Attorney General or any other Officer even in the execution of their duty." These words it struck His Honor were exempt from all ambiguity. Here it was roundly asserted that Captain Mitchell had given these instructions. But the Attorney General had further contended that a mere direction to commit felony was no felony granted. But here the direction if any were given had been acted upon; and if the act itself amounted to felony the commandment to commit it would fall under the same designation. It was not necessary however that felony should have been imputed to sustain this action. The difference between verbal and written slander was too well established in law to be now shaken; and the single point for inquiry was whether the tendency of this publication was to bring the plaintiff into disesteem and to vilify him in his character and profession. If the assessors should decide this question in the affirmative then this action would be sustained whether the publication contained an imputation of felony or not. But that felony was imputed to the plaintiff and meant to be so was obvious from another part of the article which stated that an information had been filed under Lord Ellenborough's act. His Honor did not mean to say that the mere statement of this fact amounted to any thing; but taken in connection with the rest of the article it made the meaning of the defendant extremely clear. The last part of the libel too was equally explicit on this point "with reference to firing at a defenceless boat and King's Officer some of the laws of New Zealand and China might justify the step but the mere presenting of a loaded piece by our law is death. How far the discharge of the piece may lessen the offence we are not prepared to say. After all it is an ugly affair and we should not like to be so racked with anxiety as some are for all the tea rice and dollars in the universe and even with the Almorah into the bargain." His Honor continued that these passages taken altogether certainly in his opinion contained a charge of felony. At all events they charged Captain Mitchell with a very serious offence even though it should be short of felony; and he held them to be libellous in the last degree on the character of the plaintiff and fully to entitle him to a verdict. The only remaining consideration then was as to the quantum of damages. It had been stated in evidence by Mr. Wentworth that previously to the Almorah being ordered to sea a general rumour was current of an intention to take that vessel from Captain Mitchell by force and that Capt. Mitchell believed that rumour. Mr. Wentworth had also stated that Captain Mitchell had refused to pledge himself that no resistance would be offered and further that resistance had actually been made to an attempt of certain persons to go on board that vessel. Mr. Wentworth too had stated his belief founded on the circumscribed state of society here that after this transaction a variety of rumours would probably be afloat though he does not recollect that any of them reached him. The evidence of John Thompson Mr. Allen and Mr. Berry were fully corroborative of the latter part of Mr. Wentworth's testimony and both Mr. Allen and Mr. Berry spoke pretty confidently as to certain flying reports which had reached them previously to the publication of the libel in question. It would be for the assessors to consider how far the publisher had gone beyond these rumours and also what damage Captain Mitchell might have sustained. His Honor said that he regretted most sincerely that the state of our judicature prevented this consideration from being left to a Jury: for what now were they called upon to do? to consider the value of Captain Mitchell's reputation and how far it had been damnified by this publication. A Jury selected from the community itself were the most competent to decide such a question --- and he repeated his regret that such a body was not an indispensable adjunct to this Court. With regard to the fourth and fifth counts which stated the capacity of the plaintiff and the injury he would publicly sustain in that respect he would only observe that the plaintiff might certainly be damnified in this particular by such a publication though no such damnification was or could indeed be expected to have been given in evidence. He would say nothing to the assessors as to the quantum of damages he left that matter wholly to them; for as he had before stated it was a point upon which he himself felt an extreme delicacy in hazarding an opinion. The Chief Justice and assessors then retired and after a few minutes absence they returned and brought in a verdict for the plaintiff damages £50 and all costs.  The Chief Justice in delivering the verdict of the Court stated that the assessors had given such moderate damages from the conviction which they felt that Captain Mitchell's character had not sustained and could not possibly sustain any injury from such a publication.  Dr. Wardell wished to know whether he was correct in his interpretation of the assessors' reason for giving low damages. Was it from an impression that the character of Captain Mitchell stood too high in the estimation of society to be injured by that publication. The Chief Justice observed that was the precise meaning.  The King v. Mitchell.  A Rule having been obtained in this case to shew cause why the proceedings should not be stayed till the issue of the suit on behalf of Captain Mitchell for a Condemnation of the Almorah and her Cargo at Calcutta was known the Attorney General this day shewed Cause against the Rule.  The following Affidavit disclosed the grounds on which the Counsel of Captain Mitchell obtained the Rule and now sought to make it absolute   "Charles Mitchel Esquire Master and Commander of His Majesty's Sloop of War the Slaney maketh oath and saith that a writ of trespass hath been sued out and a declaration filed against this deponent in this Honorable Court in the name of His Majesty by the Attorney General of this Colony for seizing and taking away with force and arms divers goods and chattels to wit two hundred and eighty-eight baskets of sugar four hundred and eight-one mats of wheat five thousand six hundred and twenty bags of rice three hundred quarter chests of tea and fifty-three chests of specie the alleged property of his said Majesty of great value to wit of the value of thirty thousand pounds; and also for keeping and detaining the said goods and chattels to the damage as is alleged of his said Majesty of sixty thousand pounds. And this deponent saith that the said goods and chattels arrived in this port on board of a certain ship or vessel called the Almorah on or about the seventeenth day of the month of February now last past; and that the said ship or vessel having the said three hundred chests of tea on board without the special leave and licence in writing of the United Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies or a special leave and licence in writing under their authority for that purpose was seized by order of this deponent on the opinion of Counsel that the said vessel together with her tackle apparel furniture and cargo was for the want of the said licence subjected to seizure and condemnation. And this deponent further says that after the said seizure it was his intention to institute the necessary proceedings in this Honorable Court for the condemnation of the said ship or vessel and of the tackle apparel furniture and cargo thereof and that he gave his Counsel instructions accordingly but that in consequence of divers threats which proceeded from the said Attorney General and which led this deponent to conclude that it was the said Attorney General's intention to dispossess this deponent of the said goods and chattels by forcible means and in consequence also of an opinion which the said Attorney General gave to this deponent that this Honorable Court had no jurisdiction over the subject matter of the said seizure this deponent was induced to send under the command of the First Lieutenant of his said Majesty's said sloop of war the said ship or vessel together with the said goods and chattels so claimed by the said Attorney General on behalf of his said Majesty to Calcutta in the East Indies where this deponent has been informed by his Counsel that there is a Court of competent jurisdiction to determine the validity of the said seizure; and this deponent further says that he has given Bathurst Matthews the said First Lieutenant of his said Majesty's said sloop of war positive directions to take on his arrival at Calcutta aforesaid immediate proceedings in the Court there for the condemnation of the said vessel together with her tackle apparel furniture and cargo. And that one James Tod Goodsir a Deputy Assistant Commissary General on the staff of the said Colony has been despatched as this deponent has heard and believes to Calcutta aforesaid by William Wemyss Esquire Deputy Commissary General of the said Colony for the purpose among other things of watching over his said Majesty's interest in the said goods and chattels and of claiming the same in the event of the said Court of Calcutta decreeing that the said goods and chattels are not liable to forfeiture for the cause aforesaid. And this deponent further saith that in the proceedings to be had by orders of this deponent on the arrival of the said ship or vessel at Calcutta in the said court there the right of this deponent so to seize take away keep and detain the said alleged goods and chattels of his said Majesty must necessarily be tried and determined and that the said intended proceedings will involve the same cause of action which the said Attorney General is now attempting to try in this Honorable Court contrary to his opinion so to this deponent given as aforesaid."  The Attorney General had put on the files of the Court the following Certificate from himself in reply to the Affidavit -  "I hereby certify that I did not at any time threaten to dispossess by forcible means the said Charles Mitchell of the goods chattels and property belonging to the Crown on board the ship Almorah and the subjects of the said action; and I further certify that I did not give my opinion to the said Charles Mitchell with regard to the said action but in conversation with his legal advisers I expressed an opinion that this Court had not jurisdiction to try forfeitures under the statute of the 33d year of the reign of his late Majesty George III. c. 52. section 140. and I refused to waive the objection inasmuch as I thought that the consent of parties cannot give jurisdiction to courts; but I certify that I did express to the legal advisers of the said defendant a disposition to waive forms as much as possible in order to take the opinion of the Court on the point of jurisdiction; and I further certify that I entered into a negotiation with the legal advisers of the said defendant for the delivering of the said seized cargo to the proper officers of the Crown in this Colony; and that the said cargo was secretly prepared for sea pending the negotiation and sent from this Colony although an offer was made to the said defendant on the part of his Excellency the Governor to deposit the value of the said cargo in treasury bills in the hands of the Colonial Treasurer to abide the decision of any competent Court of Law.  Sydney July 30 1825. (Signed) S. Bannister."  The Attorney General then contended for the reasons stated in his certificate and on other grounds that the Rule should be discharged.  Dr. Wardell appeared in support of the Rule and contended that it ought to be made absolute first because the certificate of the Attorney General ought not to be received at all as he had no right by virtue of his office to file an instrument of that description in the present case; secondly because the material matters stated in the certificate were not true; and thirdly on the authority of cases which he cited.  Among other things adduced to prove that the certificate set forth statements which were unfounded the learned Counsel read the following letter under the Attorney General's own hand:  "SirSydney February 22 1825.  "Being of opinion that the commodities specified in my letter to you of yesterday belong to the Crown and that you have seized them illegally - and being further of opinion that whatever doubts there may be on these two points we have not in New South Wales any tribunal by which a case of this sort can be tried I have to demand compensation for the injury sustained by the Crown in your seizing and detaining the commodities to which I refer; holding you still responsible for future damage thereto.  "I have the honor to be Sir  Your obedient servant  "To Captain Mitchell R.N.S. Bannister  H.M.S. Slany Port Jackson.Attorney General."  Mr. Wentworth also addressed the Court at considerable length in support of the Rule for staying proceedings; and the Chief Justice then delivered the decision of the Court in the following terms: --- -   From the statement presented to the Court it appeared that in this case an action of trespass had been brought by the Attorney-General in the name of His Majesty against Captain Mitchell for divers good and chattels alleged to have been the property of his Majesty and to have been wrongfully seized and taken away by Captain Mitchell. It was undoubtedly competent to the Attorney-General to do as he had done to waive the prerogative remedy and to institute on the part of his Majesty this ordinary form of action which in a similar case would have been open to all his Majesty's subjects. This was conceded by the learned Counsel on the other side. To this form of action then about the propriety of which there was no question there might have been either a plea of the general issue or a plea of justification; so as to have met the merits of the case. It had been thought expedient however instead of this to attempt the summary mode of proceeding now before the Court --- resting it on an affidavit of Captain Mitchell containing a wide statement of facts some of which were met by a certificate from the Attorney-General. He should here waive the consideration how far this certificate was admissible by way of answer to such an affidavit; because he conceived that the case might be disposed of without any reference whatever to this document. Upon the whole case as presented by the affidavit of the defendant two questions arose; 1st the great question of jurisdiction; 2dly the propriety of this summary mode of raising that question. Was this a form of proceeding for trying that question? It had been truly stated by Counsel for Captain Mitchell that causes of this sort had been of rare occurrence; and that no precedent of a case altogether similar to the present was to be found in the books. It was clear from the authorities cited by the learned Counsel in support of this rule that where two causes are depending for the same right of action either in the same or in different courts of concurrent jurisdiction the plaintiff will be driven to his election. He had in his recollection a case from Pere Williams where the court had not interfered to stay proceedings in England because an action for the same cause was going on in Ireland. The case relied on in Tidd 544 was a case where there being at the same time two actions of ejectment instituted by the same plaintiff against the same defendant for the recovery of the same premises; one was stayed till the determination of the other. In all these cases however the same parties were the litigants and therefore all these cases might be resolved upon the principle of compelling an election - a principle the equity of which could not be disputed. The case now before Court however was very different. Here the same parties were not plaintiff and defendant; but on the contrary the party who was plaintiff in this Court was defendant in the Court in Calcutta notwithstanding that the same identical right would possibly be disposed of in both Courts. He could not recollect an application precisely in point with this on a mere suggestion that the same cause was going on at Calcutta. It might and probably would be that the same facts would arise on both trials; but how could he know this or decide by anticipation on the merits of those facts? He had been attracted particularly by the argument of the learned Counsel in support of this rule which went to shew the impossibility that the Court in the present state of ignorance with regard to the proceedings at Calcutta and to the result of those proceedings could arrive at a safe conclusion; and this argument might be a good ground hereafter for suspending the trial until this Court could be put in perfect possession of the facts connected with this action which may have occurred in the Court of that Country. Upon the whole of this question then a question certainly of great nicety and novelty it did appear to him that this summary application for a stay of proceedings at this stage of the cause could not be granted. This it would be recollected was a cause of very great importance. It involved immense property; and he thought that the parties ought to have the right of appeal to a higher tribunal; from which they would be debarred if this application were granted. He should therefore discharge this rule. - Rule discharged accordingly.   The following case lately decided in the Supreme Court of New South Wales is reported as very important to Merchants in England who have any debtors or mercantile connexions in that Colony where a general feeling has evinced itself amongst the honest inhabitants on many occasions to keep in the Colony all the money they can to the prejudice of their just creditors here. We know very little of Mr. Forbes the gentleman who presides as sole Judge at this place or where he has acquired his great legal knowledge excepting that it may have been at Newfoundland where he is said to have presided as Judge for a considerable length of time. We must however say that he is extremely popular in New South Wales. It is to be remarked that none of the Colonial Newspapers made any report of the trial; but it is at the same time to be observed that the defendant had held a situation in the Courts of Law at that place.  D. Willink Esq against J.J. Moore Gent. - This was an action of assumpsit on common promises and was brought to recover the sum of 200£. due from the defendant to the plaintiff. In the year 1812 the defendant gave the plaintiff his acknowledgement for this sum &c. &c. &c. The defendant kept entirely aloof from the plaintiff from this moment and about three years after took his departure from England for New South Wales where through the interest of some friends he obtained an appointment of Registrar and afterwards of Prothonotary or Clerk to the Supreme Court. In 1821 the plaintiff having ascertained what had become of the defendant wrote to a professional gentleman in the Colony to apply to him for his just and reasonable demand of 200£. A considerable delay took place in procuring the requisite legal evidence of the demand to go into a Court of Justice with. This did not arrive in the Colony until February 1824 and in consequence of the great alterations which were taking place in the officers and practice of the Courts consequent on the new Charter of Justice the cause could not be brought before the Court until December of that year when the defendant pleaded and relied on the Statute of Limitations alone as a defence. The pleadings on the part of the plaintiff in answer to the Statute Limitations set out the fact of the plaintiff being beyond seas (i.e.) in England at the time the action accrued and had not since been within the jurisdiction of the New South Wales' Courts. The defendant rejoined that he was also in England at the time the cause of action accrued and that no action had been commenced or prosecuted within six years - to which the plaintiff answered that the defendant had left England about three years after the cause of action accrued; that the plaintiff was not bound by the laws of the realm to bring his action within a less period of time than six years and that the defendant had absconded long previous to the expiration of such six years. On the part of the plaintiff it was urged - first that the Statutes of Limitations were never meant by the Legislature to apply to the Colonies and that they were by the wording of the Statutes themselves confined to England and the parts within the four circum adjacent seas. That secondly supposing the statutes to have effect in ordinary cases within the Colony they should not apply in the present case because they must operate in the Colonial Courts in the same way that they do in the Courts at Westminster and one of the exceptions in the statute is that of the plaintiff being beyond seas at the time of the action accruing. It was further urged that the Statutes of Limitations never in any case have been suffered to work an injury to any set of men that they were salutary and beneficial acts for quitting pretended long outstanding and trumped-up demands. That the Courts in England always gave them an equitable construction suitable to the construction of the case; that if they were to be constructed according to the strict letter of the acts neither a new premise nor a case of fraud should exempt any demand from their operation both of which circumstances as well as many others of a similar nature it was every day's practice to [NN] ce contrary decisions on. That if these acts were held to apply to the present case it would work a most serious injustice not only to the present plaintiff but to all merchants who had any dealings with the numerous persons who had lately come to the Colony as it was next to impossible for any merchant in England to ascertain to what place his debtor had flown; and after having ascertained it to forward the necessary proofs of his demand to so distant a place in sufficient time* for the action to be brought before the six years should have expired. Amongst other cases cited and the one particularly relied on was that of Williams against Jones tried in the Court of King's Bench May 7th 1811 and the whole of the arguments there urged were made use of in the present case. It is cited at some length in 13 East 439 and seems to be as similar to the case in question as any two can possibly be and in which Lord Ellenborough C.J. Mr. Justice Grose and Mr. Justice Bayley (Mr. Justice Le Blanc being ill and absent) all concurred in opinion that the Statutes of Limitations did not apply. In the present case Mr. Forbes Chief Justice in New South Wales gave judgment for the defendant without alleging any other reason than that the opinions given by Lord Ellenborough and Judges Grose and Bayley in the case of Williams v. Jones were not law and that what was a legal act in one country where that act was done or committed must be held to be legal in any other country where the same act comes to be investigated or inquired into and on that principle he decided this case.  This report left Sydney on the 19th March 1825 and arrived here the 17th September so that that the transmission of any document required or a letter containing an answer might be obtained in about a year.   This important case came on for argument this day. The Solicitor General appeared on behalf of the Sheriff to shew cause against the Rule being made absolute. The learned Gentleman commenced by reading a passage from Blackstone describing the nature of a Writ of Mandamus.  He then observed that this was not an application to restore to the applicants any suspended privelege; but to impose upon them a burthensome duty from which according to the tenor of various provisional clauses in acts of Parliament it would be clearly shewn persons generally were anxious to be exempted.  He then adverted to the reasons which exempted persons from serving the office of jurors and proceeded to state that a mandamus did not lie where the party had a specific remedy: as was held in the case of "the King v. Bishop of Chester." The parties in this case were complaining without any ground. They were presuming that they would be excluded.   They were calling on the sheriff to do that which they only feared he would not do. Now the Sheriff might think it prudent or even necessary to include their names in the next pannel; that such might be for the public good he might from such an opinion from even the present argument. In the old edition of "Buller's Nisi Prius" fol. 199 the Court will not grant a writ till there was a default. No fault had yet been shewn: therefore it could only be by anticipation he would contend that the Court had no right to presume that the Sheriff would not do his duty --- - it was not because he was once in fault that he was always to continue in error.  He would admit for the sake of argument that a writ of mandamus would lie; and he would also shew that even in that case they were not in a situation to apply for it. They must not speak on belief but swear to facts. The parties besides had not shewn themselves entitled to this privelege. The statute required them to be freeholders --- - they might be so but they may not be such as the law required --- - they must remember that a larger freehold qualification was necessary here than in England. Fifty acres of cleared land or a substantial tenement was necessary. He would notice one particular point which went to impute to the Sheriff very dishonourable and even disgraceful conduct towards the Emancipists --- - (a designation technically unknown) in intentionally and wilfully omitting the names of the deponents; if such had been the case he was liable to an action at law --- - and consequently there was one special remedy which would prevent a mandamus lying[.] They complained of an intention to degrade them in the general estimation of society --- - a degradation he thought might be implied from an inclusion rather than from an exclusion. He would contend however that this was not the proper mode of proceeding. A mandamus was a high prerogative writ --- not to be applied for on all trifling occasions --- if this were granted on the present occasion he should expect to hear of persons applying for a mandamus to be sent to the tread mill or to direct gentlemen to attend that Court completely accou[t] red; to compel them to wear wigs; and to be completely a l'Anglaise at the bar.  The learned Solicitor General then contended that the names of several persons could not be included in the same writ; and concluded by moving that as the rule could not be supported it should be discharged with costs.  Dr. Wardell replied briefly to these arguments of the Solicitor General on the points of form; he regretted that the question had not been discussed on the merits in order that it might be at once decided whether the parties who were some of the most respectable gentlemen in the Colony now applying to the Court had or had not a right to be returned as jurors. He contended that the duty of a juror being of a burthensome nature did not render the fulfilment of that office the less a right; and that it was a right was evident from the original constitution of juries --- - indeed its being a burthensome duty made his clients the more entitled to praise for making the present application. With regard to the alleged defectiveness of the affidavit he stated that the parties had sworn that they verily believed they were wrongfully and wilfully excluded from the pannel and where persons could only swear to the best of their belief to do that he considered in law sufficient. As to the clause in the 4th. of Geo. IV. respecting the qualification of a Juror it was evident from the words as well as from the manner in which they were introduced that this qualification only had reference to cases in the Supreme Court where parties agreed between themselves to have a Jury impannelled. The learned Gentleman then proceeded to argue that a writ of mandamus was the only remedy left to open to the applicants for the Acts of Parliament which gave other remedies clearly had no applicability to the Colony and if they had still the writ of mandamus was the most convenient mode of bringing the question before the Court for discussion and it had been held frequently that when parties applying had even another and a specific legal remedy the Court would grant this writ; in support of which position the learned Gentleman cited several authorities and among the number 2 Mauk and Selwyn the King v. the Commissioners of Dean Enclosure where it was admitted that when an indictment would lie the Court would not therefore refuse to interfere by mandamus; for an indictment was only a proceeding in poenam for the past and not a remedy for the future. The learned Gentleman was then proceeding to shew that the emancipists really possessed the right to be returned as they had sworn in their affidavit; --- - when he was interrupted by the Solicitor General who begged to remind the learned Counsel that he had not gone farther in his argument than the points of form and must object to any departure from that subject.  Mr. Wentworth hereupon rose and said he was sorry to see such pitiful points of form resorted to to effect a delay in the decision of a great public question in which the great mass of the community were interested deeply --- - a question which had caused so much anxiety throughout the Colony. The question could not be protracted above a week or a fortnight --- - and eventually the right of the emancipists must be conceded.  Here a desultory conversation ensued and the Chief Justice at length decided that it would be better that the argument should be confined to the points of form.  The Chief Justice then said there were two sorts of mandamus one to inforce public rights the other to assert private. There were certain requisites however to be observed in both. The applicants must shew that they had sustained some particular wrong upon the right or title claimed for which there was no specific remedy. It was stated in this case that the parties were freeholders; but the annual value of that freeholds was not mentioned. He could not help thinking the affidavit somewhat defective in this respect. The qualification of Jurors in England was well known; and even if that qualification did not extend to this Colony which he collected from the argument of the learned Counsel who moved for the rule to be their opinion the affidavit still should have stated that the applicants possessed the common law qualification that they were "probi et legales homines." He had some doubts also as to the propriety of the joinder of these parties in one common affidavit; for although they all claimed the same right they might not all have the same title to it. However not to dwell on points of objection it was evident that the writ of mandamus would not lie where there were other remedies. Now various remedies were pointed out by the statutes of 3 & 4 Anne c. 18.; the 7 and 8 William III. c. 32.; and the 3 Geo. II. c. 25. It was ingeniously contended however that these were remedies only for the past; that they were not prospective and that they were not calculated to procure the insertion of the names of these parties in the Jury list. It was further contended that the statutes above named did not apply here; and if they did not --- - that would he confessed involve the question in a grave difficulty. With respect to what statutes did and what statutes did not apply here --- it was impossible to lay down any general rule. It was in the breast of the Magistrate to act on those statutes which he thought applicable and to reject those which he thought not so. In either case there would be a mode of mooting their applicability or inapplicability by the party feeling aggrieved by Magistrates' decision. With reference to the statutes in question however he was decidedly of opinion that those statutes did apply. He did not attach much weight to the Solicitor General's argument as to the rule of practice which had been established for the Sessions under the Act of Parliament. He thought that argument had been sufficiently answered by the Counsel on the other side. His principal reason for dismissing this rule was that there was another and a specific remedy for the wrong complained of to which the applicants could resort.  After His Honor had pronounced his decision some conversation arose with respect to the costs of the motion and it was agreed that the rule must be discharged with costs.   King v. Cooper.  This was an action brought by the Attorney-General at the suit of the King and called an Information of Intrusion against Mr. Robert Cooper for taking possession of a certain parcel of Crown land near Black Wattle Swamp without legal authority. The Attorney and Solicitor-General appeared on behalf of the Crown. The Attorney General stated the nature of the case and the pleadings to the Jury. Dr. Wardell then addressed the Jury on the part of Mr. Cooper. After making some observations on the importance of the case and the injustice of the proceedings as also the effect of these on most of the titles to land in the Colony which did not happen to be under seal the learned Counsel detailed at length the circumstances of the case. Mr. Cooper it appeared from his statement on seceding from the partnership with Mr. James Underwood in the other distillery determined on erecting a distillery himself on the most eligible spot he could obtain. With this view he offered to exchange some land he then held for a portion of the glebe of St. Philip's --- - this he was unable to accomplish; as on applying to the Attorney-General he had been told that though no actual grant had ever been made of the glebe yet it would require an act in Council to effect the proposed exchange. Mr. Cooper then applied by memorial to the Governor for the land in question. To this memorial he received no answer; but after a short time the Surveyor-General had sent for him and told him that he should have the land measured to him --- - accordingly one of the Assistants surveyed and put Mr. Cooper in possession conformably to the universal practice in the Colony. Mr. C. immediately began to prepare for building --- - employed workmen to dig the foundation and was proceeding rapidly with his works when it appeared that the Governor's Private Secretary happening to ride that way observed the extensive operations which Mr. Cooper had commenced; and thinking that the stream of water which ran through this land would be required for the use of the town and being also ignorant of the authority under which Mr. Cooper had thus possessed himself of it he immediately gave Mr. Cooper notice to desist; and shortly afterwards Mr. Garling the Government Solicitor served him with a notice to the like effect. Mr. Cooper however conscious that he was acting right and that he had got possession in a proper manner refused to comply and still continued to erect his building which was now in a very forward state. The present information had been filed to recover this land thus obtained by Mr. Cooper who had not expended less than £2000 upon the building.  Mr. Wentworth appeared also for Mr. Cooper.  The following gentlemen composed the Jury:  Mr. Robert Campbell sen. the foreman.  Messieurs. Gregory Blaxland Wm. Walker G.T. Savage Thos. Mat. Hindson D. Maziere R. Holl A.B. Spark J. Atkinson A. Warren Robt. Johnston.  The following witnesses were called: --- -- Major Ovens the Surveyor General Major Goulburn Mr. Moore J.P. Mr. S. Terry Mr. Thorn Mr. McBrian. Mr. Meehan the Attorney General &c. The Governor had been subpoenaed but did not appear. The Chief Justice thought that His Excellency ought to have been respectfully requested to attend by memorial; the question of right to subpoena was not however discussed. The point on which the evidence principally turns was whether the Surveyor General had given instructions to measure the whole of the ground which was divided into two parts by a stream. The Surveyor General stated that he had given instructions to the Assistant Mr. McBrian to measure only the Western side of the stream; that he shewed on the chart with a pencil where he was to commence on the S.W. Boundary making use at the same time of the words "begin from the S.W. boundary of the Crown land known by the name of the Military Garden." Now the Military Garden was fenced in and the Assistant commenced from the fence. It was further however stated by the Surveyor General that the fence was not the extremity on that side of the Military Garden and that the Assistant instead of commencing at the fence ought to have commenced at the stream which he contended was the boundary of the Military Garden and formerly known as such and so marked on the map. The Assistant on the other hand swore that he understood by the Surveyor General's instructions that he was to commence as he did from the fence. Witnesses who were present when these instructions were given said they understood the same thing. On this conflicting testimony the case was submitted to the Jury.  The Chief Justice after a few prelimary [sic] remarks on the facts which had been given in evidence said the grants to be valid as against the Crown should be under the great seal and of record. [5] Of this the framers of the instructions to the Governor under the sign manual appeared to have been perfectly cognizant for in those instructions it is expressly directed that all grants made in this Colony shall be entered of record before they are to be binding on His Majesty and his successors. No grant could be valid that wanted any of the solemnities thus enjoined. No loose usages could be set up in derogation of the King's prerogative and that portion of it which His Majesty had delegated to the Governor must be exercised in the way His Majesty had prescribed. With respect to the Governor's acts in this instance there had been nothing in them but what might have been expected. It appeared that Messrs. Cooper and Underwood had applied to His Excellency for this land and that it had then been refused to them. It was not likely that a subsequent application from one of these parties would be attended with more success than an application previously made by them jointly. There had evidently been a mistake in putting Mr. Cooper into possession of this land. This the evidence of Mr. Oxley the Surveyor General proved beyond question. It appeared in fact that it was chiefly by the instrumentality of Mr. Oxley that Mr. Cooper had obtained the promise of any land in that quarter. Mr. Oxley had interested himself in Mr. Cooper's favor and had succeeded in getting the best side of the stream after considerable demur on the part of the Governor. The boundaries of the land intended to be granted to Mr. Cooper had been distinctly stretched out to the Deputy Surveyor McBrien by the Surveyor General before any measurement took place. McBrien however appeared to have mistaken his instructions. This Mr. Oxley had distinctly sworn. His Honor did not think much reliance was to be placed on the evidence of the bye-standers. They were but casually present and not attending to other people's business but to their own. The conversation therefore between Mr. Oxley and McBrien would not be particularly noticed by them. There was certainly a good deal of hardship in this case. The defendant acting upon a mistake and that too the mistake of a public officer had incurred considerable expense. It is true that he had received early notice to desist from his works; but still he had made his contracts and could not have left off but with considerable loss. The hardship of the case however could not do away with the principle of law. Had the defendant a right? That was the question. Had he any legal title as against the Crown? He had none. "That" said His Honor "I lay down to you broadly. At the same time Gentlemen it will not be going out of my way and certainly not out of yours to make this hardship part of your verdict."  The jury then retired and after deliberating for a short time returned the following verdict: "The jury find specially the following fact that Mr. Cooper obtained possession of the land in question in the manner hitherto practised in the Colony."   King v. Mitchell.  This day Captain Mitchell of H.M. Ship Slaney was arraigned on a charge of misdemeanor in aiding and abetting Lieutenant Matthews of the same ship in a false imprisonment on the 28th day of February last of Mr. Boyd late Commander of the merchant ship Almorah Mr. Clements Deputy Assistant Commissary General passenger in the said ship and Mr. Thomas supercargo of the said ship for the space of 12 hours each and of William Jones seaman for the space of 24 hours by detaining them on board the said ship Almorah against their consent. And further --- - for aiding and abetting Lieut. Matthews in assaulting and endangering the lives on the 1st day of March last of Luke Benjamin Esq. of H.M. Attorney General the said Mr. Clements Mr. Dunn the chief constable and divers mariners by firing upon them with loaded muskets. And lastly --- - for assembling with others on the said 1st day of March tumultuously and with arms to hinder and obstruct justice. (The second and last count was afterwards withdrawn.)  Dr. Wardell and Mr. Wentworth appeared as Counsel for the defendant. Dr. Wardell pleaded to the jurisdiction of the Court. The arguments used by both the Learned Counsel went to the point that the acts complained of in the information arose out of the seizure by Captain Mitchell of the merchant ship Almorah and that if the principal matter the seizure was not cognizable in the Court of New South Wales none of the incidental matters were on the authority of Le Caux and Eden in Douglas's Reports a case in Levinz in Coke's and Lord Raymond's Reports.  The Attorney General agreed with the principle laid down by Dr. Wardell and Mr. Wentworth so far as related to civil injuries but this was a criminal information and their authorities did not apply to criminal offences. In support of this distinction he referred to a case in Andrews 231 mentioned by Chitty. The Counsel for the defendant replied.  The Chief Justice stated that the principle of law was certainly the same both in criminal and civil matters. But he was of opinion that the plea could not be maintained - he looked only at the record. The information stated a number of facts which that Court was competent to take cognizance of - if in the defence it should turn out that the Court had no jurisdiction the jury would be directed accordingly.  The jury were then sworn and a plea of not guilty was put in. The Attorney General after opening the case called as the first witness -   Mr. John Sleight first mate of the Almorah - he proved that the said ship was seized on the 18th February last - that on the evening of the 28th of the same month Mr. Mathews first Lieut of the Slaney Captain Boyd Mr. Thomas and witness were all on board the Almorah; that he and the two last gentlemen requested the Lieutenant more than once to be allowed to go on shore but were positively refused; that next morning the Almorah was taken down harbour near to Garden island; that Lieutenant Mathews attended by boats full of armed men came on board; that the boats were placed about and around the vessel with men in them armed with tomahawks &c. but no muskets - marines with loaded muskets were placed on the poop; that a man was placed aloft to give notice of boats appearing; that presently a boat was seen passing Bennelong's point when Lieutenant M. said "That is the boat" and ordered the men to be all in readiness - boat came within hail and was warned off - it came nearer and Lieutenant M ordered the marines to fire wide of the boat - two gentlemen in the boat then held something up; one held he thought a white handkerchief; and the other something like a letter; the boat seemed to pull nearer; the marines were order to fire nearer the boat; the boat pulled round but neared the ship a little; a third discharge of the muskets took place still nearer; the boat then pulled off; Lieutenant M. ordered his men to give three cheers which they did; about three quarters of an hour afterwards Captain Mitchell came on board; a musket was fired at his boat previously and the boat was warned off like the other; the marines fired also at other boats belonging to the Slaney because they did not hoist the Blue Peter; the Lieutenant apologized to his Captain for firing at his boat; and the Captain replied "You have done your duty;" another boat came in the afternoon and was fired at as before.  Cross-examined - Captain Boyd made no attempt to go ashore after Lieut. M. had refused to give him permission - no actual force was used to prevent him going ashore - Lieut. M. previous the appearance of the first boat gave the men in the boats orders not on any account to use violence but to shove boats off with their hands; but at all events they were not to allow any body to come on board - if the last shots had fallen any nearer they must have struck the boat - witness supposed that being soldiers the marines might have hit the boat if they had chosen to do so - he could at the same distance have hit it himself - never heard Lieut M. say "by no means hit any one" nor remembered to have sworn to this fact himself - did not recollect hearing Lieut. M. say he could not find it in his heart to fire at an Englishman.  William Hyde sail-maker of the Almorah and James Gordon carpenter of the same vessel were next sworn and deposed to the same effect as Sleight.  Mr. Thomas Dunn chief constable also gave similar testimony; believed Lieut. Mathews heard the Attorney General speak when he stood up in the boat waving the handkerchief; thought at first there was no danger but at last he did think there was; thought he saw a ball strike the water.  Cross-examined. - Had a warrant to go on board and seize such goods as belonged to the Crown and to apprehend persons opposing its execution. The Attorney General held the warrant in one hand and a white pocket handkerchief in the other (Warrant was then read.) Did not know whether the magistrate was indemnified for issuing the unlawful warrant.  Abraham Davis seaman was next sworn --- - his testimony did not differ from or add to the above.  The Attorney General here closed his case.  Dr. Wardell addressed the jury and then proceeded to the examination of witnesses.  Mr. Martin King carpenter of H.M.S. Slaney proved that he was on board the Almorah before the first firing. Lieut. M. had ordered the crew to keep off all boats from touching the ship and to shove them off but not to use violence --- - it was the opinion of all on board that an attempt would be made to re capture the ship --- - it was his opinion --- - the marines could have hit the boat if they chose --- - Lieut. M. was not on board at the firing in the afternoon.  Cross-examined --- - In all seizures and prizes it was the custom of the navy to keep off boats --- - it was a standing rule --- - the orders for firing did not come from Captain Mitchell but from Lieut. Matthews.  Frederick Shore serjeant of marines proved that Lieut. M. told them not to fire before orders and then to fire wide --- - that seeing one of them aiming wrong he ordered him to recover arms and then took the musket himself and shewed the man how to present it --- - the men in the boats around the ship were not allowed to have pistols lest they should injure any one and were ordered to shove off all who attempted to get aboard --- - there was a report of boats coming to take the ship and they were to keep them off but use no violence --- - Lieut. M. cautioned the men 20 times on this head.  The defence here closed.  The Attorney General replied.  The Chief Justice then summed up. The Almorah had been seized for an alleged breach of an Act of Parliament and while under seizure Captain Boyd and Mr. Thomas who were on board wished to go ashore but were prevented by Lieut. M. then in charge of the seizure --- - as centinels were placed near the gangway to prevent boats coming to and from the vessel such detention was false imprisonment for the parties felt as much under durance as if they had been lashed down. Next day the vessel was taken down the harbour --- - Lieut Matthews went on board the same morning with a number of armed men whom he placed in boats around the vessel and the marines on the poop --- - their muskets were no doubt loaded --- - when a boat appeared and was pointed out to him he said "that is the boat" --- - it was warned off --- - a parley was demanded by the boat --- - the marines were ordered to fire wide of the boat --- - fired again nearer --- - and again nearer --- - in all six rounds --- - one witness says there was danger --- all say the marines were ordered to fire wide --- - and one says that even though a boat should persist in coming alongside no one to be injured --- - the Captain being in his boat was also fired at in his turn and when the Lieutenant apologised to him he said "you have done your duty." The application of these words he thought ought to be confined to the particular act of firing. The first offence charged namely false imprisonment had not been established against Capt. Mitchell --- - what share the Captain had in the Lieutenant's conduct on this head had not appeared --- - the Lieutenant might have detained the gentlemen of his own head.  With respect to the second offence --- - it had been proved that Capt. Mitchell went on board and might therefore be supposed not to have expressed his disapprobation of Lieut. Matthews conduct as a repetition of the firing afterwards took place. Captains in the navy had a general power to seize by certain statutes and nothing contrary to this rule had been proved. Assault imprisonment and firing were not necessary consequences of a seizure --- - boats had a right to go about on the water as freely as men may go into houses on land --- - boats may go within a hundred yards of a ship or within a hundred feet if they like --- - the seizing officer may certainly lawfully prevent intruders on board --- - for he had himself known instances where from intrusion the unlawful part of a seized cargo had been all clandestinely abstracted --- - so that the seizor had nothing left to justify his act --- - but then all prevention must be lawfully effected --- - men of war should protect persons serving process of law not resist them --- - the purpose for which the boat went to go on board the Almorah namely mediation was good --- - but looking at the warrant it was not lawful --- - a seizor may seal hatches --- - secure papers --- - keep off intruders --- - but not violate the law --- - the boat however was not casually passing --- - if it had and the firing had still taken place then such firing would have been wanton. --- but the boat was proceeding to the ship after being warned off.   The Jury retired for about 20 minutes and returned with a Verdict of NOT GUILTY.  Rowe Esq. v. Wilson  Mr. Allen opened the pleadings. This was an action brought by the plaintiff Thomas Deane Rowe Esq. an Attorney and Proctor in the Supreme Court of New South Wales against the defendant Mr. Caleb Wilson a dealer in Sydney for a malicious prosecution. The declaration contained 3 counts setting forth that the defendant did on the 7th of February the 2d of March and the 29th of August last prefer bills of indictment containing 3 several assignments of perjury against the plaintiff and which were on each occasion ignored by the Grand Jury. The damages were laid at £1000.  Mr. Norton stated the case. This was an action for a malicious prosecution. The plaintiff was an attorney of the Supreme Court and the defendant an opulent dealer in the town of Sydney. The action was founded on three different attempts made to prefer a charge of perjury against the plaintiff and originated in an affidavit made by him in the Supreme Court which was met and afterwards explained by another and the first of which gave rise to the indictment that was three several times prefered against the plaintiff for wilful and corrupt perjury. In order to put the Court in possesion of the case it would be necessary to give a brief history of the affidavits and also of the circumstances which gave rise to them. In the year 1822 the plaintiff was employed by three sailors named Price Etheridge and Morgan to sue a Mr. Nathaniel Thornton by whom a sum of money was owing to them and who resided in Van Diemen's Land on which occasion he obtained a verdict for the claimants. From various circumstances he was not able to recover the proceeds till September 1824 more than a year after he had obtained the judgment in consequence of which and they being seamen and obliged to leave the port they made certain arrangements for the application of the money when it should be received by Mr. Rowe. Price when leaving the Colony gave two orders on the plaintiff one in favour of Mrs. Leburne for £18 and another in favour of a person named Landers for £10 and Etheridge also gave an order in favour of one Flood for £8 together with a power for him to receive the balance afterwards coming to him from the proceeds of his judgments. These orders the defendant afterwards received in the ordinary course of his business from Mrs. Leburne and Landers and thereby became the sole claimant on the part of Price. Price had also given Mrs. Leburne a power of attorney to receive his balance but afterwards on the 16th of May 1823 being again his own free agent he wrote to the plaintiff desiring him to pay no orders except that for £18 drawn in favour of Mrs. Leburne. About this time Price was committed to gaol on a criminal charge on which occasion the plaintiff defended him and a man named Smith whose expences as well as Price's were to be deducted also from the monies in the plaintiff's hands and in this complicated state was the account between the plaintiff and Price when the orders in the possession of the defendant were offered for payment. Under all the circumstances of the case the plaintiff did not think that he could safely pay the demand made by the defendant who refusing to take any thing short they thus became at issue. Flood also at this time applied for Etheridge's money but the instrument on which he grounded his claim was not a regular power of attorney and the plaintiff having already some suspicion of irregularity connected with the transaction refused to pay over the amount without a legal authority on which he would be safe in so doing and in consequence of which the plaintiff received directions to prepare a proper instrument to be transmitted to Etheridge who was then at some one of the neighbouring islands.   Various interviews at this time took place between the parties in which the insufficiency of the documents were discussed and in the course of which the plaintiff anxious to make every thing clear set forth his claim against Price and also a claim which he had against the defendant himself for costs on various matters but in none of these interviews had he ever made any promise to pay `till satisfied of the legality of the demand. After some time an application was made by Mr. Wentworth to the Supreme Court grounded on the affidavit of the defendant which set forth that the plaintiff had frequently promised to pay over the sum claimed for an order to the plaintiff to hand over the amount of the judgments obtained in the case of Price and Etheridge. This application was met by an affidavit from the plaintiff in which he set forth the amount of the sums due to him from the defendant and also stated argumentatively that he could not have made the promise sworn to by the defendant as he had frequent conversations with his managing clerk on the state of the matter and on the uncertainty of Landers' claim and that under these circumstances he could not have made any such promise and upon this statement was one of the assignments of perjury grounded. Another assignment was that the plaintiff had sworn to an amount due to him from the defendant which in fact was not owing but the plaintiff had been engaged in various long and tedious suits for the defendant his managing clerk made out the bill of costs; which when the plaintiff saw he observed that the defendant had already paid some monies but was assured that the account was drawn out for money then actually due ; upon this statement the plaintiff swore to the sum which he believed to be due but did a merchant in swearing to a debt always swear from his own actual knowledge? A man might be arrested for a debt which would afterwards turn out not to be owing but would any person contend that such a circumstance necessarily involved wilful and corrupt perjury. It appeared that credit had not been given for a sum paid to a man named Cooper who was at that time clerk to the plaintiff but the statement had been furnished to him by his managing clerk and he had only sworn that such a sum was due as appeared by that statement and if the account was not correct then the sum was not due. But would it be believed that an amended account was presented to the defendant before the first bill of indictment was preferred!   As the law existed an indictment for perjury could not be preferred without probable cause and the soundness of this principle was most apparent for it was possible that a party might not be able to defend himself on a false charge from the absence of witness or various other causes and therefore though perjury may be imputed still an indictment could not be prefered without shewing probable canse [sic]. But where was the probable cause in the present case for prefering not only one bill of indictment but a second and a third on the same pretence? He (Mr. Norton) would contend it was a case of the most malicious prosecution ever brought before a Court of Justice; when the defendant was foiled in his application to strike the plaintiff off the rolls foiled in his attempt to blast his character by the ignoring of his first bill of indictment in order to leave no means untried to injure him he prefered a second and a third bill and cloaked his malicious propensity under the avowed pretence of obtaining justice. The defendant had repeatedly and publicly declared that he would never let the plaintiff rest that he would pursue him to transportation that he would invent a new punishment for him for that of striking him off the rolls was nothing and that he would continue at every Sessions to prefer his charge `till he had obtained full satisfaction: but the Jury would that day visit him with such damages as would punish him for such vindictive purposes and effectually rescue the character of the plaintiff from those imputations which were so falsely and maliciously sought to be cast upon it.  Previous to calling witnesses in support of the case it was admitted by Counsel for the defendant that Mr. Rowe was an attorney and proctor and practised as a barrister and advocate in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.  Mr. Thomas Shaughnessey examined by Mr. W.H. Moore. --- Witness resides in Sydney and knows the plaintiff and defendant in this action; remembers hearing the defendant about 8 or 9 months back in his own house say that the plaintiff was a d__d rogue and that he would prosecute him for perjury; witness cannot remember the particulars of the observations made use of but the defendant's language was very harsh he seemed very determined; has heard since from two gentlemen who were on the Grand Jury that he did prefer bills of indictment for perjury against the plaintiff but that they were thrown out.  Cross-examined by Mr. W.C. Wentworth. --- Witness cannot say that the defendant spoke the truth when he said that plaintiff was a rogue; he had various transactions with the plaintiff and always believed him quite the reverse.  Mrs. Elizabeth Britton examined by Mr. Garling. --- Witness knows the defendant; has heard him say of the plaintiff that he was a swindling b__g__r that he meant to have him tried for perjury and that he would get him pillored if he could; he also stated that he had already presented one bill of indictment against him which was thrown out by the Grand Jury but that he would prefer another to the next Sessions; this occured in witness's house where the defendant came [t] o supoena a Mr. Cooper who had formerly been one of the plaintiff's clerks.  Cross-examined. --- Cooper lodges in the house with witness he is not one of the defendant's clerks now; witness is a married woman and lives with her husband.  Frederick Garling Esq. examined by Mr. Norton. --- Knows the plaintiff as a professional gentleman; knows the defendant also; has had dealings with him; witness is clerk of the peace; there was a bill of indictment for perjury against the plaintiff prefered in the Sessions Grand Jury on the 7th of February last which was returned not found; a second bill was prefered at the Sessions held on the 2d of May which was returned no bill; and on the 29th of August last another bill for the same offence was prefered and returned by the Grand Jury not found; the Sessions in February were held before William Carter Esq. and others; [in M] ay before John Stephen Esq. And others; and in Au[gust] before William Carter Esq. Edward Wollstonecraft [Esq.] and others.  Cross-examined. --- Witness was in Court when the first bill [was] presented; does not remember the fact of Mr. Blaxland the foreman of the Jury coming in to Court and stating that 8 of the Grand Jurors were for the bill and 4 against it; cannot say the number of Jurors present when the second bill was presented; there were 23 present on the last.  Mr. Charles Clay examined by Mr. Allen. --- Knows the plaintiff and defendant; was present on Wednesday last at the house of Mr. Walton a publican in King-street when some conversation took place between the defendant Mr. Andrew Nash and Mr. Walton relating to the plaintiff; defendant said plaintiff was a perjured scoundrel and that he would proclaim him so in every company he went into; the defendant also said that he understood plaintiff had brought an action for £1000 damages against him; but if he defendant gained the day he should be able to strike plaintiff off the rolls for that he was a perjured villain; some of the company present said to defendant that those were bold assertions that he should be cautious as such reports were strongly calculated to injure the plaintiff in his profession; defendant replied that he would maintain what he said every where.  Cross-examined. --- Defendant spoke as if he believed plaintiff was perjured.  Mr. Andrew Nash examined by Mr. W.H. Moore. --- Witness was present at the house of Mr. Walton in King-street when the conversation occured relative to the plaintiff; the defendant said that no person should employ him as a Solicitor for he was a perjured scoundrel and a rascal; witness said to defendant that he ought to be very cautious how he spoke in such a way of a professional Gentleman and that he did not think the plaintiff deserved such imputations; defendant replied that he would prove it and bring witnesses forward for that purpose. Some conversation took place relative to the three bills of indictment which were thrown out by the Grand Jury; defendant seemed to imply that he had not justice done him by the Grand Jury; this conversation occured at the house of Walton in King-street; it is a public-house.  Cross-examined. --- Defendant seemed to speak as if he was convinced of the truth of his assertions; he insinuated that plaintiff had a number of friends on the Grand Juries which threw out the bills.  Re-examined by Mr. Norton. --- Witness certainly understood defendant to impeach the honesty of the Grand Jury who threw out the bills.  Mr. John Walton examined by Mr. Norton. --- Corroborated the evidence of the two last witnesses.  Mr. James Lindsay examined by Mr. Garling. --- Remembers a motion being made in the Supreme Court on the 22d of September last relative to a trial in which Wilson was plaintiff; witness saw the defendant in the street on that day near the Court-house he had some papers in his hand and called out that plaintiff was a perjured villain for that he had sworn that he defendant owed him £13 for which he had his receipt; this was said so loud that witness heard it across the street; witness met the defendant on the evening of the same day near the Market-place and in the presence of a number of persons he asked witness what he thought of that rascal Rowe and said he would follow him up till he had him struck off the rolls and pillored; this he said with great vehemence and loud enough to be heard by every person round; witness had some conversation with the defendant lately and told him that plaintiff was bringing an action against him for a malicious prosecution; defendant replied that plaintiff was making a rod for himself; witness has conducted the business of an Attorney's Office for many years; filing supplemental affidavits is very usual; remembers the plaintiff being concerned in a cause between two persons Stewart and Ferrier; Mrs. Ferrier now lives with the defendant; witness don't know if plaintiff was retained by the defendant in that business but he appeared much interested in it.  Cross-examined. --- Witness was in Court when the motion was made to strike the plaintiff off the rolls; part of the motion went to that extent and part charged him with malpractices; witness was in Court when the Chief Justice pronounced his judgment; His Honor made some animadversions on the conduct of the plaintiff but only for having made and not kept an appointment; he did not at all impute perjury. The plaintiff was ordered to pay the money into Court together with the costs of the application.  Re-examined. --- Remembers the Chief Justice saying in the course of his remarks that all the graver charges were fully met by the affidavits of the plaintiff.  Robert Stewart examined by Mr. Allen. --- Remembers the plaintiff having transacted a considerable deal of business in an action brought against witness by Mrs. Catherine Ferrier; the matter came before the Governor's Court; plaintiff attended there and at various other places on her part while the action was pending; witness does not think £20 would pay plaintiff for his trouble in that transaction; if it was witness's case he would give £20 readily; witness wishes that he had availed himself of plaintiff's professional assistance.  Cross-examined. --- Believes the business of Stewart and Ferrier occured in the year 1822; witness arrested Mrs. Ferrier for debt; does not remember the amount; never swore that Mrs. Ferrier was married to witness.  William Cooper examined by Mr. W.H. Moore. --- Witness was Clerk to Mr. Rowe some time since; does not remember the business of Stewart and Ferrier; remembers an indenture of apprenticeship being prepared by direction of the defendant for the son of Mrs. Ferrier; the defendant was frequently at the office of plaintiff on various business.  Cross-examined. --- Remembers being present when the defendant came about the payment of monies which plaintiff had recovered from some person at the Derwent; has heard plaintiff say that he could not pay defendant's demand; he said he would pay certain sums but that the authority on which defendant claimed was not sufficient; Mrs. Flood was there frequently; never heard plaintiff promise payment to her of any monies she claimed on an order from Etheridge which plaintiff said was not sufficient authority for him to pay over the amount; a regular power of attorney was prepared by plaintiff to be sent to Etheridge; witness never knew plaintiff to deny himself to any applicants for money.  Mr. Gurner Clerk of the Court being sworn produced the affidavit made by Thomas Deane Rowe Esq. on the 22d of December 1824 to which was subjoined a bill of costs; on that affidavit an assignment of perjury was laid against plaintiff: the Chief Justice made some animadversions on the conduct of the plaintiff when delivering the judgement of the Court on the application made by Mr. Wentworth.  Cross-examined. --- The Chief Justice did not impute perjury to plaintiff; he appeared to be of opinion that some degree of neglect was attributable to him but there was no imputation of perjury whatever.  Frederick Garling Esq. re-examined. --- Between the motion of Mr. Wentworth and the judgment of the Court the plaintiff applied for and obtained leave to file a supplementary affidavit.  Mr. William Freeman examined by Mr. Norton. --- Witness is managing clerk to Mr. Rowe; plaintiff was employed by the defendant in various causes; plaintiff had a considerable claim on account of Mrs. Ferrier's business; there was an action brought by her against a person named Stewart and also a considerable degree of trouble in trying to get her out of the factory; the defendant retained plaintiff on her account; if plaintiff had charged according to his trouble 40 or £50 would scarcely have paid him; witness made out a list of costs against the defendant which turned out to be incorrect; another and correct account was then made out and presented to defendant before the first bill of indictment was prefered.  Cross-examined. --- The business transacted for defendant on the part of Mrs. Ferrier was about July 1822 3 years ago; there were various other business done for defendant some of which were not charged in the bill of costs; there was a deed of apprentiship [sic] and various attendances about Mrs. Ferrier while she was in the factory not charged; at the time of the presentment for perjury there was upwards of £20 due from defendant to plaintiff; witness will swear that that money is still due.  It was here admitted on the part of the defendant that His Excellency the Governor had received letters recommending the plaintiff to his notice from the Executive at home.  Mr. John Blaxland examined by Mr. Norton. --- Witness received a letter from Messrs. Sweet and Stokes Solicitors in London recommending plaintiff in very strong terms as a gentleman of highly respectable connexions and character at home.  Some other witnesses were called on the part of the plaintiff but not answering the Court on account of the lateness of the hour (half past 5 o'clock) and the probability of the defence occupying considerable time was adjourned by consent to 10 o'clock on Tuesday morning.  SECOND DAY.  TUESDAY NOVEMBER 29.  The Court met this morning at 10 o'clock pursuant to an adjournment when His Honor called on the Gentlemen engaged to proceed with the case of Rowe against Wilson  Dr[.] Douglass examined by Mr. Garling. --- I was resident Magistrate at Parramatta when in this country before; I remember a female being in the Factory named Catherine Ferrier; and I also remember the plaintiff having applied to me both personally and by letter about her; the defendant wanted to marry her but she would not be allowed to leave the Factory as when she landed she represented herself to be a married woman married I believe to a man named Stewart; I remember also that the defendant attempted to get into the Factory by some means; it was said by scaling the walls; it made a considerable noise in the neighbourhood at the time; he was so constantly seen wandering about the Factory in the evenings that I thought it necessary to send for and caution him as to the line of conduct he might pursue; I had a conversation with a high official character the Secretary to the Transport Board previous to my leaving England who was much interested about the plaintiff who he said was a cousin or some near relation to Lord Gifford.  William Wemyss Esq. examined by Mr. Garling. --- Before I left England I was spoken to by Mr. Harding of the Navy Office about the plaintiff he seemed much interested for him and requested me to do him any service in my power in this Country.  Mr. Garling as Clerk of the Peace deposed that the plaintiff paid 30 dollars for copies of the bills of indictment prefered against him at the Sessions; the plaintiff had so far incurred pecuniary in addition to the consequential damage sustained from the malicious prosecution by the defendant.  Cross-examined. --- Never knew that Attornies were entitled to and received copies of public documents gratis in cases wherein they were themselves concerned.  The case for the plaintiff having closed Mr. W.C. Wentworth rose and addressed the Court for the defendant.  The Learned Counsel stated that knowing what he did of the facts of the case knowing what the plaintiff himself must have been aware that he knew of the case he was the more surprised that such an experiment as had been that day made should ever have been attempted. He should have hoped from the imminent jeopardy which the plaintiff had escaped by a train of unforeseen circumstances that in place of coming forward to seek vengeance for a just prosecution he would have suffered the transaction which was almost ceasing to live in the remembrance of the Public to sink into a quasi oblivion. If he mistook not the situation of the plaintiff in society he could have suffered nothing in point of character and the only damage which it had even been attempted to shew that he had sustained was the paltry one of 30 dollars a sum which he should have cheerfully paid in consideration of the escape which he had had. There never was a case of more gross perjury ever submitted to a Court of Justice than that with which the plaintiff in this case was charged.  Mr. Garling rose and observed that he was sorry to interrupt the learned Gentleman but he submitted that as there was no plea of justification on the Record it was not competent in Counsel to give in his statement that which could not afterwards be supported by proof.  Mr. Wentworth contended that it was competent for him according to the modern practice to call evidence in justification under a plea of the general issue and designated the objection as frivolous and shuffling.  Mr. Garling observed that such was the sort of language they had been accustomed to hear from the learned Gentleman but he would notwithstanding contend that an objection to support which authorities could be adduced was not to be designated frivolous or shuffling merely upon that Gentleman's statement.  His Honor was of opinion that in cases of malicious prosecution and where as in the present case so much depended upon a probable cause that it was by the modern practice competent for the defendant under the plea of the general issue to go into evidence to prove a justification and therefore if it was intended to offer evidence as justificatory of the defendant in prefering those bills of indictment he could not object to Counsel's statement.  Mr. Wentworth continued; if it could be shewn that perjury was committed by the plaintiff it was immaterial whether the defendant was actuated by malice or not and would be a bar to the action then before the Court as affording a probable cause for prefering those bills of indictment. It appeared that the defendant claimed the amount recovered for Price by virtue of various orders and powers of attorney which had all settled in his hands; an objection had been taken by the plaintiff that one of these was a power of attorney to Mary Leburne and was therefore not transferable though that very power was drawn up in the plaintiff's own office and the defendant told that it would be a sufficient authority for him to receive the money. The objection therefore that was made to this claim was most disgraceful as well as futile and was one which would never have been made by any man of character. It was stated that the Chief Justice in delivering the judgment of the Court on the motion made on the part of the defendant did not throw out any imputation of perjury against the plaintiff but it would have been strange if any such observations had fallen from His Honour; that was not the question then before him. The objects of the application on which His Honor was then observing were of a different nature namely to get certain money paid into Court and to call on the plaintiff to answer to certain allegations which in the opinion at least of those who moved for the rule contained matter sufficient for the Court to discontinue him; and it therefore formed no argument against the defendant that a direct imputation of perjury had not fallen from His Honor the Chief Justice. It was stated in the defendant's affidavit that at the close of the Court on the first day of October 1824 the plaintiff promised to pay over to the defendant the monies claimed by him but how was this the main allegation met by the affidavit of the plaintiff filed on the 31st of Dec. 3 months after? what was the argument there set forth; he feared to deny having made some promise but seeing the necessity of giving a colour to the transaction he said he could not have made such promise and that denial was founded upon something which he recollected saying to his clerk Mr. Freeman. But what did could not mean but did not? If a thing could not happen it did not happen. What other meaning would a Jury of 12 impartial men on their oaths attach to it if the indictments had been found as they should have been and the plaintiff had been arraigned at the bar for perjury. If therefore the Court should be of opinion that such was the plaintiff's meaning which the very caution of the affidavit shewed if the Court should believe such was his meaning then there was probable cause at least for that part of the prosecution. What did the Chief Justice say? That it was clear that the plaintiff had promised to pay on the 1st of October and did not that declaration shew that he believed that part of the affidavits made by the plaintiff and his clerk to be false. With regard to the second affidavit it contained two distinct allegations one that the money was actually due and another that it was due as appeared also by the account of costs thereunto subjoined[.] There was then a positive and substantive allegation independent of the account and which when the defendant heard he was so shocked that he immediately ran home from the Court actually terrified that such evidence should be brought forward and instantly produced documentary proofs to completely rebut the affidavit; and then it was on the threat of ulterior proceedings being taken that the supplemental affidavit was filed which was merely the creature of those threats and was made to take the responsibility he was aware he had incurred from off his shoulders. But could the mere filing of a supplemental affidavit destroy perjury which was already committed; perjury which was completed on the swearing of the first affidavit if it was the case that a man would be allowed to file a supplemental affidavit what wretch would ever have been convicted of the crime? The perjury was committed at the first swearing or was not committed at all; and the second affidavit was only allowed as explanatory of the first and not to take off any legal consequences of the crime already committed. Perjury did or did not exist on the 22d of September and if it did no ulterior affidavit could destroy nor never was intended should destroy the legal consequences which had arisen from the crime already committed. Much stress has been laid on the defendant having called the plaintiff a perjured villain in order to shew that he was actuated by a malicious motive in prefering those bills of indictment but those expressions were but the honest and conscientious conviction of a mind detesting the turpitude and baseness of the character of the individual to whom they were applied. That the indictments were thrown out was not wonderful considering the constitution of Grand Juries in this Country; he (Mr. Wentworth) did not complain of Trial by Jury; but he complained of its limited existence and of its misfortune in being restricted by illegal fetters on which account the same parties were on the Jury at every Sessions. It was the personal friends and cronies of the plaintiff who were present that threw out the bills and by whom the question was most indecently taken up as a party question. He did not impute this by any means as an objection to Trial by Jury but he mentioned it as one of the many reasons for extending this privilege in illimitable extent in order to prevent the same persons always attending. The only consideration for the Court was whether could not was synonimous with did not and whether it was the intention of the plaintiff by deceiving the Court to shuffle out of the dilemma into which he had brought himself; and also they must come to the conclusion that there was not only a want of probable cause but also malice on the part of the defendant before they could find a verdict for the plaintiff in the case before them.  Several witnesses were called for the defence whose testimony went principally to the point of the disputed accounts between the plaintiff and defendant; and at a late hour in the evening Mr. Garling for the plaintiff rose and stated that he had to reply under circumstances of great disadvantage from the lateness of the hour and the voluminous mass of evidence he had to go through arising from the quantity of irrelevant matter which had been introduced as the indictments which were the subject of the action then before the Court arose entirely out of the transactions on account of Price and Etheridge. This was an action brought by the plaintiff in order to the vindication of his character in the public mind from the circumstance of three separate bills of indictment having been prefered against him and if the statements of Counsel were to make an impression and those statements unsupported by a shadow of evidence woeful indeed would be the situation of any person coming into Court to seek redress. The Counsel for the defendant had that day indulged in a strain of virulent invective towards the plaintiff the most uncourteous and such as was never before heard or tolerated in a Court of Justice; he had identified himself with his client in such a manner as was never before known but he (Mr. Garling) trusted that these expressions and personal invective which had been so indulged in would make a different impression from that which was intended; and that it would be the last time he should ever hear such language drop from the lips of any advocate in that place. The conduct of the Grand Juries had also been impugned in a manner the most unprecedented but he would contend that in throwing out the bills against the plaintiff they had done their duty and he trusted that as long as Juries existed in this Colony they would ever do so unintimidated by any such unwarranted misrepresentations as had been on that occasion so freely indulged in. He contended that it was impossible for the plaintiff or any other man from the complicated nature of the transaction to unravel it and to know whether he was safe in paying over the amount and to whom. Mrs. Flood stated that the plaintiff had expressly promised to pay and in answer to that statement the plaintiff swore that he could not have made any such promise as he had frequent conversations with his managing clerk as to whether it would be safe for him to do so; so that the appointment so much relied on must have been merely to come to some arrangement and yet upon that allegation a bill of indictment was prefered containing what never before was seen in an indictment for perjury an innuendo that could not meant did not. On the discussion of the motion in the Supreme Court the learned Counsel held a different opinion for he then stated that if the plaintiff had sworn he did not he would have treated him to an indictment for perjury.   It was also contended by Mr. Wentworth that it was clear to the Court at the discussion of the motion that perjury had been committed but would any one who knew the integrity wisdom and learning of His Honor the Chief Justice suppose for a moment that if it was clear to him that perjury had been committed that he would suffer the plaintiff one instant to remain on the rolls? And therefore that he did not strike him off was a clear and sufficient answer to that assertion. But what had been the conduct of the defendant throughout the transaction; he prefered a bill of indictment against the plaintiff; the Grand Jury before whom the bill was laid returned it not found; and what was the evidence brought forward before a Grand Jury? that of the accuser and his witnessess [sic] an ex parte statement; yet the Grand Jury threw out the bill; three months after the defendant prefered another bill the Grand Jury again threw it out; and what did he then do? what was never before heard of; he prefered a third bill; and as some complaints were about that there had not on the two last occasions been a full jury the returning officer exerted himself so that the fullest jury that could sit were in the room. Before the Jury the defendant came again with his witnessess [sic] no evidence on the part of the plaintiff in any way to rebut these statements; and that Jury that full Jury again threw out the bill; and yet after all this the defendant was only a week ago declaring in the presence of various people in a public-house that he again meant to prosecute the plaintiff and to follow him up until he had his revenge; and this he stated with the utmost virulence of language; shewing most unequivocally that he was not actuated by a sense of justice but by the most malignant feelings. Mr. Garling here went through the whole of the evidence commenting on its nature and concluded by submitting that under all the circumstances of the case the epithets which had been that day applied to the plaintiff had not been justly applied and that he was therefore entitled to heavy damages for the injury which had been attempted to be inflicted on his character by the defendant.  His Honor briefly addressed the Jury and observed that if any of the counts in the declaration should be supported if malice should appear as was necessary and that there was no probable cause for the defendant prefering not only one but three bills of indictment then the plaintiff was entitled to a verdict at their hands. With regard to the words could not meaning did not which formed one of the assignments of perjury His Honor observed that had the plaintiff even made use of the words it was impossible he could not have held it to be that direct statement of fact as to allow of an indictment for perjury being prefered for it was a rule of law that a person was not to be criminated on mere presumption the facts should be clearly stated and even common reason would dictate that a man could not be found guilty of a crime which would disqualify him for the exercise of those privileges of citizenship enjoyed by all others; make him incapable of giving evidence in a Court of Justice and blast his character in society so as to make even death preferable; it never could be contended that he could be convicted of that wilful and corrupt perjury which entailed all those consequences where he had merely erred from ignorance of the fact; even supposing such to have been the case in the instance then under consideration. To find a man guilty from inference is what the law would never allow; and that question for the Court was whether there was probable cause when the first bill was ignored for bringing it a second and a third time? His Honor was strongly of opinion there was not for in the first place all the evidence then before the Court had been before His Honor the Chief Justice and when his high character was considered and his universal anxiety to do justice to all was so well known; when he had decided that there were no grounds on which he could degrade the plaintiff and make him any longer unfit to exercise his profession a punishment which all who knew the upright sentiments of his mind were well aware that however painful to his feelings he would have inflicted; if therefore there was no probable cause for the first bill still less was there for the second and third. It had been alleged as a reason for bringing the indictment forward a third time that on the two former occasions there was not a full Jury but that did not appear to be a probable cause; why was it not brought before the Supreme Court where the Attorney General would never have refused an information in the ordinary course if it was supposed which His Honor could not believe that party feeling could have influenced the Jury on their oaths. The Learned Judge himself did not hesitate to bear testimony to the extreme propriety and honourable conduct of Juries in this Country and it certainly did appear to him that the defendant had not reason for bringing forward so many charges against an individual and that individual an Attorney of the Court depending for his subsistence on the opinion of the Public as to his character. It did appear that a malicious motive had influenced the defendant and the only question was the amount of damages to which the plaintiff was entitled from the hands of the Jury. --- Verdict for the plaintiff. Damages £100 with costs.  His Honor in delivering the verdict of the Court stated that the Jury were influenced in assessing damages at so low a rate only in consideration of the circumstances in life of the defendant. 